what is strategic workforce planning ? strategic workforce planning , also called human capital planning , is a systematic process that focuses on developing long - term strategies for acquiring , developing , and retaining an organization's workforce to meet its mission . agencies may outline strategies — the programs , policies , and processes that agencies use to build and sustain their workforces — in a human capital plan or through other human capital planning efforts . fps sought input from key stakeholders when it developed and implemented the plan and its human capital strategies . as noted in our 2003 report , involving top management can help set the overall direction of the agency's workforce planning and soliciting employee input on workforce planning can help an agency better understand human capital needs and identify ways to improve human capital strategies . we found that fps solicited input from its management and employees , nppd , and external stakeholders . this input helped inform the plan's contents . fps management and employees: fps officials provided several examples of how fps senior executives and employees provided input into the plan . for example , the officials said that the senior executives set the strategic direction for fps's plan and related efforts . furthermore , the senior executives meet regularly to discuss broad human capital issues , such as actions the agency can take to ensure that its workforce can address future needs . in addition , fps officials said that they administered surveys , held working groups , and conducted interviews with their employees to identify specific human capital issues , which helped shape the contents of the plan . for example , fps established working groups to help develop employee performance work plans . as discussed below , these performance work plans identify critical core competencies and associated performance standards for each position . these working groups consisted of regional directors , area commanders , and other regional staff . furthermore , the plan states that fps intends to continue to involve employees and obtain their feedback as the agency implements the plan . nppd: nppd is responsible for providing human capital services ( eg , recruiting , hiring ) on behalf of fps . fps obtained input from nppd when developing and implementing the plan and its related efforts . for example , fps and nppd officials explained that nppd officials participated in various working groups to develop strategies identified in the plan . external stakeholders: while fps officials told us they did not directly solicit input from any external stakeholder on the plan , officials said they solicit feedback from these stakeholders on fps's services , which they used to inform the contents of the plan . fps interacts with a number of external stakeholders . for example , fps is responsible for protecting all gsa - held or leased facilities , making gsa a key customer and important stakeholder . according to fps officials , fps interacts with gsa to ensure a coordinated effort for the protection of federal facilities . according to officials , fps also works closely with entities such as the u.s .