these goals . however , federal agencies have faced challenges in identifying program goals and performance measures that go beyond summarizing program activities — for example , the number of clients served — to distinguishing desired outcomes or results — for example , improving economic self - sufficiency among clients served . further , the current administration has made integrating performance information into budget deliberations a priority under the president's management agenda . the program assessment rating tool ( part ) , which the office of management and budget ( omb ) designed , is a central element of this initiative and consists of a standard series of questions meant to serve as a diagnostic tool . part draws on available program performance and evaluation information , including leverage measures , to form conclusions about program results and develop follow - on actions intended to improve those results . additionally , we interviewed representatives of the following industry groups and other organizations involved in housing and community and economic development initiatives: city of chicago department of housing ; coalition of community development financial institutions ; coastal enterprises , inc. ; council of state community and economic development agencies ; international economic development council ; harvard university's joint center for housing studies ; john d. and catherine t. macarthur foundation ; living cities: the national community development initiative ; local initiatives support corporation ; national association of affordable housing lenders ; national association of development organizations ; national association of housing and redevelopment officials ; national community development association ; national community investment fund ; national council of state housing agencies ; new hampshire community loan fund ; new markets tax credit coalition ; western massachusetts enterprise fund , inc. further , as part of this work , we conducted site visits and collected information on how federal funds have been leveraged in housing and community and economic development projects , 20 of which we toured . specifically , we conducted site visits in chicago , illinois ; laredo and san antonio , texas ; chester and philadelphia , pennsylvania ; portland and salem , oregon ; and seattle and tokeland , washington . we selected these areas to obtain perspectives from a variety of regions with attributes such as difficult - to - develop areas , rural and urban classifications , and lower - and higher - cost areas that affect the extent of leveraging . we used a nongeneralizable , illustrative sampling approach to select a range of housing and community and economic development projects or initiatives to tour . more specifically , our criteria were ( 1 ) projects were substantially completed in the last 5 years , ( 2 ) funds of each of the programs in our review were utilized in at least one of the projects selected , and ( 3 ) projects had two or more funding sources . in the cases where program officials maintained comprehensive lists of projects , we used such lists to randomly select projects ; otherwise , we used available project information ( for example , from program administrator web sites ) in conjunction with information from program administrators to select projects that generally met our criteria .