the individual is unmarried . while most partnership policyholders are married at the time they purchase a partnership policy , they are unlikely to require long - term care for many years , and their marital status can change . most individuals who are admitted to a nursing facility are unmarried . where possible , we use data from surveys of partnership policyholders to support our assumptions . in this situation , the cost per year of self - financing would be smaller than if he or she had either partnership or traditional insurance . this would result in an increase in the time it takes to become medicaid eligible for a person who self - finances relative to what it would have taken if he or she had purchased either a partnership or traditional insurance policy . the individual does not save premiums paid if he or she would have self - financed their care such that assets are equal in all three scenarios . we made this assumption to make our scenarios easier to understand . premium payments may be substantial — potentially as much as $3,000 per year — so it is possible that if the individual would have saved their premium payments by instead self - financing his or her long - term care , the individual would have more assets than either partnership or traditional policyholders would when they begin to use their benefits . if this is the case , by self - financing , the individual would have more assets to pay for long - term care before becoming eligible for medicaid , which would delay the time to medicaid . therefore , individuals who purchase partnership policies would have saved their premium dollars and not purchased long - term care insurance represent a potential cost to the medicaid program . using our examples above and assuming 15 years of payments saved at $3,000 per year , by self - financing , the individual would save $45,000 in additional assets that would otherwise have been spent on partnership premiums . therefore , the self - financing individual has assets of $345,000 . using our equation we see that the time to medicaid is delayed ( $345,000 / $70,000 = 4.9 years ) if the individual self - finances , while relative to this option a partnership policy would accelerate the individual's time to medicaid by 0.6 years . in this case , the partnership and traditional policy scenarios would not change because premiums are required to be identical for the partnership and traditional polices . the individual is equally likely to transfer assets in all three scenarios . an individual who self - finances or uses traditional insurance might be more likely to transfer assets to a spouse or other family members than he or she would with a partnership policy , because assets are protected under partnership policies . if the individual self - finances and transfers assets , he or she would likely take less time to become eligible for medicaid than with a partnership policy ( and assuming no transfers with the partnership policy ) , resulting in medicaid savings .