however , this is not current practice . regional administrators are required to focus the audits on programs , policies , and practices that have been identified as vulnerabilities , including the agency's complaint - processing procedures . however , according to osha's regional administrators , only 5 of the agency's 10 regions conduct these audits annually , while 3 conduct the audits , but only for a proportion of their area offices each year , and 2 do not conduct the annual audits at all . ( 2 ) how consistently is osha responding to complaints ? and ( 3 ) to what extent have complaints led osha to identify serious hazards ? to answer these questions , we visited the three osha area offices that handled the largest number of complaints in their respective regions in fiscal years 2000 through 2002: pittsburgh , pennsylvania ; austin , texas ; and denver , colorado . in each of these offices , we examined a randomly selected sample of case files ( 34 in pittsburgh , 30 in austin , and 38 in denver ) and interviewed the area director and available compliance officers . in addition , we randomly selected and interviewed by telephone 52 osha officials: 20 of the agency's 80 area directors and 32 of its 1,200 compliance officers , ( 12 assistant area directors who are supervisory compliance officers and 20 nonsupervisory compliance officers ) . these officials represented 42 of osha's 80 area offices . we also spoke to osha officials in the agency's 10 regional offices , as well as health and safety officials in 13 states that run their own programs . finally , we examined data for fiscal years 2000 through 2002 related to complaints in osha's integrated management information system ( imis ) and looked at data on injuries and illnesses collected and published by the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) for calendar year 2001 as they related to complaints . we interviewed both osha and bls officials to establish the reliability of the data . in addition , for the imis data we obtained and reviewed documentation of internal controls and manually tested the data . we also interviewed 15 randomly selected employers who had been the subject of an osha complaint and 6 employees who had filed complaints . for a more detailed explanation of our methodology , see appendix i . we conducted our work between september 2003 and january 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . osha was established after the passage of the occupational safety and health act in 1970 . in the broadest sense , osha was mandated to ensure safe and healthful working conditions for working men and women . the act authorizes osha to conduct “reasonable” inspections of any workplace or environment where work is performed by an employee of an employer . the act also requires that osha conduct investigations in response to written and signed complaints of employees alleging that a violation of health or safety standards exists that threatens physical harm , or that an imminent danger exists at their worksites , unless osha determines that there are no reasonable grounds for the allegations .