other areas . three of the 44 programs reported performance goals or measures in other areas , such as holding successful manufacturing - related events and tracking the amount of loans provided for manufacturing . of the 58 programs in our survey , 4 specifically estimated their effects on manufacturing with an independent performance evaluation that met our definition of a program evaluation . trade adjustment assistance for firms ( taaf , doc ) — in 2012 , we examined , among other things , the program's data and performance measures and what they indicated about the program's effectiveness . the review found that although the program provides limited data about outcomes , manufacturing firms that have participated in the program have experienced small , positive , and statistically significant increases in sales . developing the workforce . how do selected federal tax expenditures provide support to u.s. manufacturing ? how , if at all , do selected federal programs address manufacturing trends , and what , if any , challenges do they face ? to what extent do federal agencies measure performance and assess effectiveness in support of manufacturing generally , and advanced manufacturing specifically ? to answer these questions , we identified selected manufacturing - related federal programs and tax expenditures , surveyed program officials , reviewed relevant reports , interviewed selected experts and agency officials , and conducted two site visits . to select programs and tax expenditures , we reviewed relevant gao and congressional research service ( crs ) reports and the catalog of federal domestic assistance , and we identified federal agencies that , according to those sources , administered programs that supported manufacturing . we then contacted each of these agencies to obtain input about their programs . programs included in our analysis met the following criteria: the program ( 1 ) was operational in fiscal year 2014 and at the time of selection in 2015 , ( 2 ) had an identifiable focus on manufacturing , and ( 3 ) was not part of a larger manufacturing program . next we contacted each agency again and requested that they confirm the programs we identified support manufacturing . in addition , we administered a web - based survey to the identified program officials and collected , among other data , descriptive program information , budget and participation data , information on efforts to address manufacturing trends , and performance and evaluation information . all of the categorizations of the programs in this report are based on our review of program descriptions and programs officials' responses to our survey . in developing this report , we did not conduct a legal analysis to confirm the various descriptions of the programs , including information on their budgetary obligations , program goals , or intent . further , we did not review or analyze agencies' financial data or materials prepared by the agencies in connection with the annual budget and appropriations process . to gather further insight into federal programs that support manufacturing , we conducted site visits to chicago , il and knoxville , tn , interviewed local program officials , and visited manufacturers who participate in some of these programs . we selected these cities because several of the manufacturing programs we identified were operating there .