as a result , these deaths would not be included in the dmf . veterans affairs submits a death report to ssa . ssa determines the decedent is not receiving social security benefits . ssa does not verify the death before recording it in the numident record and subsequently the dmf . because there are a number of death reports that ssa does not verify , the agency risks having erroneous death information in the dmf , such as including living individuals in the file or not including deceased individuals . ssa acknowledges these limitations and does not guarantee the accuracy of the file . other ssa practices may prevent deaths from being included in the dmf or lead to other errors . for example , if ssa cannot match a death report to a corresponding numident record because of differences in name , date of birth , or gender , it generally will not take actions to resolve the non - match . in addition , analysis we performed on existing dmf records identified potentially erroneous information . specifically , we identified: 130 records where the date of death was recorded to occur before the 1,295 records where the recorded age at death was between 111 and 1,791 records where the recorded death preceded 1936 , the year ssns were first issued , although the decedents had ssns assigned to them . ssa officials said some of these anomalies were likely associated with records added prior to the mid - 1970s that were manually processed . we analyzed the dmf to identify specific types of errors . finally , we interviewed officials at other federal agencies that use the dmf about how they obtain and use it . this work is being conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . ssa historically has compiled death information about ssn - holders in order to ensure it does not pay social security benefits to deceased individuals and to establish benefits for survivors . when ssa receives a report of death — which could include name , date of birth , date of death , and ssn — it matches that information against corresponding information in its database of all ssn - holders , known as the numerical index file ( numident ) . ssa then marks the appropriate numident record with a death indicator . these sources include family members , funeral directors , post offices , financial institutions , other federal agencies , and state vital records agencies ( states ) . to get death reports from the states , ssa has established formal agreements that set forth a payment structure for the states' death reports and limit ssa's ability to share this information . however , the social security act requires ssa to share death information , including data reported by the states , with federal agencies to ensure proper payment of benefits to individuals . the act also prohibits ssa from sharing state - reported death information for any other purposes . as a result , ssa maintains two versions of the dmf . the “full dmf,” which contains all death records , is available to federal benefit - paying agencies .