not implemented . agency declined to withdraw its published notice and reassess its determination of cultural affiliation . state office has not given fair and objective consideration and assessment of all the available information and evidence in the dispute . the preponderance of the evidence indicates a relationship of shared group identity that can be reasonably traced between the paiute - shoshone tribe of the fallon reservation and colony , nevada , and the human remains and associated funerary objects from spirit cave in nevada . agency should repatriate human remains and associated funerary objects . not implemented . agency has not repatriated the human remains . we did not determine whether agency repatriated the objects . dispute resulted in litigation . the information and statements submitted and presented by the museum and the working group is sufficient to establish by a preponderanc e of the evidence that the items are both sacred objects and objects of cultural patrimony . further , they are culturally affiliated with the constituent tribes of the working group . museum should consider the oral testimony provided by the working group , consult anthropological literature , re - evaluate the determination for repatriation , and inform the committee of the museum's findings within 90 days . not implemented . museum published a notice of intent to repatriate in the federal register describing the items as sacred objects to which the museum holds the right of possession . although an official from the western apache working group reported that the museum followed the letter of the recommendation by considering the group's oral testimony and consulting anthropological literature , the museum did not follow the spirit of the recommendations which was , according to the official , to reclassify the object . museum's repatriation process for the items was flawed and is incomplete . the place and manner of the return of the items was not consistent with nagpra . museum is responsible for the completion of the repatriation process for the items . museum should recall the loan of the items to hui malama i na kupuna o hawai'i nei , make the items available to all consulting parties , and renew the consultation process for repatriation . not implemented . according to an official with the royal hawaiian academy of traditional arts , hui malama i na kupuna o hawai'i nei denied the bishop museum's request for the items . dispute led to litigation . funerary objects were removed from cave and are in possession of the bishop museum . the review committee declines to come to a finding about whether the objects are objects of cultural patrimony . further , the committee believes that the current location of the objects is appropriate . museum and hui malama o mo'omomi should work together to revise memorandum of agreement to require consent of hui malama o mo'omomi prior to the removal of the objects from the island of molokai . status unknown . items are still under the control of the bishop museum . museum failed to overcome the inference that the museum did not have the right of posession to the object . museums and federal agencies must repatriate cultural items within 90 days of receipt of a written request for repatriation that satisfies nagpra requirements .