( fig . 1 shows ssa's process in more detail. ) for the 10 percent of the reports that fail this initial validation test , ssa performs more than 20 of what it calls “front - end validation routines” that manipulate either the reported name or the ssn in a variety of ways to correct common reporting mistakes so that ssa can find an mef record and prevent the posting of the earnings to the esf . ssa's front - end routines identify social security records for about 60 percent of the reports that are initially categorized as mismatches each year . in manipulating worker information to find a valid record , the automated front - end routines assume either the ssn is correct and there is a problem in the reported name or vice versa . for example , one front - end routine for reported name errors tests whether the first name and the surname have been reversed on the employer - filed w - 2 . the name reversal routine compares the first name from ssa's numident file with the surname on the w - 2 . if they are the same and the first initial for the middle and surname match the information on the w - 2 , then ssa assumes it has found the proper record and posts the earnings . other front - end routines check whether digits in the ssn are transposed or inaccurate or whether the name on the report contains transposed or missing letters . another front - end routine involves searching for reinstated items that in the past have included the same reporting error occurring in the current year's earnings report . over the past several years , such routines have allowed ssa to post an annual average of 15 million earnings reports to individual mef records , rather than to the esf . table 2 summarizes the performance of these front - end routines for the past 5 reporting years . from ssa , we were able to obtain standard industrial classification codes for 1.8 million of the employers who had earnings in the esf to identify the types of employers who had filed the earnings reports that we analyzed . ( because of confidentiality requirements , we were unable to arrange for timely access to similar codes for about 2.5 million employers in the file from the census bureau , which controls this information ) . to analyze the reinstatement of earnings reported under repeatedly used ssns , we first examined the esf to identify the frequency that each ssn appeared for tax years 1985 to 2000 . on the basis of our examination , we selected ssns that appeared most frequently in the esf for our reinstatement analysis . specifically , we selected 295 ssns that had 1,000 or more reports in the esf for the tax years analyzed . overall , the 295 ssns had about 9.6 million earnings reports representing about $14.5 billion in unposted earnings still in the esf at the time that we received a copy of the file . we then obtained a complete copy of ssa's earnings reinstatement file that contained over 142 million records across all ssns that had received reinstatements to identify the reinstatements made from these 295 reported ssns .