utilization . doe can use the authority , known as march - in authority , to require a contractor or licensee to grant a license to any responsible entity or entities when an agency determines that certain conditions identified in the act have been met . additionally , the government has a nonexclusive royalty - free license to practice , and have practiced on its behalf , any invention created with federal funding . domestic manufacture . under the bayh - dole act and doe regulations and policy , doe has established certain requirements in financial assistance awards for contractors to manufacture federally funded inventions in the united states . these requirements vary depending on the type of contractor involved in a financial assistance award . domestic manufacture requirements for federally funded inventions include: u.s . preference . preference provisions generally require small business and nonprofit contractors' exclusive licensees to substantially manufacture federally funded inventions domestically in order to use or sell the inventions in the united states . these requirements apply only to a contractor's exclusive licensee ; the contractor that developed the invention faces no limitations on manufacturing location . federal agencies may use their march - in authority in instances where contractors' licensees do not comply with u.s . preference requirements . u.s. competitiveness . u.s. competitiveness provisions generally require that the manufacture of inventions developed by large businesses must occur substantially in the united states unless otherwise approved by doe . doe may require forfeiture of invention ownership or refund of its investment when contractors do not comply with these requirements if such penalties are included in the patent rights clause of the financial assistance award . u.s. manufacturing plan . u.s. manufacturing plan provisions generally require that contractors submit plans as part of a funding application specifying how they intend to domestically manufacture any potential inventions developed in the course of the financial assistance award . where this provision is part of a financial assistance award , doe may take ownership of the invention , require refund of its investment,reporting requirements in instances of noncompliance . in addition , doe may include provisions within a financial assistance award that require reports from contractors to provide information on how specifically , doe programs can federally funded inventions are utilized . request that contractors provide periodic reports with information regarding patent status ( eg , filing date , application number and title , and patent number and issue date ) , and invention utilization ( eg , the status of development , date of first commercial sale or use , and gross royalties received ) . doe may request these reports at its discretion but not more than annually . during fiscal years 2009 through 2013 , doe initiated nearly 6,000 financial assistance awards . doe relies primarily on contractor self - reporting and financial assistance award closeout procedures to ensure that contractors disclose agency funded inventions . during fiscal years 2009 through 2013 , doe initiated a total of nearly 6,000 financial assistance awards worth at least $11 billion with contractors , according to data provided by doe .