estimating the number of casualties . in 2016 , acta completed the design of a method for estimating the number of casualties that uses computer software to simulate a range of possible launch accidents that are intended to be more realistic than the scenario used in faa's previous method . faa officials stated that faa has used the revised method to calculate mpl values since april 2016 . faa's revised method for estimating the number of direct casualties in the mpl calculation uses additional data and modeling software to simulate more realistic accident scenarios . the data used in faa's previous method were a list of potential debris for each launch vehicle , which was supplied by the launch company , and the population densities of areas near the launch site . the revised method uses additional vehicle launch data , such as launch trajectory and fuel type , as well as failure rates for different phases of flight and types of failures . faa uses software known as the range risk analysis tool to create physics - based simulations of possible accidents using these data , and it assigns each simulated accident a probability of occurrence based on the failure rates of the different elements of the launch vehicle . based on the types of debris that are simulated , where the debris are predicted to fall , and population data , the software estimates a number of direct casualties for each simulated accident . faa officials told us that faa also revised how it incorporates secondary casualties into its mpl calculation . in each simulated accident , secondary casualties from inert debris and explosive debris are estimated separately . secondary casualties from inert debris are assumed to be 25 percent of direct casualties from inert debris , while secondary casualties from explosive debris continue to be estimated as 150 percent of direct casualties . federal internal control standards require that agency management identify , analyze , and respond to risks related to achieving the entity's objectives , and use current data . these standards also require that agency management define how to achieve objectives and the time frames for achieving them . however , while faa has hired a contractor to study the cost - of - casualty issue , it has not responded to the risk presented by using outdated data as the basis of the cost - of - casualty amount . further , because faa's contractors have concluded that the cost - of - casualty amount is likely too low , the current mpl calculation may not account for all damages to third parties and federal government property and personnel that can reasonably be expected to result from a launch accident , as required by faa regulations . an mpl methodology that does not account for all damages that can reasonably be expected could cause the government to be liable for some of those damages . this would not align with the mandated considerations of the cslca - required faa review , which includes helping to ensure that the federal government is not exposed to liability risk for more damages or losses than can be reasonably expected or intended .