these facilities are referred to as rmp facilities . officials have analyzed the agency's database of rmp facilities to identify high - risk sites for dhs and justice's federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) . but these facilities are only a portion of the universe of all industrial facilities that house toxic or hazardous chemicals . at the time of our review , epa had not analyzed non - rmp facilities to determine whether any of those facilities should be considered at high risk for a terrorist attack . epa has also issued warning alerts to the industry , hosted training classes on vulnerability assessment methodologies , and informally visited about 30 high - risk facilities to learn about and encourage security efforts . finally , dhs' information analysis and infrastructure protection directorate collects information from the u.s. intelligence community , other federal agencies , and the private sector . working with acc , an industry association representing chemical manufacturers , dhs also supports the chemical sector information sharing and analysis center to collect and share threat information for the chemical industry . in addition , according to epa officials , dhs has begun identifying high - risk facilities and conducting site visits at facilities . however , neither epa nor dhs is currently monitoring the extent to which the industry has implemented security measures . the chemical manufacturing industry has undertaken a number of voluntary initiatives to address security concerns at chemical facilities , including developing security guidelines and tools to assess vulnerabilities , but major challenges remain . all of the industry groups with whom we met have taken actions such as forming security task forces , holding meetings and conferences to share security information with members , and participating in security briefings with federal agencies . in response to the terrorist attacks on september 11 , 2001 , acc — whose members own or operate approximately 1,000 rmp facilities — - now requires its members , as a condition of membership , to rank facilities using a screening tool to evaluate its facilities' risk level . it also requires facilities to identify , assess , and address vulnerabilities at facilities using one of several available vulnerability assessment methodologies . in doing so , acc member facilities generally follow a multistep process that includes evaluating on - site chemical hazards , existing safety and security features , and the attractiveness of the facility as a terrorist target ; using hypothetical threat scenarios to identify how a facility is vulnerable to attack ; and identifying security measures that create layers of protection around a facility's most vulnerable areas to detect , delay , or mitigate the consequences of an attack . acc established time frames for completing the vulnerability assessment and implementing security measures , based on the facility's risk ranking . acc reports that the 120 facilities ranked as the highest risk and 372 facilities ranked as the next highest have completed vulnerability assessments . most of acc's lower - risk facilities are progressing on schedule . acc generally requires third - party verification that the facility has made the improvements identified in its vulnerability assessment .