navy . the navy uses a medical - specific model , called the medical manpower all corps requirements estimator , to estimate its total medical personnel readiness requirements . the navy readiness mission is to support all navy and marine corps operational missions , including operational operations ( such as hospital ships and expeditionary medical facilities ) and day - to - day operations ( such as ships , submarines , and special forces ) . air force . the air force uses a medical - specific sizing model named the critical operational readiness requirements tool to project its minimum military personnel requirements . this tool identifies the number of military medical personnel needed to meet requirements , including requirements for en - route casualty support , theater hospitals , and critical care air transport teams . according to military department officials , the decision to apportion medical personnel requirements among the active and reserve components is based on an assessment of risk across a range of factors . in a 2013 dod report issued in response to section 1080a of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 . dod noted that there are several important factors in active component and reserve component mix decisions , including , among others , the timing , duration , and skills required for anticipated missions . moreover , the report notes that active components are best suited for unpredictable and frequent deployments , dealing with complex operational environments , and unexpected contingencies and the reserve components are best suited for predictable and infrequent deployments . as noted in the report , active component personnel typically mobilize and deploy to theater the fastest . the sum of these considerations results in a different mix of active and reserve component medical personnel within each military department . specifically , reserve personnel ( as a percentage of the total workforce ) varied by military department in fiscal year 2017 , with reservists representing 41 percent of medical personnel of the army , 17 percent of the navy , and 34 percent of the air force , as shown in figure 3 . the military departments have not assessed the extent to which federal civilians and contractor personnel can be used to meet identified operational medical personnel requirements . specifically , after the military departments have determined their operational medical personnel requirements , they generally have designated all such positions as “military - essential” ( i.e. , the activity must be performed by a military servicemember ) and have not formally assessed the extent to which civilians or contractors could be utilized to fill these positions , according to officials . army , navy , and air force officials stated that they have historically relied on active and reserve component military personnel when planning for operational medical requirements , with a few exceptions . for example , according to navy officials , the few federal civilians that are planned to fill operational medical requirements are technical representatives who do not travel on ships for extended periods of time . in interviews , military department officials cited key reasons for not incorporating federal civilians and contractors into their planning for operational medical care .