documents are not portion marked . classified under the authority of executive order 12958 , as amended . c - nnpi nsi documents are typically marked secret noforn ( “not documents containing information classified under the authority of the aea are not portion marked . controlled in accordance with naval sea systems command instruction c5511.32b and protected pursuant to export control requirements and statutes . all unclassified but controlled information concerning the design , arrangement , development , manufacture , testing , operation , administration , training , maintenance , and repair of propulsion plants of naval nuclear powered ships and prototypes , including associated shipboard and shore - based nuclear support facilities . u - nnpi documents will be marked and controlled as noforn ( not releasable to foreign nationals ) . in addition , nancy crothers , robin eddington , doreen feldman , william lanouette , greg marchand , terry richardson , kevin tarmann , and ned woodward made significant contributions to this report . confidential foreign government information – modified handling authorized ( c / fgi - mod ) an agency must safeguard foreign government information under standards providing a degree of protection at least equivalent to that required by the government or international organization that furnished the information . doe has also implemented an extensive and rigorous oversight program . from 2000 through 2005 , the office of classification and its predecessor offices have conducted on - site inspections of classification activities at 34 doe field offices , national laboratories , and weapons manufacturing facilities . in calendar years 2004 and 2005 , the office of classification conducted an average of 10 oversight inspections a year . classification activities were evaluated in depth in eight different functional areas , including site - provided classification training , self - assessment efforts , and overall senior management support for ( and awareness of ) classification activities . to this end , before a team of 3 to 10 office of classification inspectors arrived , it would send the site's classification officer a “data call” requesting detailed and specific answers to dozens of questions about the procedures and practices of the site's classification program . for example , to ascertain how effectively classification guidance was being used , requests were made for information about what guidance was in use at the site ; the names of authorized classifiers who had guides ; whether there were any local ( site - specific ) guides in use , and if so , when were they last validated by office of classification officials . similarly detailed requests for information were requested about each of the other classification program elements . having such detailed information in hand prior to arrival at the site allowed inspection teams to undertake a comprehensive evaluation in just 2 to 5 days because they could focus more on validating the information provided in the data call than on undertaking the time - consuming task of gathering data themselves . the office of classification staff's expertise in classification matters is augmented with subject area experts .