costs . similarly , the bureau did not capture all costs for items such as data processing by programs like icm / a.c.e . programs ? what was the source and support for $400 million in life cycle costs reported by the bureau for the icm / a.c.e . programs ? how were icm / a.c.e . program costs estimated ? how much did the bureau budget for the icm / a.c.e . programs ? what were the obligated life cycle costs for the icm / a.c.e . programs ? were any budgeted funds for the icm / a.c.e . programs not used as of the end of fiscal year 2001 , and if so , how much ? what were the icm / a.c.e . program - related costs for the bureau dress rehearsal in fiscal year 1998 ? this report is part of a series of gao studies on the lessons learned from the 2000 census that can help in the planning and development effort now occurring for the 2010 census . early in the 2000 census cycle , the u.s. census bureau was researching coverage measurement options for the 2000 census , including the post enumeration survey ( pes ) methods used in past decennial censuses . the bureau explored a number of design options aimed at improving data accuracy while controlling costs . in 1993 , the bureau was also evaluating the feasibility of conducting a one - number census , which combines the features of both the traditional head count and statistical methods to produce a single count before the mandated deadlines . in may 1995 , the bureau announced that it would conduct a sample survey of 750,000 housing units , called integrated coverage measurement ( icm ) , to estimate how many housing units and people it would miss or count more than once in the 2000 census . in this initial design for the 2000 census , the bureau planned to use statistical methods to integrate the results of this survey with the traditional census enumeration to provide a one - number census by december 31 , 2000 . the u.s. supreme court ruled in january 1999 that 13 u.s.c . 195 prohibited the use of statistical sampling to generate population data for reapportioning the u.s. house of representatives . however , the court's ruling did not prohibit the use of statistical sampling for other purposes , such as adjusting formulas to distribute billions of dollars of federal funding to state and local governments . following the supreme court ruling , the bureau abandoned certain statistical aspects of the icm program , and announced the a.c.e . program to assess the quality of the population data collected in the 2000 census , using a smaller sample of 300,000 housing units . the bureau conducted a.c.e. , which corresponded to the pes in past censuses and the icm in the original 2000 census plan , to measure and correct the overall and differential coverage of the u.s. resident population in the 2000 census . although a.c.e . was generally implemented as planned , the bureau found that a.c.e . overstated the census net undercount . this was due , in part , to errors introduced during matching operations and from other remaining uncertainties .