this concludes my prepared testimony . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or members of subcommittees may have . for questions regarding this testimony , please call richard m. stana at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or stanar@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . other key contributors to this statement were john brummet , assistant director ; deborah davis , assistant director ; michael dino , assistant director ; john mortin , assistant director ; teresa abruzzo ; richard ascarate ; katherine bernet ; jeanette espinola ; adam hoffman ; and bintou njie . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . lack of inspection staff was also a problem . based upon a staffing model it developed , cbp estimated it may need several thousand more cbp officers at its ports of entry . according to cbp field officials , lack of staff affected their ability to carry out border security responsibilities . for example , we examined requests for resources from cbp's 20 field offices and its pre - clearance headquarters office for january 2007 and reported that managers at 19 of the 21 offices cited examples of anti - terrorism activities not being carried out , new or expanded facilities that were not fully operational , and radiation monitors and other inspection technologies not being fully used because of staff shortages . at seven of the eight major ports we visited , officers and managers told us that not having sufficient staff contributes to morale problems , fatigue , lack of backup support , and safety issues when officers inspect travelers — increasing the potential that terrorists , inadmissible travelers , and illicit goods could enter the country . cbp also had difficulty in providing required training to its officers . cbp developed 37 courses on such topics as how to carry out inspections and detect fraudulent documents and has instituted national guidelines for a 12-week on - the - job training program that new officers should receive at land ports of entry . however , managers at seven of the eight ports of entry we visited said that they were challenged in putting staff through training because staffing shortfalls force the ports to choose between performing port operations and providing training . lastly , although cbp has developed strategic goals that call for , among other things , establishing ports of entry where threats are deterred and inadmissible people and goods are intercepted — a key goal related to traveler inspections — it faces challenges in developing a performance measure that tracks progress in achieving this goal . we made a number of recommendations to the secretary of homeland security to help address weaknesses in traveler inspections , challenges in training , and problems with using performance data . dhs said it is taking steps to address our recommendations . we also reported that cbp's ability to do thorough inspections is made more difficult by a lack of technology and training to help cbp officers identify foreign nationals who attempt to enter the united states using fraudulent travel documents .