iii. ) dod concurred with the report's recommendations . in its written comments , dod stressed that strong oversight of the civilian provider network is necessary and should be continuously monitored for improvements . dod said that the implementation of tnex will address many of the points raised in our report . dod said tnex will enhance the reporting of information about network adequacy as well as provide powerful financial incentives for contractors to optimize the direct care system , maximize the extent of civilian provider networks , and achieve the highest level of beneficiary satisfaction . however , since the tnex contracts have not been finalized as of july 2003 , it is too early to assess whether the contracts will result in improved oversight . in its written comments dod also said that the report title might mislead some into concluding that we found the tricare network to be inadequate . as we noted in the draft report , we did not assess the adequacy of the civilian provider network but focused our work on dod's oversight of the network . we believe the title of the report reflects that focus . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated into the report as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . copies will also be made available to others upon request . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7101 . other contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix iv . to describe and evaluate dod's oversight of the adequacy of the civilian provider network , we reviewed and analyzed the information in the quarterly network adequacy reports submitted by each contractor . we identified the requirements for the content of these adequacy reports based upon the general requirements in the tricare operations manual and the additional requirements in contractors' best and final offers . we reviewed the contents of five of the contractors' quarterly network adequacy reports , submitted between june 2002 and october 2002 , and compared them to the applicable reporting requirements . each report was evaluated for compliance regarding the provider - to - beneficiary ratios and the access - to - care standards . because dod has delegated the oversight of the network to the regional lead agents , we discussed civilian provider network oversight with officials in 5 of the 11 tricare regions — northeast , mid - atlantic , heartland , central , and northwest . to discuss network management , we interviewed officials from the four contractors — healthnet , humana , sierra , and triwest — that are responsible for developing and maintaining the provider network that augments care provided by dod's mtfs . because concerns regarding network adequacy may also be identified at the local level , we met with lead agent and contractor officials at mtfs in each of the regions we visited .