maternity care services . according to officials from the three military services and ncr , as of july 2015 , 37 of the 41 domestic military hospitals offered maternity care services , with most hospitals offering either a basic level or specialized level of care ( levels i and ii ) , and fewer offering maternity care at subspecialty or higher levels ( level iii or higher ) . specifically , they reported that 16 of the 37 domestic military hospitals that offered maternity care offered only a basic level of care ( level i ) , 13 offered a specialty level of care ( level ii ) , 5 offered a more specialized subspecialty level of care ( level iii ) , and 3 were considered even further specialized regional perinatal health care centers with full maternity care capabilities ( level iv ) . army officials said that army hospital perinatal advisory boards coordinate perinatal quality , safety , education , patient satisfaction , and outreach efforts . according to air force officials , in air force hospitals , responsibility for the quality of care is held by clinical departments , such as the women's health department or the obstetrics department . under the cqib are three advisory groups that focus on quality measures that include measures for women's health care services — the perinatal advisory group ( pag ) , the clinical measures working group ( cmwg ) , and the national surgical quality improvement program ( nsqip ) working group . figure 2 depicts these advisory groups . each of these groups has representatives from the military services and formally reports to the cqib on an annual or biannual basis . mhs officials told us that each of these department - level advisory groups selects and reviews quality measures . for example , the pag , which coordinates the mhs's efforts to improve the quality of maternity and neonatal care , annually reviews quality measures . military treatment facilities , including hospitals and clinics , are under the direction and control of the military services , which maintain the responsibility to staff , train , and equip those commands to meet mission requirements . decision making within the mhs reflects collaborative activities by a number of bodies with representation from each service and the dha throughout the decision - making process . in 2014 , the pag added two quality measures that looked at newborn complications and first - time cesarean deliveries . in addition , officials from mhs , all three services , and ncr reported that coordination of the selection of quality measures for women's health care services increased in the past several years . for example , the pag , using coordinated efforts across the three military services and ncr , is selecting perinatal quality measures to include in a “dashboard” that will be used throughout all domestic military hospitals . the dashboard is intended to provide more timely quality information to providers during a patient's hospital stay . mhs officials said that the cmwg and nsqip working group have similar processes focused on broader clinical topics , of which women's health care services are a subset . military - service - level advisory groups .