this information is then to be presented in the pom . the pom is completed at least two years before the estimated funds will be spent and documents funding needs for 5 years into the future . for example , the fiscal year 2017-2021 pom is to be completed in fiscal year 2015 and document the requirements and resources needed for fiscal years 2017 through 2021 . in preparation for this phase , each military department is to issue annual pom guidance to inform commands and program offices of the types of information that should be included in pom submissions , the format , and time frames for completion . organizations responsible for issuing this guidance are within the programming community and include army's g - 8 , program analysis and evaluation office of the chief of naval operations secretary of air force financial management other organizations , such a major commands or program executive offices , may issue supplemental guidance based on that organization's needs . generally , commands and program offices determine and document requirements , priorities , and funding needs that are used to support their respective command's pom in the fall . consolidated pom estimates are to be submitted to the dod components in early spring and then to office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) in july or august . before submitting the pom to osd in july , the office of the secretary of defense , cost assessment and program evaluation , and other dod senior leaders , including those in the financial management and programming community , are to review pom documents to validate and prioritize requirements and make department wide resource allocation decisions . the budgeting phase of the ppbe process happens at the same time as the programming phase and its purpose is to decide how much prospective funding to allocate to each of the dod programs for the next fiscal year . dod program offices are to convert their requirements in the first year of the pom into the congressional appropriation format , known as the budget estimate submission ( bes ) . the bes and the pom submissions are to be used by each dod component financial management office and dod comptroller to formulate the president's budget request . the dod comptroller and the omb review the submissions to ensure that program funding aligns with current policy and is justified to congress . the president's budget is required to be submitted to congress no later than the first monday of february . in the president's budget , contracted services are identified by eight spending categories , known as object class codes , as shown in table 2 . services within these codes may be associated with more than one of dod's portfolio groups . for example , object class code 25.1 , advisory and assistance services , may be associated with both the knowledge - based and the research and development portfolios . object class code data is presented for each military department appropriation . in the fiscal year 2015 president's budget , contracted services for the military departments were included in 38 different appropriations and 192 separate lines in the budget . each military department has a different approach to developing its budget request .