we did not review the effectiveness of these procedures . in addition to the contact named above , eric erdman , assistant director ; mona blake ; jeffrey demarco ; michele fejfar ; lisa humphrey ; richard hung ; thomas lombardi ; linda miller ; victoria miller ; jan montgomery ; timothy persons ; and michelle woods made key contributions to this report . the cia did not provide any comments . we are sending copies of this report to national security staff ; the attorney general ; the secretaries of the departments of defense , homeland security , and state ; the directors of national intelligence and central intelligence ; and appropriate congressional committees . this report is also available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . should you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact eileen r. larence at ( 202 ) 512-6510 or larencee@gao.gov . how did the composition of the watchlist change as a result of actions taken by departments and agencies after the attempted attack ? how are screening agencies addressing vulnerabilities exposed by the attempted attack , what have been the outcomes of related screening since the incident , and to what extent are federal agencies assessing the impacts of this screening ? this report is a public version of the classified report that we provided to you . the various departments and agencies we reviewed deemed some of the information in the restricted report as classified or sensitive ( eg , sensitive security information or for official use only ) , which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits certain information associated with vulnerabilities in watchlisting and screening processes that were exposed by the december 25 , 2009 , attempted attack and government actions to address these vulnerabilities . this report also omits key details regarding ( 1 ) certain policies and procedures associated with the development and use of the terrorist watchlist and ( 2 ) specific outcomes of encounters with individuals who were positively matched to the watchlist . although the information provided in this report is more limited in scope , it addresses the same questions as the restricted report . also , the overall methodology used for both reports is the same . to determine federal government actions to strengthen the watchlist nominations process and related challenges , we analyzed postattack government reports issued by the executive office of the president and the senate select committee on intelligence . we also compared the july 2010 watchlisting guidance — issued by the tsc to standardize watchlisting policies and processes — to the 2009 watchlisting protocol ( the most recent operational policy before the december 2009 attempted attack ) to identify changes that were intended to strengthen agencies' abilities to nominate known or suspected terrorist to the watchlist . to help us determine how postattack changes in the watchlisting guidance have affected the volume of nominations and any resulting impacts , we obtained data for the period january 2009 through may 2011 from seven federal entities involved in the nominations process . specifically , we obtained data from five entities that nominate individuals for inclusion on the terrorist watchlist ( nominating agencies ) .