usaid requires cost estimates for programs . cost estimates record the government's assessment of a contract's most probable cost and can be used to make requirements trade - offs in the acquisition planning process . following acquisition planning , the cost estimate can be used to check the reasonableness of potential contractors' proposals and negotiate prices . in one case we reviewed at hhs , neither the contracting official nor program official involved in acquisition planning for the $210 million contract for management and technical consulting services were still at the agency . an hhs contracting official told us they maintained a running list of issues to address in follow - on contracts to ensure lessons learned are not lost . in addition , because the contract file contained significant documentation of the early planning process , we were able to readily understand the decisions they had made and the lessons they learned . usaid did not indicate specific actions the agency will take to implement this recommendation . nasa noted that it plans to require acquisition plans to fully document the rationale for cost estimates . in its comments , dhs described existing guidance and training related to independent government cost estimates and stated its intention to review its regulations and guidance in accordance with our recommendation . in doing so , it is important that guidance define the role of cost estimates specifically for acquisition planning purposes , which could include making affordability and requirements tradeoffs . a detailed scope and methodology is presented in appendix i . we conducted our audit work from may 2010 to august 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . acquisition planning activities should integrate the efforts of all personnel responsible for significant aspects of the acquisition . generally , program and contracting officials share responsibility for the majority of acquisition planning activities . although there is variation among agency processes , acquisition planning for individual contracts typically occurs in three phases ( see figure 1 ) : 1 . pre - solicitation: acquisition planning activities generally begin when the program office identifies a need . the program office contacts its contracting office for guidance on how to develop and prepare key acquisition documents . the program office is primarily responsible for conducting market research , defining requirements in a document such as a statement of work , developing cost estimates , and developing a written acquisition plan , if required . the program office also obtains reviews and approvals as necessary from program leadership for the documents prepared . procurement request: the program office submits a formal request to acquire services , generally known as the request for contract package which can include a requirements document , a cost estimate , and an acquisition plan , if required . at this point , contracting and program officials work together to revise and refine these key planning documents as necessary , until the request for contract package is complete .