we did not verify these data . we conducted all of our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to produce a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our statement today . additional information on our scope and methodology is available in each issued product . ( see our list of related products at the end of this testimony. ) of the four agencies that received over $40 billion in funding for science - related activities under the recovery act , doe received the largest amount of funds . table 1 shows recovery act funding , obligations , and expenditures for these agencies . of the $35.2 billion it received under the recovery act for science - related projects and activities , doe reported that it had obligated $34.6 billion ( 98 percent ) and spent $18.9 billion ( 54 percent ) as of september 30 , 2011 . this is an increase from march 10 , 2011 , when doe reported that it had obligated $33.1 billion and spent $12.5 billion . table 2 shows recovery act funding , obligations , and expenditures for doe's program offices . our recovery act recommendations have focused primarily on the following four doe programs and projects: the eecbg program , which provides grants to states , territories , tribes , and local communities for projects that improve energy efficiency , reduce energy use , and reduce fossil fuel emissions . the office of environmental management , which cleans up contaminated sites across the country where decades of nuclear weapons research , development , and production left a legacy of dangerously radioactive , chemical , and other hazardous wastes . the lgp , which guarantees loans for energy projects that ( 1 ) use either new or significantly improved technologies as compared with commercial technologies already in use in the united states and ( 2 ) avoid , reduce , or sequester emissions of air pollutants or man - made greenhouse gases . the weatherization assistance program , which enables low - income families to reduce their utility bills by making long - term energy - efficiency improvements to their homes by , for example , installing insulation , sealing leaks , and modernizing heating or air conditioning equipment . table 3 shows recovery act funding , obligations , and expenditures for these doe programs as of september 30 , 2011 . the recovery act provided about $3.2 billion for doe's eecbg , funding the program for the first time since it was authorized in the energy independence and security act ( eisa ) of 2007 . doe awarded this funding as follows: about $1.94 billion as formula grants to more than 2,000 local communities — including cities , counties , and tribal communities . about $767 million as formula grants to the states , five territories , and the district of columbia . about $40 million for administrative and training / technical assistance . about $453 million through competitive grants to local communities .