both agencies expressed agreement with this recommendation . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the committee may have . for further information about this testimony , please contact me , john stephenson , at 202-512-3841 or stephensonj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . contributors to this testimony include steve elstein , assistant director ; chase huntley ; alison o'neill ; and lisa van arsdale . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . others argue that increases in losses have been driven by changes in climate . in particular , the program has significantly expanded the scope of crops covered and increased participation . the largest insured losses in the data we reviewed were associated with catastrophic weather events . notably , crop insurers and other property insurers both face catastrophic weather - related risks , although the nature of the events for each is very different . for example , fcic officials stated that they had modeled past events , such as the 1993 midwest floods , using current participation levels to inform negotiations with private crop insurers over reinsurance terms . in the case of crop insurance , drought accounted for more than 40 percent of weather - related loss payments from 1980 to 2005 , and the years with the largest losses were associated with drought . virtually anything that is insured is vulnerable to weather - related events . assessments by leading scientific bodies suggest that climate change could significantly alter the frequency or severity of weather - related events , such as drought and hurricanes . leading scientific bodies report that the earth warmed during the twentieth century — 1.3 degrees fahrenheit ( 0.74 degrees celsius ) from 1906 to 2005 according to a recent ipcc report — and is projected to continue to warm for the foreseeable future . while temperatures have varied throughout history , triggered by natural factors such as volcanic eruptions or changes in the earth's orbit , the key scientific assessments we reviewed have generally concluded that the observed increase in temperature in the past 100 years cannot be explained by natural variability alone . in recent years , major scientific bodies such as the ipcc , nas , and the united kingdom's royal academy have concluded that human activities are significantly increasing the concentrations of greenhouse gases and , in turn , global temperatures . assuming continued growth in atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases , the latest assessment of computer climate models projects that average global temperatures will warm by an additional 3.2 to 7.2 degrees fahrenheit ( 1.8 to 4.0 degrees celsius ) during the next century .