ii ) . although the program attempted to stabilize costs by adding approximately $200 million to the contract in january 2004 , costs continued to grow steadily thereafter . in addition , the contractor has increasingly fallen behind schedule and has had to devote more resources than originally planned . in january 2005 , the prime contractor estimated that the total costs for the cluster 1 radio and waveform development would be $531 million more than what was originally budgeted , reaching about $898 million at completion . however , according to program officials , since contract award , the prime contractor has not demonstrated strong cost estimating and cost management techniques , and it is difficult to estimate with any confidence what the overall program is likely to cost . key issues driving the cost growth are unanticipated complexity associated with developing the hardware , wideband networking waveform , and other software . as a result , the unit costs for early prototypes have increased from the prime contractor's original proposal . according to one dod official , until the requirements' specifications are stabilized , cost and schedule problems are likely to continue . for example , according to the defense contract management agency , meeting the design changes for security requirements is expected to cost an estimated $80 million . in light of the technical problems and cost growth , the army in december 2004 delayed the initial production decision , which was scheduled for the third quarter of fiscal year 2005 , and proposed to add $458 million and 24 months to the program . before carrying out this restructure , the office of the secretary of defense directed the army in january 2005 to stop work on portions of the cluster 1 development and focus on preparing for an early operational assessment of the radio , which was intended to test the basic functionality of pre - engineering development models of the radio . in april 2005 , however , the army suspended the operational assessment and notified the contractor that it was considering contract termination . this action was taken based on initial findings of an assessment of the cluster 1 program conducted by a newly established jtrs joint program executive office , which concluded that the current program structure is not executable and the contractor's ability to develop the radio is questionable . at this point it is not clear whether the contract will be terminated and what impact a termination would have on the future of the program . the joint program executive office is expected to complete its assessment of the program , and a defense acquisition board review will be held at the end of fiscal year 2005 to determine the future of the program . program officials anticipate a new program acquisition strategy will evolve , with greater emphasis on developing the radio in blocks . if development resumes , it is anticipated that there will be start - up delays — 3 to 12 months , according to agency officials — associated with restaffing the contractor's development team and bringing the team up the learning curve . adding to the program's uncertainty is the impact of pending requirements on program cost and schedule .