gao - 15-758t . washington , d.c.: july 8 , 2015 . the 30-day cybersecurity sprint . in june 2015 , in response to the opm security breaches and to improve federal cybersecurity and protect systems against evolving threats , the federal chief information officer launched the 30-day cybersecurity sprint and instructed agencies to immediately take a number of steps to further protect federal information and to improve the resilience of federal networks . one step was to accelerate the implementation of multi - factor authentication , such as the use of personal identity verification cards to gain access to federal networks , systems , and data . according to a report by the executive office of the president , the percentage of education's users who used strong authentication decreased to 57 percent , one of only four agencies to show a decrease following the sprint . agency spending on cybersecurity activities . according to omb , the 24 agencies covered by the chief financial officers act reported spending about $12.7 billion on cybersecurity activities in fiscal year 2014 . of this amount , the 23 civilian agencies reportedly spent about $3.75 billion or about 9 percent of the amount the agencies reportedly spent on information technology in fiscal year 2014 . ( see fig . access controls: for fiscal year 2014 , education and 21 other agencies had weaknesses in electronic and physical controls to limit , prevent , or detect inappropriate access to computer resources ( data , equipment , and facilities ) , thereby increasing their risk of unauthorized use , modification , disclosure , and loss . specifically , education's inspector general reported weaknesses in several key access control elements , including protecting the boundaries of its information systems and handling incidents . for example , the department did not implement controls to verify the security of non - government furnished equipment connecting to its network via virtual private client programs prior to authentication . configuration management: for fiscal year 2014 , 22 agencies , including education , had weaknesses reported in controls that are intended to ensure that only authorized and fully tested software is placed in operation , software and hardware is updated , information systems are monitored , patches are applied to these systems to protect against known vulnerabilities , and emergency changes are documented and approved . for example , the department's configuration management guidance had not been updated since 2005 and its it security baseline configuration guidance had not been updated since 2009 . segregation of duties: fifteen agencies had weaknesses reported in controls for segregation of duties , although education was not one of them . these controls are the policies , procedures , and organizational structure that help to ensure that one individual cannot independently control all key aspects of a computer - related operation and thereby take unauthorized actions or gain unauthorized access to assets or records . continuity of operations: education and 17 other agencies had weaknesses reported in controls for their continuity of operations practices for fiscal year 2014 . for example , education did not consistently document the it recovery procedures for its systems in accordance with national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) guidelines and departmental policies .