these policies are discussed below . criteria for implementing evm on all it major investments: faa requires all of its major development , modernization , and enhancement programs to use evm . specifically , these are all programs with a requirement to provide a business case to omb . in addition , faa requires that all contracts and subcontracts that are expected to exceed a cost of $10 million for development , modernization , and enhancement work must be managed using an evm system . projects lasting less than 1 year are not required to use evm . compliance with the ansi standard: faa requires that all work activities performed on major programs by government personnel , major contractors , and support contractors be managed using an evm system that complies with industry standards . faa's evm focal point is responsible for certifying that contractors with contracts over $10 million conform with the standard . faa's value management office is responsible for certifying that each program conforms with the standard . integrated baseline reviews: faa requires each program manager to conduct a comprehensive review of a program baseline for major programs and contracts within 90 to 180 days of contract award or program baseline establishment . furthermore , an updated integrated baseline review must be performed after a program exercises significant contract options or executes modifications . the agency's guidance calls for the involvement of program management teams , prime contractor management , and independent subject matter experts who validate the program baselines and performance measurement processes . system surveillance: faa requires ongoing surveillance of all programs and contracts that are required to use evm systems to ensure their continued compliance with industry standards . while this presents a challenge , it is not insurmountable . for example , in the near - term , the agency could develop a standard mapping function to translate product - oriented program data into the function - oriented cost accounting system . while this approach would not resolve the time - consuming nature of mapping ( since programs would still be expected to complete this activity ) , it does at least allow costs to be captured consistently across programs . as a longer - term solution , we have repeatedly urged government agencies to adopt cost accounting systems that provide meaningful links among budget , accounting , and performance . such systems are consistent with product - oriented work breakdown structures . until faa establishes a standard product - oriented work breakdown structure , program officials who use the function - oriented approach to manage their contracts may not be obtaining the information they need . furthermore , program officials who choose to manage using a product - oriented structure will continue to spend valuable time and effort mapping their product - oriented structures to the faa standard , and the agency will continue to risk that data are captured inaccurately or inconsistently during this mapping exercise . evm training requirements: faa has developed evm training and requires program managers to complete a minimum of 24 hours of evm and cost estimating training . however , the agency does not specify evm training requirements for program team members or senior executives with program oversight responsibilities .