( see fig . phmsa's regulations also incorporated , as mandatory , voluntary industry consensus standards on maximum reassessment intervals into these regulations for other types of safety threats . the industry standards require that operators reassess gas pipelines at least every 10 , 15 , or 20 years for all safety threats depending primarily on the condition of the pipelines and the pressure under which they operate . if conditions warrant , reassessments must occur more frequently . in addition , operators must perform prevention and mitigation activities — such as monitoring their pipelines for excavation or corrosion damage — on a continuing basis . operators are making good progress in assessing and repairing their pipelines , thereby improving the safety of their pipeline systems . as of december 2005 , operators had assessed about 6,700 miles of their 20,000 miles — or about 33 percent — of pipelines located in highly populated or frequently used areas . since phmsa does not require that operators tell it the nature of the problems found , we do not know how many , if any , were due to corrosion . these assessments covered about 6,700 miles , or about one - third of the nationwide total to be assessed . it is encouraging that the majority of operators nationwide reported that they found few or no problems requiring immediate repairs , because operators are supposed to assess pipeline segments facing the greatest risk of failure from leaks or ruptures first , as required by the 2002 act . in addition , since operators are required to identify and repair significant problems , the overall safety and condition of the pipeline system should be enhanced before reassessments begin toward the end of the decade . regarding the industry's overall safety record , over the past 5-1 / 2 years ( from january 2001 through early july 2006 ) , there were 143 corrosion - related incidents over the 295,000-mile transmission system ( 26 per year , on average ) — none of which resulted in death or injury . over the past 10- 1 / 2 years , 12 people have died and 3 have been injured in two corrosion - related incidents . neither of these incidents occurred in a highly populated or frequently used area . about 80 percent of the 52 operators that we contacted prefer that reassessment intervals be based on the condition and characteristics of the pipeline segment rather than on a prescriptive standard . about half of these operators ( 28 ) expressed a preference for the industry consensus standard developed by the american society of mechanical engineers ( asme b31.8s - 2004 ) for setting reassessment intervals for time - dependent threats because it incorporates a risk - based approach ( for pipeline failure ) and is based on science and engineering knowledge . this standard sets reassessment intervals at a maximum of 10 years for high - stress pipeline segments , 15 years for medium - stress segments , and 20 years for low - stress segments .