royalty rate . boem evaluated the effect of lowering the royalty rate to 12.5 percent for two scenarios: ( 1 ) tracts with water depths between 200 and 400 meters and ( 2 ) all tracts . market conditions . boem assesses trends in oil and gas prices as well as forecasts from the department of energy's energy information administration , the world bank , and the office of management and budget . boem uses these assessments to estimate , under existing fiscal terms , results for the lease sales covered by the analysis — including the amount of bonus bids collected and the number of tracts sold — as well as resulting production and net economic value under various price scenarios . boem reviews the fiscal terms of international jurisdictions to assess how they compare with the u.s. system . within this context , boem considers potential changes to its fiscal terms by estimating their effects on outcomes including leasing activity , production , and revenue at various oil and gas prices . for example , in its annual analysis for its august 2017 and march 2018 lease sales , boem analyzed the potential effect of five royalty rate changes from the 18.75 percent rate that had been in place since 2008 . two of the potential changes were targeted to specific types of production or water depths and three would apply to all production . for the targeted changes , boem considered ( 1 ) a lower natural gas royalty and ( 2 ) a lower shallow water royalty — both at the statutory minimum of 12.5 percent . the other potential changes were to lower royalty rates on all production to ( 1 ) 12.5 percent , ( 2 ) 15 percent , and ( 3 ) 16.67 percent . for each of these scenarios , boem modeled effects on overall production and revenue at various market prices . based on our review of boem lease planning documents , boem conducts additional lease sale - specific analysis before finalizing the fiscal terms for each sale . for example , boem considered changes to each of the fiscal terms for its august 2018 lease sale — minimum bid , rental rates , and royalty rate — but recommended that they not change from the previous sale . specifically: minimum bid . boem evaluated lowering the minimum bid for tracts in water depths of greater than 400 meters to account for the effects of decreases in ( 1 ) oil prices since boem raised the minimum bid to $100 in 2011 and ( 2 ) corporate tax rates per the tax cuts and jobs act of 2017 . boem found that , because of these changes , a $100 per acre minimum bid in 2018 was roughly equivalent to a $170 per acre minimum bid in 2011 and that maintaining the $100 per acre minimum bid in 2018 could reduce the number of tracts sold . however , boem assessed that industry has recently shown a preference for holding less acreage , evidenced by relinquishments and bidding on fewer blocks .