iii ) . ( 1 point ) did not live in state that “don't know” 62% 11 . if you don't live in a state that allows residents to receive one free credit report a year , about how much will a credit reporting agency charge you for a copy of your credit report ? ( 1 point ) provided a correct response — 45% provided an incorrect response — 10% don't know — % 12 . when a credit report is prepared on someone , the information can come from different sources . please tell me which of the following sources you believe it can come from by answering yes , no , or don't know . a ) from banks and other lenders ? a ) a checking account ? b ) a credit card ? c ) an automobile loan ? d ) a mortgage or home loan ? e ) a savings account or certificate of deposit ? f ) a mutual fund ? g ) stocks in individual companies ? h ) government bonds ? now for the final question , i am going to read a list of income categories . which category best represents your total combined income during the past 12 months of all the members of your family ? this includes money from jobs ; net income from business , tips , farm or rent ; pensions ; dividends ; interest ; social security payments ; and other income or money received . less than $25,000 — 24% $25,000 — $49,999 — 25% $50,000 — $74,999 — 19% $75,000 or more — 22% 58 . we understand that you would prefer not to tell us your actual income , but could you just confirm if it is less than $25,000 or over $25,000 ? ( for the 10% who refused on question 57 ) . gao conducted a literature search to identify some of the relevant non - gao sample surveys and other studies on consumers' knowledge of credit reporting issues , the extent to which consumers review their credit reports and scores and their reasons for doing so , and other related matters . we attempted to evaluate the quality of the data and findings of these reports , but the limited methodological documentation available to us prevented a thorough review . we included only those surveys for which we had some indication that a random sample of a known population , typically a nationwide random - digit dial telephone survey of u.s. adults , had been conducted . different people have different types of financial accounts , investments and loans . we don't want to know the amounts , but have you ever had any of the following ? however , due to possible shortcomings in important design aspects of these studies that are not known , the possibility for error still exists in each of these studies . therefore , gao does not consider any one estimate from the following studies to be sufficiently accurate to base conclusions on . however , in the aggregate , these other results may serve as a general comparison to the gao survey of u.s. consumers and provide a background description of what other researchers have reported on these issues .