gao - 05-108t . washington , d.c.: october 7 , 2004 . this constraint did not apply to as many plans in some other years . the department of labor , treasury , and pbgc also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of labor , the secretary of the treasury , and the executive director of the pbgc , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made contributions are listed in appendix v . to describe recent pension funding trends , we analyzed data from schedule b of the form 5500 . this schedule contains information on plan assets , liabilities , contributions , funding standard account ( fsa ) credits and charges , and additional funding charge ( afc ) calculations . problems with the electronic data of the form 5500 are well documented . to mitigate problems associated with the data we used form 5500 research data from the pension benefit guaranty corporation's ( pbgc ) policy , research and analysis department ( prad ) . prad analysts routinely and systematically correct the raw 5500 data submitted by plans , and prad 5500 data are thought to be the most accurate electronic versions . although we did not independently audit the veracity of the prad data , we performed routine data reliability checks . in instances where the data reliability checks revealed inconsistencies , we contacted a prad analyst to check and , if appropriate , correct the electronic data using information provided to prad in hard copy . for our analysis , we worked with a subset of the pbgc research data that included the 100 largest plans , measured by current liability , annually from 1995 to 2002 . in 2002 , the most recent , nearly complete year of available form 5500 data , these 100 plans , with average liabilities per plan of $6.7 billion and 94,000 participants , represented approximately 50 percent of the total liabilities and about 28 percent of the total participants of the approximately 30,000 defined benefit ( db ) plans that filed a form 5500 for plan year 2002 as of february 2005 . thus , while our sample data set represents only a small portion of the total plans in the single - employer program , it constitutes a significant proportion of the liabilities of the db system and the financial risk to pbgc while allowing for more manageable analysis . we did not directly test or compare our sample for generalizability across the entire sample of single - employer plans . for 1999 and 2002 , the best available data do not contain all possible plans , and therefore it is possible that in those years complete data sets would yield slightly different samples for our analysis .