( see app . ii for other limitations identified by our office of special investigations and observations on how they could be addressed. ) moreover , the physical security measures that usda chose to implement on plum island are largely limited to the biocontainment area , where pathogens are located . consequently , other important assets remain vulnerable . for example , the continued operation of the plum island animal disease center is dependent on its infrastructure , which has limited protection . protecting the infrastructure is particularly important because the plum island animal disease center is the only facility in the united states capable of responding to an outbreak and researching foot - and - mouth disease . therefore , if the infrastructure was damaged , no other facility could step in and continue this foot - and - mouth disease work . furthermore , plum island is the only facility in north america that has a foot - and - mouth disease vaccine bank . this bank represents years of cooperative research performed by canada , mexico , and the united states , yet the room containing it has a window opening covered with only plywood . usda officials said they intend to improve the physical security of the vaccine bank but have not yet decided on the approach to take . in addition , dhs officials agree that the plum island animal disease center is vital to combating bioterrorism , and they are evaluating the physical security on plum island . access to pathogens at the plum island animal disease center is not adequately controlled . for example , as of july 2003 , eight scientists from other countries were working in the biocontainment area without completed background investigations . according to fbi officials , allowing anyone who does not have a completed background investigation access to the biocontainment area — in particular , a scientist from another country — represents a significant security risk . usda officials told us these scientists were allowed into the biocontainment area to enable research to continue . furthermore , they stated that background investigations had been initiated for these individuals , and it was assumed that these scientists were being escorted , which usda policy permits for those with pending background investigations . however , plum island officials told us that due to resource constraints , it has not been possible to continually escort and monitor scientists while they are in the biocontainment area . when we brought this concern to the attention of dhs officials , they told us they are developing a more restrictive policy for allowing scientists from other countries to have access to pathogens . in addition , usda policy does not require background checks on students who attend the foot - and - mouth disease classes that are regularly held in the biocontainment area . in 2002 , usda held six classes with an average of 32 students per class and anticipates continuing these classes in the future . according to usda's policy , individuals may enter the biocontainment area without background checks if an approved individual escorts them.we believe this policy warrants reconsideration for several reasons .