gao - 09-400 . washington , d.c.: may 19 , 2009 . personnel security clearances: an outcome - focused strategy is needed to guide implementation of the reformed clearance process . gao - 09-488 washington , d.c.: may 19 , 2009 . high - risk series: an update . gao - 09-271 . washington , d.c.: january 22 , 2009 . dod personnel clearances: preliminary observations about timeliness and quality . membership on the council currently includes senior executive leaders from 11 federal agencies . in addition to high - level leadership of the performance accountability council , the reform effort has benefited from a dedicated , multi - agency implementation team — the joint reform team — to manage the transformation process from the beginning . the joint reform team , while not formally part of the governance structure established by executive order 13467 , works under the council to provide progress reports to the president , recommend research priorities , and oversee the development and implementation of an information technology strategy , among other things . in addition to the key practices , the three reports issued by the joint reform team have begun to address essential factors for reforming the security clearance process that we identified in prior work and that are also found in irtpa . these factors include ( 1 ) developing a sound requirements determination process , ( 2 ) engaging in governmentwide reciprocity , ( 3 ) building quality into every step of the process , ( 4 ) consolidating information technology , and ( 5 ) identifying and reporting long - term funding requirements . while the personnel security clearance joint reform reports , which we reviewed collectively , begin to address essential factors for reforming the security clearance process , which represents positive steps , the joint reform team's information technology strategy does not yet define roles and responsibilities for implementing a new automated capability that is intended to be a cross - agency collaborative initiative . gao's prior work on key collaboration practices has stressed the importance of defining these roles and responsibilities when initiating cross - agency initiatives . in addition , the joint reform team's reports do not contain any information on initiatives that will require funding , determine how much they will cost , or identify potential funding sources . without long - term funding requirements , decision makers in both the executive and legislative branches will lack important information for comparing and prioritizing proposals for reforming the clearance processes . the reform effort's success will be dependent upon the extent to which the joint reform team is able to fully address these key factors moving forward . although the high - level leadership and governance structure of the current reform effort distinguish it from previous efforts , it is difficult to gauge progress of reform , or determine if corrective action is needed , because the council , through the joint reform team , has not established a method for evaluating the progress of the reform efforts .