a variety of such measures exist now . for example , the medicare trustees report total medicare spending as a share of gross domestic product ( gdp ) . this measure clearly shows that total medicare expenditures will likely consume an increasingly larger share of the national economy . currently , combined hi and smi expenditures account for 2.3 percent of gdp . this percentage is expected to rise to 4.5 percent in 2030 and 8.5 percent in 2075 . at the same time , they can create financial barriers to care and leave beneficiaries with extensive health care needs liable for high out - of - pocket costs . health insurers today commonly design cost - sharing requirements — in the form of deductibles , coinsurance , and copayments — to ensure that beneficiaries are aware there is a cost associated with the provision of services and to encourage them to use services prudently . ideally , cost - sharing should encourage beneficiaries to evaluate the need for discretionary care but not discourage necessary care . optimally , cost - sharing would generally require coinsurance or copayments for services that may be discretionary and could potentially be overused , and would also aim to steer patients to lower cost or better treatment options . care must be taken , however , to avoid setting cost - sharing amounts so high as to create financial barriers to necessary care . the benefit packages of most medicare+choice plans illustrate cost - sharing arrangements that have been designed to reinforce cost containment and treatment goals . most medicare+choice plans charge a small copayment for physician visits ( $10 or less ) and emergency room services ( less than $50 ) . relatively few medicare+choice plans charge copayments for hospital admissions . plans that offer prescription drug benefits typically design cost - sharing provisions that encourage beneficiaries to use cheaper generic drugs or brand name drugs for which the plan has negotiated a discount . medicare fee - for - service cost - sharing rules diverge from these common insurance industry practices in important ways . for example , as indicated in table 2 , medicare imposes a relatively high deductible of $792 for hospital admissions , which are rarely optional . in contrast , medicare requires no cost - sharing for home health care services , even though historically high utilization growth and wide geographic disparities in the use of such services have raised concerns about the potentially discretionary nature of some services . medicare also has not increased the part b deductible since 1991 . for the last 10 years the deductible has remained constant at $100 and has thus steadily decreased as a proportion of beneficiaries' real income . also unlike most employer - sponsored health plans for active workers , medicare does not limit beneficiaries' cost - sharing liability . employer - sponsored plans typically limit maximum annual out - of - pocket costs for covered services to less than $2,000 per year for single coverage . in medicare , however , current estimates suggest that the combination of cost - sharing requirements on covered services and the cost of services not covered by medicare leaves beneficiaries liable for about 45 percent of their health care costs .