potential advantages . adding an additional risk component to pca capital measures may make pca more responsive to specific trends . for example , in the current crisis many banks failed , in part , because of risks associated with high asset concentrations . a stakeholder told us that incorporating early indicators of heightened risk into pca capital thresholds could be an additional way to minimize losses to the dif . also , this change would not affect all banks but only those banks engaging in riskier activities . moreover , incorporating a bank's risk profile into the pca capital category thresholds would be an opportunity to broaden the scope of the pca framework , helping mitigate the repeated concern among stakeholders that pca , as currently constructed , is too narrowly focused . potential disadvantages . this option could complicate the process of determining capital adequacy for pca purposes , according to one stakeholder responding to our survey . for example , banks would vary in the levels of capital they needed to meet pca capital thresholds , depending on their risk level . a stakeholder also cautioned that risk - based measures were complex and dependent on information from banks . finally , adding a risk component to pca could be duplicative because regulators already use risk - based capital ratios in pca . raising all the pca capital category thresholds had the second - highest weighted score on our survey , and stakeholders selected it most often as a first choice . specifically , 10 stakeholders selected this option among the top three that should be considered , with 7 selecting it as their first option ( see table 5 ) . in addition , 17 of 29 stakeholders told us increasing the capital category thresholds would improve the effectiveness of pca . this option would increase the capital ratios required for a bank to be classified as well capitalized , adequately capitalized , undercapitalized , significantly undercapitalized , and critically undercapitalized . federal regulatory agencies have amended and updated the regulations and rules on measuring a bank's capital level in the past , often in conjunction with recommendations from the basel committee on banking supervision . however , the capital thresholds have not changed since the implementation of the pca provisions of fdicia in 1992 . the basel committee recently released guidelines recommending increased capital requirements to be phased in by january 1 , 2015 . federal regulators typically adopt , with some national discretion , basel committee recommendations . raising only the critically undercapitalized threshold also was on our list of options . twenty of 29 stakeholders we surveyed told us that raising the critically undercapitalized threshold would improve the effectiveness of pca , more than the number who told us raising all pca capital category thresholds would improve pca effectiveness . however , when asked to select top options to improve the pca framework , fewer stakeholders selected raising only the critically undercapitalized threshold . currently , a bank is categorized as critically undercapitalized if its tangible equity is 2 percent or less . regulators generally must close critically undercapitalized banks within a 90-day period .