we are not making recommendations in this report . we provided a draft of this report to dod for comment . dod reviewed the draft and offered technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . the engineers will incorporate technology into a new srm as designed by each company . according to an official , mibp provided general guidelines for the resulting srm , but purposely did not provide strict specifications in an effort to allow engineers to identify their own solutions for a new motor design . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or makm@gao.gov . figure 2 is an illustrative version of the srm supply chain . historically , the demand for srms was mostly driven by their use in solid rocket boosters for nasa space programs , such as the space shuttle program . dod has reported that nasa's retirement of the space shuttle program in 2011 had a negative impact on the srm supply chain as it led to decreased demand for srms and the related raw materials and components . dod officials noted that , even if other suppliers exist , it can be costly and time - consuming for them to be qualified as alternative sources . for example , in its assessments , dcma has stated that energetic materials — which are used in srm propellants — are among the most expensive components to requalify . as there are approximately 25 to 30 ingredients in the typical srm's propellant , changes in any of the ingredients require that the propellant be retested for effectiveness . further , disruptions among single source suppliers can take place for other reasons besides leaving the market . production changes , such as altering manufacturing processes or even relocating production facilities , can affect the material or component produced in unexpected ways . in addition , there has been a long - standing concern that srm manufacturers are dependent on a single source supplier for an srm propellant ingredient — ammonium perchlorate — as only one u.s. company is certified to provide this ingredient . the house version of the fiscal year 2018 national defense authorization act calls for dod to study the future costs and availability of ammonium perchlorate . mibp officials told us they have conducted extensive analysis of the issues for this critical component , including two studies conducted in 2016 . industry representatives from missile prime contractors and srm manufacturers we spoke with said that managing their supply chain to ensure the availability of needed materials is a primary concern . prime contractor representatives said that srm subcontractors are generally expected to manage their suppliers and ensure that they suppliers can meet their contract requirements . however , the prime contractors said they are particularly involved when the risks relate to material availability .