consulted stakeholders . for two of the selected action plans , creating the pii handbook and restructuring civil rights operations , crd provided documentation demonstrating that they consulted the stakeholders they deemed relevant — civil rights service providers and unions respectively . one of the action plans , related to training to address office climate , did not have any documentation of stakeholder consultation . according to crd officials , the action plan to revise the eo manual will consult all directorates once it is complete . we assessed this action plan as partially implemented because the end users of the manual were not consulted while the manual was being drafted . evaluated the success of completing the action plan . none of the selected action plans that we reviewed identified how crd would evaluate the success of completing the action plan . crd officials stated that they were primarily focused on completing the action plans to address the recommendations to improve the eo / eeo program , and if they had more time , they would have planned to evaluate the action plans . this planning practice — planning to evaluate success — is linked to the earlier planning practice of identifying performance goals . outcome measures as performance goals , as opposed to output measures , would provide the basis for evaluating the success of the action plans in achieving the intended improvements in crd . while it is too early to evaluate the effectiveness of the action plans , strategizing about how they would be evaluated is a key step in identifying any necessary midcourse corrections and ensuring that change will go in the right direction . revise the eo manual . this action plan was intended to address the recommendation to revise the manual and add content that addresses the roles of field and headquarters personnel throughout the complaint process and the appropriate statutory references and citations . crd contracted this undertaking to a third party to complete while providing the oversight intended to achieve a standardized administration of complaints throughout the commands . we analyzed the four selected action plans to determine the extent to which generally accepted project management practices have been integrated in their development and implementation process . table 2 shows the results of our assessment of the extent to which each action plan implemented the practices . for purposes of our analysis , fully means all of the conditions of the project management practices were met , partially means the criteria did not meet all of the conditions of the project management practice , and did not implement means crd did not provide evidence to meet any of the conditions of the project management practice or the evidence provided was inadequate . identifying measurable performance goals . all the selected action plans describe an output goal , such as revising the eo manual or attending training , but do not identify measurable objectives or identify the intended results of completing the action plans . in order to fully meet the criteria , crd needed to define an outcome goal for each of the selected action plans that had measurable objectives against which actual achievements can be compared .