the reports are then distributed to the other services . in addition , the office of the executive director for conventional ammunition , which facilitates this process , compares the data in the inventory reports with data on planned procurements of ammunition . after the services share their annual reports on ammunition inventory , including which ammunition could be reutilized , service officials meet to discuss how they will redistribute ammunition that is available for any service's requirements . as noted previously , specific information pertaining to the active navy inventory is classified and is not included in this gao report . appendix i provides further information on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from december 2012 to march 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . however , the army does not provide information on missiles in the annual reports that it prepares as part of this process . also , the army does not share information on usable inventory in a storage category for ammunition items that were excess to all the services' requirements in a prior year and placed into storage in preparation for disassembly or disposal . without such annual reporting , the information dod obtains may lack full transparency about all available items and may miss opportunities to avoid procurement costs for certain usable items that may already be available in the army's stockpile . we are making seven recommendations to improve the efficiency of dod's systems for managing its conventional ammunition inventory and to improve data sharing among the services . to improve the efficiency of data exchanges between lmp and other service ammunition systems , we recommend that the secretary of defense , in coordination with the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics , take the following two actions: direct the secretary of the navy to ( 1 ) take steps to incorporate dlms into the ordnance information system and ( 2 ) direct the commandant of the marine corps to take similar steps with regard to the ordnance information system – marine corps . direct the secretary of the air force to assess the feasibility of accelerating the 2017 target date for incorporating dlms into the combat ammunition system and , if determined to be feasible , take appropriate implementation actions . to provide greater assurance that lmp is capable of maintaining accurate , timely , and more complete ammunition data in accordance with dod supply chain materiel management and ammunition guidance , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the army to establish a plan , with timeframes and costs , for incorporating ammunition - related functionality into lmp , including functionality that is no longer being included in the planned ammunition - related upgrades for increment 2 .