easement payments . landowners can also receive payments by entering into easement agreements with usda ; easement payments can be made to participants in grp and wrp . an easement under these programs essentially results in the landowner agreeing to how the enrolled land will be managed under the program for the length of the agreement in return for an easement payment . compared to the temporary duration of the other financial incentives offered by usda programs , what is most distinctive about easements is the long - term or permanent character of the restriction on future development of enrolled land . two easement options are available under grp and wrp — 30 years or permanent . according to one respondent , the incentive to pursuing an easement is the long - term certainty that they will be adequately compensated for making habitat improvements . under wrp , a participant agreeing to a permanent easement may also receive a higher cost - share percentage . specifically , these participants may receive up to 100 percent of the cost needed to implement projects to enhance or restore wetlands . these responses may differ slightly than those identified in the body of this report because , in the report , we only include the responses that were identified most frequently across the majority of the six programs we reviewed . the most frequently cited incentives for participation in grp included: ( 1 ) financial ; ( 2 ) program criteria that give greater consideration to projects that directly address threatened and endangered , and other at - risk species ; and ( 3 ) a personal interest in conservation . the most frequently cited disincentives for participation in grp included: ( 1 ) limited funding for both the program and participants , ( 2 ) fears about government regulations , ( 3 ) restrictive eligibility and participation requirements , and ( 4 ) burdensome paperwork requirements . suggestions most frequently identified to address disincentives for grp participation included: ( 1 ) increasing funding and ( 2 ) providing greater education and outreach . the wetlands reserve program ( wrp ) is administered by usda's nrcs and authorizes the agency to provide technical and financial assistance to eligible landowners to restore , enhance , and protect wetlands . wrp was first authorized under the food , agriculture , conservation and trade act of 1990 , and was later reauthorized and amended in the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 . the program has an acreage enrollment limit rather than a funding limit . the 2002 act authorized up to 2,275,000 acres to be covered under wrp and , as of september 2004 , over 7,800 projects on nearly 1.5 million acres were enrolled in the program . wrp is available in all 50 states and the district of columbia . to be eligible for wrp , land must be capable of restoring wetland functioning and be able to provide wildlife benefits . eligible types of lands include farmed wetlands , riparian areas , lands adjacent to protected wetlands that contribute significantly to wetland functions and values , and previously restored wetlands that need long - term protection .