gao - 05-371 . washington , d.c.: april 22 , 2005 . the department of labor did not provide us any comments . because dod disagreed with the recommendation to conduct and document a cost - benefit analysis associated with continuing the search for additional project 112 participants and has not adequately addressed our may 2004 recommendation to determine the feasibility of addressing unresolved issues associated with project 112 , we added a matter for congress to consider directing the secretary of defense to conduct such an analysis . dod and va also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . dod's and va's comments are reprinted in appendices ii and iii , respectively . dod agreed to and has in some cases begun taking action to respond to five of the recommendations . specifically , dod stated that it has already coordinated on updating program goals and objectives for the identification of individuals who were potentially exposed during chemical and biological tests outside of project 112 and is revising the statement of work , implementation plan , and concept of operations to ensure consistent guidance and deliverables . dod also stated that it has taken steps to increase oversight of the project and has established an implementation plan with oasd ( ha ) delineating oversight responsibilities . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . to assess the department of defense's ( dod ) efforts since 2003 to identify servicemembers and civilians who may have been exposed to chemical or biological substances used during tests conducted under project 112 , we reviewed and analyzed documents pertaining to project 112 , including dod's 2003 report to congress: disclosure of information on project 112 to the department of veterans affairs . we interviewed officials at the office of the secretary of defense , washington , d.c. , including the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics , and the under secretary for personnel and readiness . we also interviewed officials at the office of the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs who were responsible for conducting dod's investigation of project 112 tests and have been designated as the single point of contact for providing information related to tests and potential exposures during project 112 . we interviewed officials at the institute of medicine and reviewed their 2007 report on the long - term health effects of participation in the shipboard hazard and defense tests of project 112 . in addition , we reviewed and analyzed our prior reports as well as reports of other organizations to provide a historical and contextual framework for evaluating dod's efforts . to evaluate dod's current effort to identify servicemember and civilian exposures that occurred during activities outside of project 112 tests , we reviewed and analyzed reports , briefings , and documents and interviewed officials at the office of the secretary of defense , washington , d.c. , including the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics and the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness .