( see app . the numbers in magnetic stripes on the cards . however , both dod and va continued to use the number as an identifier and have described other steps they are taking to better protect beneficiaries against theft or improper use of the numbers . specifically , dod officials stated that the department is in the process of developing and implementing a solution for removing embedded ssns from the bar codes on military identification cards and replacing them with a new identifier ; they plan to complete this project in late 2016 . additionally , va is working to remove the number embedded in magnetic stripes because of increased security risks introduced by the prevalence of electronic readers on devices such as smart phones ; it plans to complete this project in late 2016 . since the inception of medicare in 1965 , cms and its program stakeholders — ssa , the railroad retirement board , and state medicaid programs — have used an ssn - based identifier when filing and processing fee - for - service claims , and when exchanging data related to the medicare program . this number , referred to as the health insurance claim number ( hicn ) , is displayed on medicare beneficiaries' health insurance cards . individuals' eligibility to participate in the medicare fee - for - service programs is initially determined by ssa , based on factors such as age , work history , contributions made to the programs through payroll deductions , and the presence of certain medical conditions . once ssa determines that an individual is eligible , it provides information about the individual to cms , including the ssn and a 1- or 2-digit beneficiary identification code.enrollment database — the repository of data about individuals who are or have ever been on medicare . this system combines these two data fields to create the 10- or 11-digit hicn . cms prints and issues to the individual these data are transmitted to and stored in cms's a paper identification card ( similar to the example shown in fig . 1 ) that displays the hicn ( i.e. , the medicare claim number ) , the cardholder's full name , his or her gender , and the effective dates of medicare program eligibility . the hicn is maintained and referenced throughout cms's it environment . for example , health care providers may reference medicare beneficiaries' printed cards at the point of care to determine eligibility for the fee - for - service program . providers may then query a cms system using the hicn printed on the card , along with other demographic data , to obtain information regarding eligibility for specific treatments or services they intend to deliver , such as glaucoma screening or smoking cessation counseling . specifically , the agency provides verification services through its hipaa eligibility transaction system ( hets ) , which allows providers to access real - time data regarding beneficiaries' eligibility at the point at which care is scheduled or delivered . likewise , providers are required by cms to use the number when they submit claims to receive payment for those treatments and services .