er 2010 . since the first flight in december 2006 , only about 4 percent of jsf capabilities have been completely verified by flight tests , lab results , both . the pace of flight testing accelerated significantly in 2010 , but overall progress is still much below plans forecast several years ago . furthermore , only a small portion of the extensive network of ground te labs and simulation models are fully accredited to ensure the fidelity of results . software development — essential for achieving about 80 percent is significantly behind schedule as it enters its of the jsf functionality — most challenging phase . development flight testing was much more active in 2010 than prior ye and had some notable successes , but cumulatively still lagged behind previous expectations . the continuing effects from late delivery of test aircraft and an inability to achieve the planned flying rates per aircraft ars substantially reduced the amount and pace of testing planned previously . consequently , even though the flight test program accelerated its pace la year , the total number of flights accomplished during the first 4 years ofthe test program significantly lagged expectations when the program's 2007 baseline was established . figure 4 shows that the cumulative numbe of flights accomplished by the end of 2010 was only number forecast by this time in the 2007 test plan . by the end of 2010 , about 10 percent of more than 50,000 planned flight test points had been completed . the majority of the points were earned on airworthiness tests ( basic airframe handling characteristics ) and in ferrying the planes to test sites . remaining test points include more complex and stringent requirements , such as mission systems , ship suitability , and weapons integration that have yet to be demonstrated . the jsf test program relies much more heavily than previous weapon systems on its modeling and simulation labs to test and verify aircraft design and subsystem performance . however , only 3 of 32 labs and models have been fully accredited to date . the program had planned to accred it 11 labs and models by now . accreditation is essential to validate that the models accurately reflect aircraft performance and it largely depends upo flight test data to ground testing for some flight testing is unproven . contracting officials told us that early results are providing good correlation between ground and flight tests . verify lab results . moreover , the ability to substitute software providing essential jsf capability is not mature and releases the test program are behind schedule . officials underestimated the time and effort needed to develop and integrate the software , substantially nd contributing to the program's overall cost and schedule problems a testing delays , and requiring the retention of engineers for longer periods significant learning and development work remains before the program can demonstrate the mature software capabilities needed to meet warfighter requirements . the jsf software development effort is one of the largest and most complex in dod history , providing functionality essential to capabilities such as sensor fusion , weapons and fire control , maintenance diagnostics , and propulsion .