gao - 03-671 . washington , d.c.: may 30 , 2003 . ( see app . iii for a summary of stryker brigade deployment times by origins and destinations. ) according to the u.s. transportation command's stryker brigade air mobility deployment analysis , the army's deployment goal for stryker brigades has significant implications for the u.s. transportation command and the defense transportation system . according to this analysis , the army must reduce its transportation requirements and simultaneously work with the u.s. transportation command and the services to improve deployment timelines . a 2002 rand report of stryker brigade deployment options , sponsored by the u.s. air force , also concluded that stryker brigades cannot be deployed by air from the continental united states to distant overseas locations in 4 days . the study found that it is possible to achieve global air deployment timelines on the order of 1 to 2 weeks by using a combination of continental united states based brigades , a stryker brigade forward - based in germany , and regional preposition sites . according to the study , prepositioning of equipment or overseas basing of forces is the single most effective way to increase the responsiveness of army forces for operations in key regions . under the 2002 defense planning guidance , the army is planning for the relocation of one stryker brigade to europe in fiscal year 2007 . by air , a brigade based in germany , for example , could reach some global regions in less time than it could from the four currently planned brigade locations . from ramstein air base in germany , minimum air deployment times to sub - saharan africa would be 7 to 9 days , compared to a minimum of 13 days to 14 days from the other brigade locations . from germany to the balkans , it would take 5 days to airlift a stryker brigade , compared to about 6 days to 7 days from the other locations . although the army recognizes that some prepositioning of stryker brigade equipment overseas would add to a brigade's strategic responsiveness and is considering it as a future option , army officials told us that it would be too costly to do so at this time . based on our analysis of the u.s. transportation command's air deployment planning factors and airlift allocation assumptions , achieving the 5 to 14 day air deployment timelines would be difficult because it would require the air force to dedicate about one - third of its projected 2005 primary strategic airlift aircraft fleet of c - 17s and c - 5s for transporting only one stryker brigade . obtaining this amount of airlift for deploying one stryker brigade would require allocating 31 percent of the air force's total 2005 inventory of c - 17 aircraft and 38 percent of its c - 5 aircraft inventory . obtaining an airlift allocation larger than this would be possible — if airlifting a stryker brigade is a national command authority top priority and absent competing demand elsewhere for airlift aircraft .