it was to be completed by january 2001 . however , as of january 2002 , the air force had essentially completed its assessment of wartime requirements , but it had not yet begun its assessment of whether air force authorized personnel were sufficient to support contingency operations in peacetime . the peacetime analysis was important because it would demonstrate whether particular career fields might be overburdened in peacetime even if sufficient forces were available to meet the two - theater - war scenario . the results of the wartime analysis were somewhat inconclusive because the air force stopped work on the study before some discrepancies in the assessment's results were resolved . these discrepancies occurred because the process used for the study resulted in double counting some requirements , which in turn required the air force to manually review results for accuracy . ( 2 ) to what extent did the air force use results from the total force assessment to improve force - management and decision - making processes ? we are providing this report to you because of your oversight responsibilities and past interest in the air force process . the air force's manpower requirements are determined by individual major commands , using a number of methodologies , including manpower standards , logistical models , and crew ratios . once approved by air force leadership , the results serve as the basis for authorizing military , civilian , and contractor positions in the air force and are entered into the air force's manpower data system . the air force's directorate of manpower and organization designed the total force assessment ( tfa ) process to assess whether the various methodologies used by the air force to determine manpower requirements generated sufficient manpower to accomplish two purposes: ( 1 ) meet deployment commitments should it be called on to fight two major theater wars and ( 2 ) conduct multiple small - scale contingency operations in peacetime . to assess whether the authorized manpower was adequate for the wartime scenario , the air force compared the authorized forces in the manpower data system to the deployment commitments demanded by the two major theater wars . it then calculated the effect of deploying these forces on the manpower needed to continue operations at existing airbases ( i.e. , in - place support forces ) . demands for the deployment commitments were identified using troop deployment listsgenerated from war plans for conducting wars in southwest and northeast asia . the requirements for in - place support forces were calculated using a model that adjusts manpower requirements to account for changes in the personnel needed to support ongoing air force operations when forces are deployed . we also discussed the assessment's methodology and past assessments with these officials . we did not independently verify the underlying manpower - requirements system information that serves as the starting point for the total force assessment . plans for assessing the adequacy of forces in peacetime were never finalized . the air force conducted only the wartime component of the assessment , not the component assessing the adequacy of its manpower in conducting multiple contingency operations in peacetime .