we are making two recommendations in this report . community participation in nfip is voluntary . however , communities must join nfip and adopt fema - approved building standards and floodplain management strategies in order for their residents to purchase flood insurance through the program . in addition to meeting these federal standards , the regulations that each community enacts and implements must meet the minimum state requirements , which are established consistent with nfip standards . for example , communities must adopt at least the minimum standards for floodplain management regulations , including building requirements to reduce future flood damage , such as requiring new and substantially improved or substantially damaged structures in special flood hazard areas to be elevated to or above base flood elevation levels . additionally , fema provides premium reduction incentives for policyholders within communities that take measures to mitigate flood risk beyond nfip minimum requirements through the agency's program , the community rating system . under nfip , the federal government assumes the liability for covered losses and sets rates and coverage limitations . while nfip does not subsidize most policies , policyholders with certain types of insured properties pay subsidized premiums . for crop insurance , farmers participate voluntarily , but the federal government encourages participation by subsidizing their insurance premiums . usda's rma administers the federal crop insurance program , including issuing new insurance products and expanding existing products to new geographic regions . rma administers the program in partnership with private insurance companies that share a percentage of the risk of loss or the opportunity for gain associated with each policy . federal law prohibits crop insurance from covering losses due to a farmer's failure to follow good farming practices . good farming practices are identified by agricultural experts in a given area and provide acceptable farming methods for crop insurance policyholders to use in producing yields consistent with historical production . agricultural experts are individuals employed by usda's cooperative extension system or the agricultural departments of universities , or other approved persons , whose research or occupation is related to the specific crop or practice for which expertise is sought . the federal government's disaster relief and flood and crop insurance programs create fiscal exposure to weather - related events and climate change . for the purposes of this report , fiscal exposures are responsibilities , programs , and activities that may either obligate the federal government to future spending or create the expectation for future spending . for example , the government's response to a weather - related event or series of events can strengthen expectations that the government will respond in the same way to similar events in the future . differences exist in the types of property that public insurers insure , as well as their time horizons . for example , federal flood and crop insurance programs insure different types of property , with different time horizons . while state insurers and nfip insure permanent structures that are designed to last years or decades , federal crop insurance primarily covers agricultural commodities that farmers plant and harvest each year .