we disagree . in the report , we state that baseline and target values of indicators are needed to assess project performance . for example , baselines for a victim assistance program could include the number of victims served or assisted , or the number of vocational training sessions held . moreover , project - level estimates are needed for baselines by which to evaluate how effectively interventions are reducing trafficking . for this type of baseline , panelists suggested methods for baseline estimation , such as gathering data in trafficking hot spots , that would allow for more rigorous impact evaluations . what is the projects' estimated effect on the nature and severity of human trafficking ? panelists emphasized the necessity of designing rigorous methods to evaluate antitrafficking projects , such as randomized control trials . for example , as baseline estimates in trafficking hot spots are obtained and interventions are undertaken in that location to reduce trafficking , the use of “place - randomized trials” for evaluation would become possible . to determine the interventions' impact , data obtained from interventions in hot spots could then be compared with locations where there had been no interventions . although randomized trials may be difficult to execute for many trafficking projects , they are important ways to generate evidence about interventions' effectiveness . randomized trials should be pilot - tested in carefully chosen settings so that the evaluator can identify and correct any problems encountered before expanding the trials to larger populations or areas . panelists pointed out that such rigorous evaluation has occurred in the fields of public health and criminal justice . for example , a randomized study was done of brothels in thailand to obtain information on the hiv / aids rates of prostitutes . to address weaknesses in project design that impede monitoring and evaluation , such as projects with very broad , high - level objectives , panelists made the following recommendations: develop a logic framework . given the weaknesses of some antitrafficking projects that have overly broad objectives across a diverse range of activities , panelists suggested that officials design projects with a logic framework that has clear objectives and narrow the focus of interventions . they also recommended that officials design projects that clearly link activities to intended outcomes , identify measurable indicators , and establish procedures for setting and modifying targets . measurable indicators with mutually agreed - upon targets allow project officials to assess how a project is achieving its overall goals and objectives . for example , a labor - funded project implemented by ilo in mexico includes a logic framework that links project activities and outputs to outcome objectives , and includes clear indicators and means of verification . the project's overall goal of eliminating the commercial sexual exploitation of children in mexico links to four immediate objectives that , in turn , link back to project activities and outputs . one objective — that at least 300 child victims of sexual exploitation or at - risk children and their families receive assistance — is linked to 28 activities and 8 outputs , such as increasing families' employment opportunities .