ustr has requested additional staff resources for 2004 . as of january 23 , 2003 , the cbp had 3,269 positions dedicated to performing trade - specific functions: 2,263 specialists , auditors , and attorneys and 1,006 associated positions carry out trade activities such as auditing trade compliance ; processing entry documents ; collecting duties , taxes , and fees ; assessing and collecting fines and penalites for noncompliance ; and advising on tariff classification issues . cbp is expected to maintain these staff levels , as the homeland security act of 2002 stipulates that the secretary of homeland security may not reduce the staffing levels attributable to such functions on or after the effective date of the act . in addition , more than 18,000 cbp inspectors perform trade and nontrade functions depending on the nature of their assignment . for example , inspectors may screen and inspect cargo for illegal transshipment of textiles , counterfeit cigarettes , illegal drugs , and other contraband ; and enforce compliance with u.s. trade and immigration laws . after september 11 , 2001 , combating terrorism became the priority mission for the u.s. customs service and remained so when the customs service was transferred to the department of homeland security and incorporated into cbp . while it is too soon to tell how the increased importance of security will affect the implementation of cbp's trade - related activities in the long run , some short - term shifts in human capital from trade to nontrade functions have occurred . as part of its focus on terrorism , cbp has implemented new programs to screen high - risk containers for weapons of mass destruction at overseas ports and to improve security in the private sector's global supply chain . cbp has made progress in getting these programs up and running but has not devised systematic human capital plans to meet long - term staffing needs for both programs . the increased importance of security requires human capital strategies that link with the goals of combating terrorism and facilitating trade to establish accountability and ensure effective performance . the historical mission of the u.s. customs service has been to collect customs revenues and ensure compliance with trade laws , but this mission has shifted over time . for example , in the 1970s customs expanded its functions to include the interdiction of narcotics entering the united states . since september 11 , 2001 , combating terrorism has become customs' priority mission , culminating in the creation of cbp on march 1 , 2003 . on that date , the u.s. customs service was transferred from the department of the treasury to the department of homeland security as part of the homeland security act of 2002 . figure 3 illustrates the range of trade and nontrade activities that cbp performs . while two of the nine key mission - related offices within cbp are primarily dedicated to trade , most offices and most of cbp's more than 40,000 employees perform a range of activities that support both trade and nontrade goals . moreover , about a fifth of the 3,269 cbp positions dedicated to performing trade activities are located in the trade - specific offices , but most are located in offices that support both goals .