the production approach also posed a challenge . the enhanced combat helmet program had intended to expedite production and fielding by having lots comprised of every helmet size . however , the marine corps and dot&e could not identify a viable approach to lot acceptance testing — a quality control test where a sample of helmets is tested from each lot manufactured — that would support lots with mixed helmet sizes . impact: meeting the newly standardized test policy requirements necessitated more funding and time than planned for by the program . program officials stated they experienced about 12 months in delays and about $2 million in cost increases during operational testing . officials stated that meeting dot&e test protocol requirements contributed to the cost and schedule growth , but helmet performance problems and material changes , contract renegotiations , and test requirements independent from dot&e oversight were also factors . dot&e stated that additional risk reduction tests pursued by the program after the initial first article test and delays associated with the helmet developer resolving the manufacturing issues led to the majority of the program delays . dot&e also indicated that issues with the test procedures were due to the unanticipated behavior of the helmet when shot during testing and emphasized that these issues would also have occurred with the marine corps' originally - proposed test procedures . regarding the health considerations related to enhanced combat helmet test results , dot&e and the marine corps operational test agency recommended additional testing in concert with the medical community to characterize the potential for injury from helmet deformations . for production , the industry best practice of single - size helmet lots has been used , which slowed fielding plans because marine or soldier units are not equipped with the helmets until all needed sizes are available but also reduced the risk of deficient helmets being fielded . resolution status: the marine corps found the enhanced combat helmet preferable to the existing lightweight helmet and proceeded to full - rate production and fielding . at the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics' ( usd ( at&l's ) ) direction , in 2013 the marine corps revised the reliability growth program for the ground / air task oriented radar — a portable short - to medium - range air defense and air surveillance radar — to address issues discovered during developmental testing . despite the revisions , the director , operational test and evaluation ( dot&e ) did not approve the test and evaluation master plan ( temp ) ahead of the low - rate initial production decision review , stating that additional changes were needed to make the program's reliability growth program consistent with system requirements , realistic , and achievable by initial operational test and evaluation ( iot&e ) . the program received low - rate production approval in march 2014 , with reliability concerns unresolved and without dot&e temp approval . shortly thereafter , the navy commissioned a panel that reviewed the reliability concerns and provided recommendations related to the ground / air task oriented radar's reliability requirement and growth plan .