forums . to determine how the u.s. government participates in international energy to determine how the u.s. government participates in international energy cooperation forums , at your request , we reviewed: ( 1 ) what are the key cooperation forums , at your request , we reviewed: ( 1 ) what are the key international energy forums in which the united states pursues energy international energy forums in which the united states pursues energy cooperation , ( 2 ) what are some of the key emerging energy market issues cooperation , ( 2 ) what are some of the key emerging energy market issues that are important for international energy cooperation , and ( 3 ) how the that are important for international energy cooperation , and ( 3 ) how the united states is addressing these issues through its participation in these united states is addressing these issues through its participation in these forums . forums . to answer these questions , we reviewed documents and interviewed to answer these questions , we reviewed documents and interviewed officials responsible for international energy cooperation at the officials responsible for international energy cooperation at the departments of energy ( doe ) , state , and commerce . our work at doe departments of energy ( doe ) , state , and commerce . our work at doe also included the energy information administration ( eia ) , a doe also included the energy information administration ( eia ) , a doe statistical agency that provides independent data , forecasts , and analyses statistical agency that provides independent data , forecasts , and analyses to promote sound policy making and efficient markets . we focused on the to promote sound policy making and efficient markets . we focused on the oil and natural gas sectors and on the following key international energy oil and natural gas sectors and on the following key international energy cooperation forums: the international energy agency ( iea ) , the asia cooperation forums: the international energy agency ( iea ) , the asia pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) energy working group , the north pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) energy working group , the north american energy working group ( naewg ) , and the international energy american energy working group ( naewg ) , and the international energy forum ( ief ) . we neither evaluated these forums and their impacts on forum ( ief ) . we neither evaluated these forums and their impacts on energy policy and the global energy market nor did we evaluate u.s. energy policy and the global energy market nor did we evaluate u.s. energy policy goals . rather , we reviewed the forums' mission , structure , energy policy goals . rather , we reviewed the forums' mission , structure , and activities . we conducted fieldwork at iea and the u.s. mission to the and activities . we conducted fieldwork at iea and the u.s. mission to the organization of economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) in paris , france , and interviewed u.s. members of the iea and apec energy working group business advisory groups , as well as private sector energy experts .