sba agreed with these recommendations . i note that sba has completed an effort to expand dcms's capacity . sba officials said that dcms can now support a minimum of 8,000 concurrent agency users as compared with only 1,500 concurrent users for the gulf coast hurricanes . additionally , sba has awarded a new contract for the project management and information technology support for dcms . the contractor is responsible for a variety of dcms tasks on sba's behalf including technical support , software changes and hardware upgrades , and supporting all information technology operations associated with the system . in the report released in february , we identified other measures that sba had planned or implemented to better prepare for and respond to future disasters . these steps include appointing a single individual to coordinate the agency's disaster preparedness planning and coordination efforts , enhancing systems to forecast the resource requirements to respond to disasters of varying scenarios , redesigning the process for reviewing applications and disbursing loan proceeds , and enhancing its long - term capacity to acquire adequate facilities in an emergency . additionally , sba had planned or initiated steps to help ensure the availability of additional trained and experienced staff in the event of a future disaster . according to sba officials , these steps include cross - training staff not normally involved in disaster assistance to provide back up support , reaching agreements with private lenders to help process a surge in disaster loan applications , and reestablishing the disaster active reserve corps , which had reached about 630 individuals as of june 2007 . while sba has taken a variety of steps to enhance its capacity to respond to disasters , i note that these efforts are ongoing and continued commitment and actions by agency managers are necessary . in june 2007 , sba released a plan for responding to disasters . this backlog peaked at more than 204,000 applications 4 months after hurricane katrina . by late may 2006 , sba took about 74 days on average to process disaster loan applications , compared with the agency's goal of within 21 days . as we stated in our july 2006 report , the sheer volume of disaster loan applications that sba received was clearly a major factor contributing to the agency's challenges in providing timely assistance to gulf coast hurricane . as of late may 2006 , sba had issued 2.1 million loan applications to hurricane victims , which was four times the number of applications issued to victims of the 1994 northridge , california , earthquake , the previous single largest disaster that the agency had faced . within 3 months of hurricane katrina making landfall , sba had received 280,000 disaster loan applications or about 30,000 more applications than the agency received over a period of about 1 year after the northridge earthquake . however , our two reports on sba's response to the gulf coast hurricanes also found that the absence of a comprehensive and sophisticated planning process contributed to the challenges that the agency faced .