about 19,600 communities have joined the flood insurance program . second , the number of policyholders covered by the program increased about 31 percent from 3.3 million policies in force in fiscal year 1995 to 4.3 million policies in force by fiscal year 2000 . under the program , flood insurance rate maps ( firm ) were prepared to identify special flood hazard areas . in order for a community to join the program , any structures built within a special flood hazard area after the firm was completed were required to be built according to the program's building standards that are aimed at minimizing flood losses . special flood hazard areas , also known as the 100-year floodplains , are areas subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of experiencing flooding in a given year . disaster assistance: issues related to the development of fema's insurance requirements ( gao / ggd / ogc - 00-62 , feb. 25 , 2000 ) . flood insurance: information on financial aspects of the national flood insurance program ( gao / t - rced - 00-23 , oct. 27 , 1999 ) . flood insurance: information on financial aspects of the national flood insurance program ( gao / t - rced - 99-280 , aug. 25 , 1999 ) . disaster assistance: opportunities to improve cost - effectiveness determinations for mitigation grants ( gao / rced - 99-236 , aug. 4 , 1999 ) . disaster assistance: fema can improve its cost - effectiveness determinations for mitigation grants ( gao / t - rced - 99-274 , aug. 4 , 1999 ) . disaster assistance: improvements needed in determining eligibility for public assistance ( gao / rced - 96-113 , may 23 , 1996 ) . flood insurance: financial resources may not be sufficient to meet future expected losses ( gao / rced - 94-80 , mar . according to fema , the initiative is designed to eliminate or short - circuit the cycle of flooding and rebuilding for properties suffering multiple losses due to flooding . the initiative includes identifying repetitive loss properties and transferring their insurance policies to a central , special servicing facility designed to better oversee claims . fema believes that this special servicing will help coordinate insurance activities and mitigation grant programs . the national flood insurance reform act of 1994 reinforces the objective of using insurance as the preferred mechanism for disaster assistance by ( 1 ) expanding the role of federal agency lenders and regulators to enforce the mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements and ( 2 ) prohibiting further flood disaster assistance for any property where flood insurance is not maintained , even though flood insurance was mandated as a condition for receiving disaster assistance . regarding the prohibition on further flood disaster assistance , the act requires borrowers who have received certain disaster assistance and then failed to obtain flood coverage to be barred from receiving future disaster aid . other forms of flood disaster assistance include low - interest loans from the small business administration to flood victims who are creditworthy . as a result , the program has had to borrow funds from the u.s. treasury to cover its operating losses , which it subsequently repaid .