in addition , 18 u.s.c . § 1037 ( c ) allows doj to seek the criminal forfeiture of both property obtained from spamming profits and the computers used to send the spam . fcc has recently addressed this issue . some complainants noted problems with the opt - out number — that is , the telephone number that they should be able to call to stop receiving the faxes . and ( 3 ) what challenges do fcc face in carrying out its junk fax responsibilities ? ( 2 ) what are the strengths and weaknesses of fcc's junk fax procedures ? in addition , we provide in appendix i of this report information on enforcement measures and penalties that have been established to protect consumers from other types of unsolicited advertising . to assess fcc's procedures , implementation , and strengths and weaknesses , we reviewed the applicable statutes and fcc rules pertaining to junk fax enforcement . in a december 2005 report to congress , ftc stated that the commission had brought 20 cases alleging violation of the act . we obtained fcc data on junk fax complaints and enforcement actions and reviewed portions of the complaint database and enforcement spreadsheet . although we discuss limitations to the complaint data in the report , we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for us to present overall trends and approximate figures . to identify challenges , we compared fcc's enforcement efforts with recognized performance management practices and reviewed applicable fcc performance goals , measures , and data analysis . finally , we reviewed other statutes relevant to protecting consumers from unsolicited advertisements . we conducted our work from november 2005 through march 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . see appendix ii for a more detailed explanation of our scope and methodology . in 1991 , congress enacted tcpa to address a growing number of telephone marketing calls and certain telemarketing practices thought to be an invasion of consumer privacy and , in some cases , costly to consumers . provisions of this law generally prohibit anyone from faxing unsolicited advertisements , or “junk faxes,” to consumers or businesses . an unsolicited advertisement under tcpa was defined as “any material advertising the commercial availability or quality of any property , goods , or services which is transmitted to any person without that person's prior express invitation or permission.” in addition , there are three distinct enforcement mechanisms for violations of the junk fax provisions . first , persons or entities that believe they have been sent a fax in violation of the act have a private right of action — that is , they can sue the fax advertiser in an appropriate court for damages and / or injunctive relief . second , a state attorney general ( or another official or agency designated by the state ) may bring a civil lawsuit for damages and / or injunctive relief when a case involves a pattern or practice of violations . third , fcc is authorized to assess and enforce a “forfeiture” against those who violate the junk fax provisions — that is , a monetary penalty against the faxer for violating the junk fax rules .