omb and gsa did not to provide comments on our report . a - 123 appendix b requires agencies to incorporate purchase card spending data into overall spend analysis to support strategic sourcing initiatives and recommends that agencies analyze purchase card spending patterns and levels to identify opportunities for negotiation of discounts and increased savings based on volume . in response to a congressional committee request , we assessed the extent to which selected ( 1 ) agencies analyze purchase card data to identify opportunities to leverage buying power agency - wide and ( 2 ) local purchase cardholders take advantage of opportunities to achieve cost savings when using purchase cards . to address these objectives , we reviewed laws and regulations in place relating to the use and management of purchase card programs and strategic sourcing initiatives . we met with general service administration ( gsa ) officials who manage the smartpay purchase card program as well as officials from the office of management and budget responsible for issuing government - wide guidance on managing purchase card programs to gain insight into what purchase card transaction data are available to individual agencies and the requirements placed upon these agencies to analyze purchase card spending . we also collected and analyzed government - wide purchase card transaction data from the three smartpay banks for fiscal year 2014 and the first two quarters of fiscal year 2015 to understand what data are available to agencies for performing spend analysis and to identify potential challenges presented by the data supplied by vendors through the banks . we analyzed data to determine top vendors used by certain agency offices and understand the extent to which descriptive information on procured goods and services is included in purchase card transaction data supplied by the banks . to determine the extent to which individual agencies perform analysis of purchase card data , we reviewed policies and conducted interviews with finance and acquisition officials from six , case study agencies that represent three differing levels of purchase card spending . based on analysis of fiscal year 2014 purchase card statistical data available from the gsa website describing total spending and transactions by each agency participating in the smartpay program , we selected: 1 . in its written comments , dod concurred with both of our recommendations and stated that the office of defense procurement and acquisition policy will issue guidance to help ensure that dod components and local officials take steps to analyze purchase card spending for potential cost - saving opportunities . similarly , energy concurred with both recommendations in its written response . it will use a new spend analytics database to analyze agency - wide purchase card spending patterns and update existing acquisition guidance , purchase card policy , and operating procedures to encourage local examination of spending patterns and share information on such efforts . both agencies estimate implementation of these recommendations by the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2016 . dhs and va agreed with our recommendation to develop guidance that encourages local officials to examine purchase card spending patterns for opportunities to obtain savings and to share results of these analyses .