these concerns are outlined below along with our response . first , hud stated that compensation programs are not an eligible cdbg activity — except when acquiring property for a public purpose — unless the secretary grants a statutory waiver to allow it . while hud has issued guidance covering all aspects of housing rehabilitation programs , the department stated that it has issued no formal guidance for compensation programs because such programs have been seldom used and each compensation design has been different . furthermore , because the requirements for compensation programs are tailored to the grantee's specific program design , hud does not consider this to be a “fruitful area for general guidance.” however , hud agreed that it may be useful to compare already implemented housing compensation programs to a typical rehabilitation program to identify key areas where policies have differed and examine the application of environmental reviews and other requirements . as stated in our report , we note that compensation programs have been rare . in our view , that fact helps highlight the importance and need for the development of written cdbg disaster assistance guidance for housing compensation program design . while each compensation program may have its own unique design features , we continue to believe that hud could improve its assistance to states by issuing guidance that clearly articulates the applicable legal and financial requirements , as well as the types of program elements that may trigger federal environmental and other requirements . we support hud's suggestion to compare past compensation programs with a typical rehabilitation design to identify differences in policies and the application of environmental requirements . the results of such a comparative study would contribute to the department's development of new written guidance . second , hud stated that it is currently conducting a multiyear evaluation of the housing compensation programs in louisiana and mississippi — the results of which are expected to clarify whether hud will support housing compensation programs in the future . for this reason , the department hesitated to develop guidance that would be “premature” if issued prior to completion of the evaluation . hopefully , the results of hud's evaluation will provide valuable insights on the effectiveness of compensation programs for disaster recovery . we agree that hud should wait to develop guidance until it completes its evaluation . however , if the department chooses to continue to allow housing compensation programs , we continue to stand by our recommendation that the department issue written guidance . similar to the comparative study discussed earlier , the results of this multiyear evaluation would help to inform hud's efforts to develop written guidance for housing compensation programs . third , hud stated that the cdbg program is not a formal part of the federal government's disaster recovery programs . the department anticipates that upon a presidential review of disaster recovery programs , the current administration may choose to either relieve the cdbg program of any disaster recovery role or grant it a permanent place among the array of federal assistance programs available to states for disaster recovery . if the latter happens , hud stated that it would issue permanent regulations and supporting guidance .