the state official , however , did not agree with this proposal . they document their decisions in a cost - sharing agreement for that fire . according to federal officials , cooperating entities traditionally shared suppression costs on the basis of the proportion of acres burned in each entity's protection area because the method was relatively easy to apply and works well when the lands affected by a wildland fire are similar . officials said that the use of alternative cost - sharing methods has been increasing in recent years . federal and nonfederal entities included in our review used a variety of methods to share the costs of fighting fires that burned or threatened both federal and nonfederal lands and resources . although master agreements between federal and nonfederal entities typically listed several cost - sharing methods , the agreements often lacked clear guidance for officials to follow in deciding which cost - sharing method to apply to a specific fire . consequently , for eight fires we reviewed in four states , we found varied cost - sharing methods used and an inconsistent application of these methods within and among states , although the fires had similar characteristics . the type of cost - sharing method chosen is important because it can have significant financial consequences for the federal and nonfederal entities involved . for example , costs for the fires we reviewed in california and colorado were shared using methods different from those used for similar fires we reviewed in arizona and utah . in california , federal and nonfederal officials agreed to share the costs of two fires using the cost - apportionment method — that is , costs were apportioned on the basis of where firefighting personnel and equipment were deployed . officials said that they had often used this method since the mid - 1980s because they believed that the benefit it provides in more equitable cost sharing among affected firefighting entities outweighs the additional time required to apportion the costs . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or robinsonr@gao.gov , or robin m. nazzaro at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or nazzaror@gao.gov . federal and nonfederal officials agreed that federal agencies can assist with such actions , but they did not agree on which entities are responsible for bearing the costs of these actions . federal officials told us that the purpose of this policy is to allow federal agencies to use their personnel and equipment to help protect homes but not to bear the financial responsibility of providing that protection . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . nonfederal officials , however , said that these actions are intended to keep a wildland fire from reaching structures , and financial responsibility should therefore be shared between both federal and nonfederal entities . further , the presence of structures adjacent to federal lands can substantially alter fire suppression strategies and raise costs .