developmental testing will continue into 2010 . in addition , the program successfully demonstrated that the latest software release of the aegis bmd system had the capability to support the program's next generation interceptor during simulated sm - 3 block ib engagements . the c2bmc program also satisfied multiple test objectives and increased its capability in fiscal year 2009 . the program participated in many system - level tests during the year that enabled it to demonstrate multiple capabilities , including improved situational awareness and sensor management . during testing , c2bmc used multi - sensor correlation and provided integrated situational awareness for weapons release decisions . gmd , for the first time , used information from multiple sensors to develop and successfully conduct an intercept of a live target during a flight test . in december 2008 , target information from four different sensors and satellite data were input into the gmd fire control system to develop an intercept plan . the involvement of multiple sensors provides better information to develop an engagement . in addition , gmd made progress in addressing bmds operational test agency concerns regarding the formatting , tracking , and accounting of messages from gmd sensors . for example , mda added test instrumentation to collect data for regional / theater tests communications . however , the agency still faces ongoing challenges assessing timeliness with the exchange of messages at the strategic level . according to bmds operational test agency officials , they continue to work with mda to resolve this issue . key to the integration and functionality of the bmds is communications and message traffic . the timely reception of messages from sensors to weapon systems is key to support decisions and achieve effective intercepts . in march 2009 , we reported that these data management problems prevented the analysis of the timeliness of message data , according to bmds operational test agency officials . the stss program successfully completed the ground testing and integration of components to support the launch of its two demonstration satellites in september 2009 . these satellites will use onboard infrared sensors to detect , track , and discriminate ballistic missiles throughout their trajectories . thaad also demonstrated improved element - level functionality when it successfully launched a salvo of two thaad interceptors to intercept a separating target inside the earth's atmosphere . the primary interceptor hit the target and the second interceptor hit the largest remaining piece of target debris seconds later . regional and theater bmds assets — aegis bmd and thaad — succeeded in demonstrating improved interoperability in fiscal year 2009 . for example , during a thaad intercept test , aegis bmd tracked a target and provided the information to thaad's fire control . as a result , the missile was successfully engaged by thaad . additionally , during this test , the forward - based radar supporting thaad was also able to discriminate the threat reentry vehicle from other objects and provide the information to support the engagement . according to program officials , the thaad element reported that c2bmc provided accurate and timely status information for the bmds as well as situational awareness of the test to the warfighter .