viii . this report is available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have further questions about this report , please contact me or steven lozano at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or on mihmj@gao.gov or lozanos@gao.gov . major contributors to this report included justin booth , carole cimitile , john dale , terrell dorn , maria edelstein , elena epps , brett fallavollita , v. bruce goddard , carl higginbotham , david merrill , susan pachikara , masha pastuhov - pastein , john reilly , william roach , mark trapani , kris trueblood , and michael volpe . our january 2003 report contained 11 recommendations to help the office of the architect of the capitol ( aoc ) establish its strategic management and accountability framework in the areas of strategic planning and organizational alignment , communications , development of congressional protocols by involving stakeholders , accountability reporting through annual performance planning and reporting , customer satisfaction , performance measurement , strategic human capital management , and establishing action - oriented implementation goals . this appendix describes aoc's progress to date in addressing each of these recommendations . we provide a brief review of findings that led to each recommendation , report the actions that aoc has taken to implement the recommendation , and provide our analysis of whether aoc's actions address the underlying issues that caused us to make the recommendation in our january 2003 report . we also make additional recommendations to assist aoc in improving its communications with employees and stakeholders . recommendation: improve strategic planning and organizational alignment by involving key congressional and other external stakeholders in aoc's strategic planning efforts and in any organizational changes that may result from these efforts . successful organizations ensure that their strategic planning fully considers the interests and expectations of congress and other stakeholders . in moving forward with its strategic planning efforts , it will be critical that aoc fully engage key congressional and other stakeholders in further developing and implementing its strategic plan , as well as revisions , to provide a strong foundation for any organizational or operating changes that may be needed to implement the plan . key congressional and other stakeholder involvement will be especially important for aoc to help it ensure that its efforts and resources are targeted at the highest priorities . actions taken by aoc: in march 2003 , aoc issued a draft strategic plan for fiscal years 2003 through 2007 that contained aoc's four strategic focus areas and corresponding strategic goals described in table 1 . aoc also issued a draft performance plan outlining the specific actions and milestones to reach for achieving the goals and objectives established in the draft strategic plan . the draft strategic plan is to become operational through the annual performance planning process , which translates strategic goals into objectives , action plans , milestones , and performance measures . aoc has developed an overall approach to managing organizational performance that includes strategic planning , annual planning and accountability reporting , and assessment of aoc's performance based on meeting agencywide milestones and measures . aoc staff plans to meet with stakeholders to discuss its plan . the draft strategic plan will be the cornerstone of this process .