management processes . these management controls are vital to ensuring that dod can effectively and efficiently manage an undertaking with the size , complexity , and significance of its business systems modernization , and minimize the associated risks . dod continues to take steps to comply with the provisions of the ronald w. reagan ndaa for fiscal year 2005 , as amended , and to satisfy relevant system modernization management guidance . however , despite undertaking activities to address ndaa requirements and its future vision ; the department has yet to demonstrate significant results . specifically , dod has updated its bea and is beginning to modernize its corporate business processes , but the architecture is still not federated through development of aligned subordinate architectures for each of the military departments , and it still does not include common definitions for key terms and concepts to help ensure that the respective portions of the architecture will be properly linked and aligned . has not included all business system investments in its fiscal year 2013 budget submission , due in part to an unreliable inventory of all defense business systems . has made limited progress regarding investment management policies and procedures and has not yet established the new organizational structure and guidance that dod has reported will address statutory requirements . in addition , while dod implemented a business process reengineering ( bpr ) review process , the department is not measuring and reporting its results . continues to describe certification actions for its business system investments based on limited information . has fewer staff than it identified as needed to execute its responsibilities for business systems modernization . gao - 11-278 . specifically , the office of the dcmo , which took over these responsibilities from another office that was disestablished in 2011 , reported that it had filled only 82 of its planned 139 positions , with 57 positions vacant . dod's limited progress in developing and implementing its federated bea , investment management policies and procedures , and our related recommendations is due in part , to the roles and responsibilities of key organizations and senior leadership positions being largely undefined . furthermore , the impact of dod's efforts to reengineer its end - to - end business processes has yet to be measured and reported , and efforts to execute needed activities are limited by challenges in staffing the office of the dcmo . until the long - standing institutional modernization management controls provided for under the act , addressed in our recommendations , and otherwise called for in best practices are fully implemented , it is likely that the department's business systems modernization will continue to be a high - risk program . among other things , the act requires dod to develop a bea that would cover all defense business systems and their related functions and activities and that would enable the entire department to ( 1 ) comply with all federal accounting , financial management , and reporting requirements and ( 2 ) routinely produce timely , accurate , and reliable financial information for management purposes . the corporate bea had yet to be extended ( i.e.