clearly , this will be a significant challenge . the contractors proposing overall architecture designs must be aware of all the related risk reduction development activities affecting their respective designs . it may also prove difficult for contractors proposing space transportation system designs to coordinate work with other contractors without a prime contractor to subcontractor relationship . nasa's own aerospace technology advisory committee , made up of outside experts , has also expressed serious concerns about the difficulty of integrating these efforts effectively . communications and coordination were not effectively facilitated . in a report following the failure of the x - 33's composite fuel tank , the investigation team reported that the design of the tank required high levels of communication , and that such communication did not occur in this case . a nasa official told us that some nasa and lockheed personnel , who had experience with composite materials and the phenomena identified as one of the probable causes for the tank's failure , expressed concerns about the tank design . however , because of the industry - led nature of the cooperative agreement , lockheed martin was not required to react to such concerns and did not request additional assistance from nasa . the government performance and results act of 1993 requires federal agencies to prepare annual performance plans to establish measurable objectives and performance targets for major programs . doing so enables agencies to gauge the progress of programs like the x - 33 and x - 34 and in turn to take quick action when performance goals are not being met . for example , we reported in august 1999 that nasa's fiscal year 2000 performance plan did not include performance targets that established a clear path leading to a reusable launch vehicle and recommended such targets be established . without relying on these important project management tools up front , nasa encountered numerous problems on both the x - 33 and x - 34 programs . compounding these difficulties was a decrease in the projected commercial launch market , which in turn lessened the incentive of nasa's x - 33 industry partners to continue their investments . in particular , technical problems in developing the x - 33's composite fuel tanks , aerospike engines , heat shield , and avionics system resulted in significant schedule delays and cost overruns . after two program reviews in 1998 and 1999 , the industry partners added a total of $145.6 million to the cooperative agreement to pay for cost overruns and establish a reserve to deal with future technical problems and schedule delays . however , nasa officials stated that they did not independently develop their own cost estimates for these program events to determine whether the additional funds provided by industry would be sufficient to complete the program . also , these technical problems resulted in the planned first flight being delayed until october 2003 , about 4.5 years after the original march 1999 first flight date . after the composite fuel tank failed during testing in november 1999 , according to nasa officials , lockheed martin opted not to go forward with the x - 33 program without additional nasa financial support .