the information was accurate and current . discussion of defense issues , in particular , was extensive , describing for each of the nine countries its achievements in terms of five capability areas: ( 1 ) deployability and mobility ; ( 2 ) sustainability and logistics ; ( 3 ) consultations , command , and control ; ( 4 ) effective engagement ; and ( 5 ) survivability of forces and infrastructure . the report's discussion of budgetary issues focused on each of the nine countries' commitments to defense spending as a percentage of its gross domestic product , and the defense budget planning systems that each country has implemented . discussion of information security and legal issues focused on the extent to which each country had met or achieved nato requirements . for information security , the report assessed the extent to which each of the nine countries had implemented nato requirements for personnel screening and the handling and storage of classified documents . regarding legal issues , the report assessed whether a country's constitution and / or laws provided any barriers to the deployment of the country's troops abroad , or the hosting of foreign troops in - country , in support of nato operations . in the economic area , the report discussed the status of each country's economy . women's participation in politics is disproportionately low . in muslim communities , women are deprived of their electoral rights due to the practice of “family vote” through which men vote on behalf of the women in their family . efforts to address these issues are hampered by insufficient monitoring procedures and a lack of public awareness , particularly with regard to domestic violence . the constitution protects the right of minorities to preserve and express their cultural , religious , and linguistic identities , including the right to primary and secondary education in the minority language . sources we reviewed , however , indicate that societal discrimination against minorities — including roma , albanians , turks , and serbs — remains a problem . turks and roma complain of governmental , societal , and cultural discrimination , but the most explosive source of ethnic tension is the country's large albanian minority . the problem of discrimination against minorities was addressed by the august 13 , 2001 , ohrid framework agreement , which contains broad constitutional and legislative reforms focused on greater minority rights and increased minority participation in the domestic police force and other governmental institutions . however , according to the new york university school of law , which monitors constitutional issues in eastern europe and the former soviet union , implementation of the reforms in the ohrid framework agreement has been slow . with nearly 22 million people , romania is the most populous of the nine countries aspiring to nato membership . situated on the black sea , romania is also bordered by one nato member — hungary — as well as moldova , ukraine , and the federal republic of yugoslavia . bulgaria , on romania's southern border , is also seeking membership in nato .