we acquired both models . the first , the fatigue avoidance scheduling tooltm ( fast ) , was originally developed for military use by dr. steven r. hursh , et al . some of the costs were recurring . for example , an official from a class iii railroad told us his company spends an extra $500 a month for a manager to review and verify the accuracy of hours of service records . after rsia took effect , some covered employees filed claims for lost work or compensation — that is , requests for payment for work hours or compensation lost because of rsia's consecutive work day limits or other requirements . such claims might arise when , for example , an employee who formerly worked a 6 by 1 shift could no longer do so because rsia requires 48 hours' rest after 6 consecutive days on duty . in responding to our survey , 5 of 7 class i , 6 of 14 class ii , and 22 of 152 class iii railroads reported that the number of claims for missed work opportunities ( hours ) or compensation increased as a direct result of rsia's hours of service changes . the remaining class i and ii railroads and 128 of the class iii railroads ( about 84 percent ) said either the number of such claims stayed the same or the issue was not applicable to them . we did not collect data on the number of claims filed . however , some railroad officials we spoke with said the number of claims filed doubled or tripled from the normal level . for example , a class ii railroad official we spoke with estimated that the number of claims filed at his company each month for lost work hours increased from about 5 before rsia took effect to 10 to 15 afterwards . this official also said the number of claims subsequently went back to 2 – 3 per month . a class i railroad official told us t&e employees had filed over 500 claims at this company between july 2009 and may 2010 , most of which the company was holding in abeyance until it had decided how to handle them . we do not know how many claims may have resulted in payments to employees or other forms of relief . as noted , one class i railroad we spoke with had not decided at the time of our review how to resolve the 500 claims filed by its employees , in part because the railroad was still considering the status of collective bargaining agreements in relation to rsia's legal requirements . officials from this railroad estimated each claim filed averaged approximately $200 and the railroad's potential liability in paying these claims was about $100,000 . at other railroads , paying compensation may have been more routine . for example , an official we spoke with at a class ii railroad , which was trying to avoid working employees 6 consecutive days , said the railroad had , in virtually every instance , paid claims for compensation filed by t&e employees who had been skipped over for work assignments because they were approaching 6 consecutive days of work .