the district faces some real constraints on revenue . the district , like all state and local governments , is unable to tax property owned by the federal government . district officials say they face a particular hardship because a larger proportion of their property is owned or specifically exempted by the federal government than is the case with most jurisdictions . the district has stated that , according to its real property tax records , 42 percent of its property is federal property . it is difficult to estimate the net fiscal impact of the presence of the federal government or other tax - exempt entities because of the wide variety of indirect contributions that these entities have on district revenues and the lack of information on the services they use . the presence of tax - exempt entities generates revenues for the district , even though they do not pay income or property taxes directly . for example , these tax - exempt entities attract residents , tourists , and businesses to the district . in addition , employees of the tax - exempt entities and employees of businesses that provide services to these entities pay sales taxes to the district . we have found no comprehensive estimates of these revenue contributions ; however , studies of individual tax - exempt entities suggest that the amounts could be significant . further , given the large portion of the private sector activity in the district that is linked to the presence of the federal government and other tax - exempt entities , it is unclear whether commercial property would fill the void if federally owned property were reduced to the average seen in other cities . in addition to the amount of nontaxable property in the district , the district government , unlike state governments , is prohibited by federal law from taxing the income earned in the district by nonresident individuals . states that have income taxes typically tax the income of nonresidents , although some states have voluntarily entered into reciprocity agreements with neighbor states in which they agree not to tax the incomes of each other's residents . states that impose income taxes also typically provide tax credits to their residents for income taxes paid to other states . in addition , some cities that have income taxes tax the incomes of commuters who work within their boundaries . these taxes are typically levied at a low flat rate ( most of the ones we identified were between 1 and 2 percent ) on city - source earnings . the two states could respond to a district commuter tax by taxing the income of district residents who work within their jurisdictions or increasing the tax rates on all of their residents . the congress recognized that the district's ability to raise revenues was affected by a number of legal and practical limitations on its authority — the immunity of federal property from taxation ; the building height restriction , which has a limiting effect on commercial property values ; the prohibition on the district from passing a law to tax the income of nonresidents ; and the restriction on imposing sales taxes on military and diplomatic purchases .