we disagree with the comment . while we understand that some state regulations require termination of jurisdiction at bond release , the federal regulations only state that the relevant regulatory authority may terminate its jurisdiction under the surface mining control and reclamation act ( smcra ) at bond release . therefore , we have not revised the report in response to the comment . we disagree with the comment . smcra does not specifically prohibit applicants from obtaining future smcra permits if they have previous bond forfeitures . smcra generally prohibits applicants from obtaining future permits if they have unabated violations . however , in response to the comment , we have added detail on the state regulations , which do specifically note that bond forfeiture based on violations that are not subsequently corrected disqualify operators from obtaining future permits . such permits are needed for the construction of a valley fill . section 404 ( c ) authorizes epa to deny or restrict the use of any disposal site where it finds that the discharge will have unacceptable adverse effects . mining companies may be able to construct valley fills under one of two types of permits issued by the corps . osm manages the mining program in tennessee . one goal of smcra's , among others , is to assure that mines are reclaimed as contemporaneously as possible with surface coal mining operations and to protect the environment from problems — such as water quality degradation — that may result from mining . the state is correct that the 2003 draft programmatic environmental impact statement was finalized in october 2005 , and we have revised footnote 2 to make that clear . the final version of the statement incorporated the 2003 draft statement by reference . however , the 2005 final statement did not contain all of the material found in the draft statement . for example , studies of the impacts of mountaintop mining were in the appendixes of the 2003 draft , but not the 2005 final statement . therefore , we believe that it is preferable to refer the readers of our report to the 2003 draft statement instead of the 2005 final statement . the following are gao's comments on the letter dated december 22 , 2009 , from the deputy director , division of mining and reclamation . we agree that mining nationwide has similar potential to impact the environment . we agree that the contamination may not necessarily have been post - bond release , and we agree that contamination problems are likely to be site specific , when they occur . we did not revise the report in response to this comment . the focus of this report was surface coal mining and not all activities that may affect water quality . those five district offices are responsible for issuing and enforcing the clean water act section 404 permits to surface mines in the states of kentucky , tennessee , virginia , and west virginia .