we found several discrepancies with the data . for example , obligations and contract action data for certain organizations differed within the same cer briefings depending on whether the data came from the contracting organization or dasa ( p ) . in the third quarter fiscal year 2016 cer briefing , usace reported that it completed 39,600 contracting actions and obligated $9.01 billion . however , these figures were 14 and 16 percent higher , respectively , than figures dasa ( p ) officials reported for usace in the same briefing . dasa ( p ) representatives told us that the cers may contain internal discrepancies because different army organizations pull data from source systems on different dates . however , none of the cer briefings contained caveats or amplifying information to explain any of the data discrepancies . dasa ( p ) representatives told us that the forthcoming cer policies are intended to improve the reliability of cer data and to clarify the causes of any discrepancies by providing as - of dates for data , among other things . army officials from contracting centers , peos , lcmcs , major commands , and department headquarters all told us that army leadership focuses on obligation rates more than any other metric to determine whether contracting efforts have been successful . senior leaders within amc and asa ( alt ) also told us that the army has an “obligation culture,” and the primary focus is ensuring that the army obligates all of its funds before they expire . this focus is partially out of concern that the army could miss opportunities to use available appropriations to meet the department's needs if they expire . additionally , army leaders are concerned that appropriations in future years may decrease if the army does not obligate all of its appropriations before they expire because it could appear that the army was appropriated more funding than it needed . this issue is not unique to the army , as appropriations are commonly available for obligation only during a specific fiscal year . a recent dasa ( p ) stated , however , that this limited perspective increases the risk that contractors will not provide the government goods and services in an efficient or effective manner . further , contracting professionals and requirements generators repeatedly told us that obligating funds simply to prevent them from expiring does not drive the optimal contracting behavior , particularly in terms of cost savings . the department concurred with all four recommendations but has not yet addressed them . moreover , a 2013 report on army contracting issues , commissioned by the office of the assistant secretary of the army ( acquisition , logistics and technology ) ( asa ( alt ) ) , identified concerns about inconsistent levels of customer service , redundant activities , and inconsistent organizational structures , among other things . given these challenges , you asked us to examine the army's contracting operations . this report assesses the extent to which army leaders have evaluated ( 1 ) the efficiency and effectiveness of contracting operations and ( 2 ) the effects of organizational changes on contracting operations .