these processes are described below . the army generates personnel requirements through a biennial process known as total army analysis . during the initial stages of this process , army force planners assess the numbers and types of units needed to carry out missions specified in dod and army guidance . the most recent total army analysis — called total army analysis 2011 because it provides the force structure foundation for the army's fiscal year 2006 through 2011 planning cycle — included analyses of operating force requirements for homeland defense , major combat operations , forward deterrence , and ongoing military operations , among others , as well as for personnel who operate installations and provide support services . during the subsequent resourcing phase of the process , army officials determine how best to allocate the limited number of positions authorized by osd among active and reserve component units across the army's force structure to minimize risk to priority missions . the army completed an initial version of total army analysis 2011 in spring 2004 , but the army continues to assess requirements as it carries out changes to its basic force structure . these changes , discussed in the army campaign plan , alter the way in which the service organizes and staffs its combat forces , and therefore will have significant impacts on the numbers of active personnel the army will need . in place of the existing 10 active divisions , each comprising about 3 combat brigades and associated support units , the army's new force structure will be based on modular combat brigades , each with its own support units . under current plans , when the new structure is fully implemented in 2006 , the army will have 43 combat brigades , an increase of 10 brigades from the 33 it had under the traditional divisional structure . although the army has begun implementing plans to create a modular force structure , several aspects of these plans are uncertain or have yet to be determined . for example , the army is considering increasing the number of brigades it will have from 43 to 48 . this increase could require approximately 17,000 to 18,000 more personnel depending on the types of brigades established . the army plans to make the decision by fiscal year 2006 based on resource considerations as well as the status of ongoing military operations . we did not examine reserve component requirements . to assess osd's oversight of active military personnel requirements , we examined osd's involvement in determining personnel requirements , including policy and budget guidance . we also assessed the extent to which osd reviews service processes for determining military personnel requirements and allocating personnel to authorized positions . also , relying on our prior work on best practices in human capital management , we examined assessments that osd and the services use to determine requirements and inform decision making . to assess osd's and the services' management and implementation of initiatives to use military personnel more efficiently , we collected and analyzed information on key initiatives and examined the planning , implementation , and oversight issues that will likely affect their success .