table 3 provides data on these shortfalls , by language . the shortages that agencies reported can have a significant impact on agency operations . here are a few examples: the army has noted that a lack of linguists is affecting its ability to conduct current and anticipated human and signal intelligence missions . as a result , the army said that it does not have the linguistic capacity to support two concurrent major theaters of war . the need for spanish speakers has been an issue in pursuing florida health care fraud cases . the assistant u.s. attorney in miami in charge of health care fraud investigations recently advised the fbi that his office would decline to prosecute health care fraud cases unless timely translations of spanish conversations were available . this situation has important implications , since the miami region has the nation's largest ongoing health care fraud investigation . this is a model that could be used to guide workforce planning efforts as they relate to other skills needed in the federal government such as math , science , and information technology . we found that the fbi has made an effort to address each of the five steps in opm's model . the fbi estimates that medicare and medicaid losses in the region are in excess of $3 billion . the fbi's los angeles office has also cited a critical need for spanish language specialists and language monitors for cases involving violent gang members . according to the bureau , being able to target these gang members will save lives in los angeles but is contingent on the availability of spanish linguists to assist with these investigations . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to answer any questions the subcommittee members may have . the fbi reviewed these reports along with workload statistics from its regional offices . fbi officials noted that implementation progress is routinely tracked and adjustments to the action plan are made as needed . in contrast , the other three agencies have yet to pursue this type of comprehensive strategic planning and had only completed some of the steps outlined in opm's planning model . the army has limited its efforts to developing a plan partially outlining a strategic direction and identifying its available supply and demand for staff with foreign language skills ( addressing only steps 1 and 2 of the opm model ) . the state department has not yet set a strategic direction for its language program ; however , the department has addressed step 2 in the workforce planning model through its annual survey of ambassadors regarding foreign language needs at their posts on a position - by - position basis . state has yet to develop an action plan and the related implementation and monitoring steps described in opm's model . finally , the status of the foreign commercial service's language program closely mirrored the situation we found at the state department . one difference , however , is that the agency surveys senior officers regarding a post's foreign language needs every 3 years instead of annually .