however , most tribes we interviewed were not participating in the program . hhs provided written comments that are reproduced in appendix ii . the reimbursement rate varies by type of expense . the federal share of foster care maintenance payments , adoption assistance payments , and guardianship assistance payments is between 50 percent and 83 percent of costs , with higher federal support going to states and eligible tribes with lower per capita incomes . the federal share of training and administrative costs is 75 percent and 50 percent , respectively . eligible tribes may receive federal title iv - e funds either by ( 1 ) directly operating a foster care title iv - e program pursuant to an approved title iv - e plan ; or ( 2 ) administering all or part of a title iv - e program on behalf of a state pursuant to a tribal - state agreement . tribal - state agreements: tribes may enter into cooperative agreements with their state child welfare agency to administer part of the state's title iv - e program . through tribal - state agreements , title iv - e funds are generally passed through the state to the tribes . whether tribes or states have responsibility for activities such as developing a case plan for the child's placement and care , or reviewing the case plan on a regular basis , can vary depending on the agreement . hhs considers the state to be the grantee for title iv - e funding and as a result , the state has ultimate responsibility for ensuring compliance with title iv - e program requirements . direct title iv - e programs: the fostering connections to success and increasing adoptions act of 2008 ( fostering connections act ) authorized tribes to directly operate a title iv - e program and obtain federal reimbursement for eligible program costs pursuant to an approved title iv - e plan . as of october 2015 , there were seven tribes approved to directly operate a title iv - e program . the provisions of title iv - e apply to tribes that operate their own programs in the same manner as they apply to states , with limited exceptions . hhs is responsible for oversight and monitoring of states and tribes that are approved to directly operate a title iv - e program . tribes also have access to federal funding provided under title iv - b , subparts 1 and 2 of the social security act for various child welfare services — $664 million in fiscal year 2015 . these programs fund a range of child welfare services and activities generally aimed at preventing abuse and neglect ; preserving and reunifying families ; and promoting safety , permanency , and well - being of children in foster or adoptive placements . to receive title iv - b funding , states and tribes must submit a 5-year plan — the child and family services plan — that sets forth the vision and goals to be accomplished to improve the state's or tribe's coordinated child and family service delivery system . it also includes , among other things , the state's or tribe's plans for use of funding from title iv - b .