this coincided with the implementation of the ipia . for fiscal year 2008 , medicare ffs improper payment estimate totaled $10.4 billion , or 3.6 percent of benefit payments for the prior year . as part of its testing , cms reported it determined whether the claim payments complied with medicare coverage , coding , and billing rules . in its fiscal year 2008 afr , hhs reported causes of improper payments included provision of medically unnecessary services , incorrect coding , and insufficient documentation . medicare advantage is designed to provide health coverage through private health plans for medicare beneficiaries who choose to enroll in this option . fiscal year 2008 marks the first year that cms reported estimated improper payments for medicare advantage , with an error rate of 10.6 percent or $6.8 billion in estimated improper payments . while hhs's afr states that medical record reviews were performed , they did not specifically identify the types of attributes tested to identify the improper payments . the causes of improper payments cited were errors in transferring data , interpretation of data , payment calculations , and incorrect diagnoses resulting in incorrect beneficiary risk scores . medicare prescription drug benefit is an outpatient prescription drug benefit for medicare beneficiaries who opt to enroll . as we highlighted earlier in this testimony , cms had not yet estimated an error rate for its medicare prescription drug benefit , which had total outlays of about $46 billion for fiscal year 2008 . the medicaid program is a joint federal / state program , administered by the states to provide health insurance to certain low income individuals . although it was required by omb to report improper payment information beginning with its fiscal year 2003 budget submission , cms began reporting estimated improper payments for this program in fiscal year 2007 . for fiscal year 2008 , cms estimated improper payments for fee - for - service providers , managed care plans , and for ineligible recipients — and reported an error rate of 10.5 percent or $18.6 billion as the federal share of these improper payments . among all federal programs reporting in fiscal year 2008 , medicaid had the highest estimated dollar value of reported improper payments . ( see figure 1. ) to estimate improper payments for the medicaid program , cms developed a multi - faceted strategy that included obtaining claim payment data from the 50 states and the district of columbia , utilizing a three - year state rotation cycle . using this methodology , cms selects 17 states each year to generate and report a national improper payment estimate for medicaid . cms reported that the most common causes of medicaid improper payments resulting from its medical and data processing reviews included insufficient or lack of documentation ( which accounted for 90 percent of the errors ) , pricing errors , and non - covered services . as reported in the fiscal year 2008 afr , hhs expressed the view that the high percentage of errors related to insufficient documentation follows a trend similar to the early years of the medicare ffs error rate measurement program .