( see app . these two alternatives were for the government to purchase its own vessel fleet to meet defense requirements or for dod to charter or contract for vessels in times of need . we conducted this performance audit from january 2017 to july 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . a series of laws and policy directives dating back to 1904 require dod to rely in large part on u.s. - flag commercial vessels over government - owned or foreign - flag vessels for its sealift needs . this report responds to the following objectives: what effect has the u.s. government's support for the internationally trading u.s. - flag fleet had on defense needs and other government programs ? according to stakeholders , what , if any , sustainability challenges does the internationally trading u.s. - flag fleet face in meeting national defense needs ? what is the status of the mandated national sealift and maritime strategies , and what options has dot considered to address any challenges related to sustaining the internationally trading u.s. - flag fleet to meet defense needs ? in addition , you requested that we identify and discuss alternatives to the msp with dod , the department of transportation's maritime administration ( marad ) , and other stakeholders , and this information is included in appendix i . to identify the effect the u.s. government's support for the internationally - trading u.s. - flag fleet has had on national defense needs and other government programs , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and directives , including the maritime security act of 1996 , the maritime security act of 2003 , national security directive 28 , and laws and regulations related to cargo preference requirements , among others . we also reviewed unclassified summaries of dod studies and interviewed officials from dod's u.s. transportation command ( transportation command ) to learn how these studies are used to determine defense needs for u.s. - flag vessels . we reviewed dot guidance on the msp and interviewed marad officials to learn how the program operates , including how participants are selected for the program and how the stipend is determined . we also conducted a literature search on the msp and maritime economics and reviewed prior gao reports as well as reports from the congressional research service , marad , econometrica , and academics on the msp and cargo preference requirements .