as is discussed below , epa applied some of these recommendations to the particulate matter analysis . epa applied — either wholly or in part — approximately two - thirds of the academies' recommendations in preparing its january 2006 particulate matter regulatory impact analysis and continues to address the recommendations through ongoing research and development . according to epa , the agency intends to address some of the remaining recommendations in the final rule and has undertaken research and development to address others . the january 2006 regulatory impact analysis on particulate matter represents a snapshot of an ongoing epa effort to respond to the national academies' recommendations on developing estimates of health benefits for air pollution regulations . hypothetically , the agency could refine national air quality standards to address the potentially varying health consequences associated with different components of particulate matter . the national academies recommended that epa strengthen its benefit analyses by evaluating a range of alternative assumptions regarding relative toxicity and incorporate these assumptions into sensitivity or uncertainty analyses as more data become available . epa did not believe the state of scientific knowledge on relative toxicity was sufficiently developed at the time it prepared the draft regulatory impact analysis to include this kind of analysis . in a separate report issued in 2004 , the national academies noted that technical challenges have impeded research progress on relative toxicity but nonetheless identified this issue as a priority research topic . the clean air scientific advisory committee also noted the need for more research and concluded in 2005 that not enough data are available to base the particulate matter standards on composition . the office of management and budget , however , encouraged epa in 2006 to conduct a sensitivity analysis on relative toxicity and referred the agency to a sensitivity analysis on relative toxicity funded by the european commission . for example , there is uncertainty about the effects of the age and health status of people exposed to particulate matter , the varying composition of particulate matter , and the measurements of actual exposure to particulate matter . epa's health benefit analysis , however , does not account for these key uncertainties by specifying a range of estimates and the likelihood of attaining them . for these reasons , epa's responses reflect a partial application of the academies' recommendation . in addition , the academies recommended that epa both continue to conduct sensitivity analyses on sources of uncertainty and expand these analyses . in the particulate matter regulatory impact analysis , epa included a new sensitivity analysis regarding assumptions about thresholds , or levels below which those exposed to particulate matter are not at risk of experiencing harmful effects . specifically , the national academies recommended that epa clearly summarize the key elements of the benefit analysis in an executive summary that includes a table that lists and briefly describes the regulatory options for which epa estimated the benefits , the assumptions that had a substantial impact on the benefit estimates , and the health benefits evaluated . epa did not , however , present a summary table as called for by the recommendation or summarize the benefits in the executive summary .