gao - 08-252 . washington , d.c.: april 16 , 2008 . washington , d.c.: july 11 , 2003 . combating terrorism: selected challenges and related recommendations . gao - 01-822 . washington , d.c.: september 20 , 2001 . northcom would command that dod assistance . the jiacg supports day - to - day planning and advises northcom planners regarding civilian agency operations , capabilities , and limitations . further , the jiacg provides the command with day - to - day knowledge of the interagency situation and links directly with agency partners at the command and in other locations when an operation is necessary . the jiacg also conducts focused planning on specific issues . for example , the group met with officials from the centers for disease control and prevention and the department of health and human services in august 2006 to coordinate federal efforts for responding to a potential influenza pandemic . the jiacg also formed a working group to integrate private sector capabilities and interests into northcom plans and operations as appropriate . specifically , the group's objectives were to determine how to provide northcom with private sector information regarding facilities and operations , achieve coordination and cooperation with the private sector , and gain and maintain awareness of technological initiatives developed in the private sector . the jiacg also formed working groups for law enforcement issues , earthquakes , and prescripted mission assignments . according to fema's director , one of the most important interagency planning tools developed as a result of the lessons learned during hurricane katrina is the prescripted mission assignments discussed earlier . northcom collaborated with fema and other agencies to identify the most likely tasks dod would be asked to fulfill and drafted generic mission assignments for those tasks in terms of capability requirements rather than specific resources . twenty - five prescripted mission assignments are included in northcom's standing defense support for civil authorities execute order . these mission assignments also include defense coordinating officers ( dco ) who are located in each of fema's 10 regional offices ( see fig . officials from several agencies told us that locating the dcos in the fema regions and assigning greater emphasis to the dcos' missions has enhanced interagency coordination , particularly with states . the dcos are senior military officers with joint experience and training on the national response framework , defense support to civil authorities , and dhs's national incident management system . they are responsible for assisting civil authorities , when requested by fema , by providing liaison support and capabilities requirements validation . dcos serve as single points of contact for state , local , and other federal authorities that need dod support . dcos work closely with federal , state , and local officials to determine what unique dod capabilities are necessary and can be used to help mitigate the effects of a natural or man - made disaster . for example , during the recent california wildfires , northcom's subordinate command , army forces north , deployed the region ix dco to support the joint field office in pasadena , california , and assess and coordinate defense support of civil authorities to fema .