nrc also consulted with agreement states on this issue . in the end , it was agreed in september 2003 that the threshold for increased concern — that is , the quantities at which various radionuclides become subject to more stringent security — should be category 2 quantities . after our august 2003 recommendation that nrc consult with the agreement states on this list , nrc officials formally provided it to agreement state officials for their review . the agreement states agreed with the list and the thresholds developed by the iaea and participating countries ( see table 1 ) . nrc also implemented our recommendations to ( 1 ) determine how agreement state and nonagreement state officials could participate in the development and implementation of additional security measures for radionuclides of concern and ( 2 ) include performance criteria for assessing nrc's and agreement states' implementation of these additional security requirements in periodic evaluations of both nrc and agreement state effectiveness . first , nrc worked with agreement states to devise and implement several additional security measures — called “increased controls” — to protect category 2 or greater quantities of radionuclides of concern from theft , diversion , and other unauthorized access . in late 2003 , nrc and state officials , some of whom were also officers of the organization of agreement states or conference of radiation control program directors ( an organization that includes both agreement and nonagreement states ) , established several working groups to facilitate the participation of state officials and their organizations in developing and implementing additional security measures for certain radioactive sources and materials . several state officials , including a former chair of the organization of agreement states ( oas ) , told us that these working groups functioned in a highly collaborative and deliberative manner . another oas official told us that the fact that so many agreement state officials have been willing to volunteer to serve in working groups , and that nrc has been willing to provide some financial support for state officials' involvement , is a testament to the importance that both nrc and agreement states placed on federal - state collaboration . nrc and agreement states officially issued requirements for the increased controls in december 2005 . the purposes of the increased controls , according to nrc , are to reduce the risk of unauthorized use of radioactive materials and to aid the prompt detection and assessment of and response to any such attempt . increased controls include such measures as 24-hour surveillance , multiple layers of physical security , and measures to ensure the immediate notification of local law enforcement agencies in the event of any actual or suspected breach in security . for example , increased controls on medical sources require some sources to be kept in heavily secured rooms with limited access ( see fig . according to nrc , all increased controls were to be fully implemented by june 2006 . some licensees with the highest - risk sources were inspected by june 2007 , while all increased controls must be fully inspected by june 2009 .