some projects require more than 2 years . dndo officials stated that their process for selecting and prioritizing projects is based on a review of capability gaps and government priorities in accordance with the global nuclear detection architecture as well as the nuclear defense r&d road map fiscal years 2013 to 2017 . dndo officials also stated that they consider what technologies exist before considering advanced technology development and their goal is to complete an r&d project with a proof - of - concept study or a prototype . the s&t directorate , dndo , and the coast guard are each appropriated funding for r&d . table 1 provides dhs's r&d budgets from fiscal years 2010 through 2013 for the various entities that conduct border and maritime r&d . what have been the results of dhs's border and maritime security r&d and to what extent has dhs obtained and evaluated feedback on these efforts ? to what extent does dhs coordinate its border and maritime r&d efforts internally ( with other dhs components and end users ) and externally with other federal agencies and the private sector ? to answer the first objective , we focused our review on the components and offices receiving direct r&d appropriations related to border and maritime security — specifically , dhs s&t , the coast guard , and dndo . to determine the results of dhs's recent r&d efforts , we asked officials from each r&d office to identify the deliverables their offices produced from fiscal years 2010 through 2012 , including the cost of each deliverable . we corroborated the dhs - identified lists of deliverables and their costs with varied documentary evidence , including congressional budget justifications , dhs materials prepared for independently produced r&d reviews , and other published material . we determined that the information on deliverables and costs was sufficiently reliable for the purposes of providing an overview of border and maritime r&d ; limitations to the data are noted in the report . for each component , we selected deliverables to reflect a range of product types and recipients and then asked dhs to identify the customers that received those deliverables . for the purposes of this report , we relied on dhs to identify who its customers were — in other words , those agencies that worked closest to s&t over the course of a project . we also refer to the reports , prototypes , software , or other project outputs as r&d deliverables . we selected these definitions because they are in keeping with those used by s&t . given that s&t , the coast guard , and dndo have different roles with respect to conducting and managing r&d , we selected different numbers of deliverables to review within each component . specifically , given s&t's role as the lead r&d agency for dhs and its wider variety of customers , we interviewed every customer of s&t border and maritime security division's identified deliverables ( 20 of 20 deliverables ) . we met with 35 percent of the customers of the coast guard's completed deliverables ( 8 of 23 deliverables ) and 12 percent of the customers of dndo's deliverables ( 5 of 42 deliverables , which included one discontinued project ) .