ii. ) the industry concerns about current training regulations for commercial pilots and incorporating additional initial training requirements to improve first officer applicants' performance capabilities could be addressed by the airline safety and federal aviation administration extension act of 2010 for all airline pilots . currently , while a captain for a commercial airline is required to hold an airline transport pilot certificate — the highest level of pilot certification and requiring the highest number of total flight hours — a first officer is required to hold only a commercial pilot certificate , i.e. , requiring a minimum of 250 flight hours . however , the recent law will require that each pilot ( captain and first officer ) must have an airline transport pilot certificate , which currently requires a minimum of 1,500 total flight hours . individuals interested in becoming a first officer for a regional airline generally complete training from pilot schools with a commercial pilot certificate and possess about 300 to 500 flight hours . the 2010 law directs faa to conduct a rulemaking and effect the changes no later than august 2013 . according to faa , it will issue a notice of proposed rulemaking regarding the increased requirements in the fall of 2011 . representatives of the regional airlines we interviewed were concerned this legislation will reduce airlines' hiring flexibility and make it harder to find qualified first officers that possess an airline transport pilot certificate . as another potentially relevant factor , the law stated that the faa administrator may allow specific academic training courses — beyond the additional courses required by the legislation to raise the minimum requirements for the airline transport pilot certificate — to be credited in lieu of flight hours needed to obtain an airline transport pilot certificate . according to faa's first officer qualifications aviation rulemaking committee report , well - structured training programs that feature integrated academic content and flight experience optimize the pilot learning process , and the committee supported new , higher - level minimum certification requirement for first officers . to support the concept that academic training courses should be credited for some of the additional total flight hours , the report outlined a system for crediting academic training courses based on the sources of pilot training , eg , vocational pilot schools , collegiate aviation schools , or military . the coalition of airline pilots associations ( capa ) and national air disaster alliance - foundation presented dissenting opinions to this approach in the report and suggested that academic courses , while necessary , should not replace an increase in total flight hours required in the law . many of the collegiate aviation schools provide specialized training in a flight simulation training device using realistic scenarios , including some coursework and advanced flight training in jet aircraft systems and airline operational procedures . for example , embry - riddle aeronautical university's aeronautical science degree program is designed to prepare graduates for a career as a professional pilot in multi - crewmember , jet aircraft . courses include communication theory and skills , aircraft turbine engines , crew resource management , aviation weather , jet transport systems , and optional upset recovery training .