in addition , we reviewed our past reports related to levee safety . in exchange for meeting program requirements , federally backed flood insurance is offered to residents in those communities . the water resources development act of 2007 directed the corps to create and maintain a national levee database that includes a national inventory of levees , with information on the location and condition of all federal levees and , to the extent such information is provided to the corps , nonfederal levees among other things . it also established the national committee on levee safety to develop recommendations for a national levee safety program . the committee , which was composed of 23 diverse professionals from federal , state , and local or regional governments as well as the private sector and indian tribes , operated from 2007 to 2011 . in 2009 , it submitted a draft report to congress that included 20 recommendations for actions to establish a national levee - safety program , in addition to a strategic plan for implementing the program . the moving ahead for progress in the 21st century act , enacted in 2012 , called for the corps and fema to align agency processes to allow interchangeable use of information collected for the corps' inspection of completed works program and fema's national flood insurance program . in 2013 , a joint corps and fema taskforce determined that under certain circumstances , corps risk assessments of levees conducted under the agency's levee safety program could satisfy aspects of levee accreditation under fema's national flood insurance program . the effort culminated in a memorandum of understanding signed by the corps and fema in which the corps agrees to , among other things , provide fema with risk assessment results and fema agrees to accept and consider the corps results , when possible . the water resources reform and development act of 2014 amends portions of the water resources and development act of 2007 and also requires the corps and fema to take the lead in implementing certain key national levee - safety - related activities . more specifically , it established new reporting responsibilities for the national committee on levee safety , required continued development of a national levee inventory , and required implementation of a multifaceted levee safety initiative under which the agencies are to accomplish the following tasks: develop voluntary national levee - safety guidelines: the voluntary national levee - safety guidelines are intended to be comprehensive standards that are available for use by all federal , state , and local agencies as well as tribes . under the act , the voluntary guidelines are also expected to address activities and practices by states , local governments , tribes , and private entities to safely build , regulate , operate , and maintain a wide range of levee types , canal structures , and related facilities . the guidelines are also expected to address federal activities — including levee inspection , levee rehabilitation , local floodplain management , and public education and training — that facilitate state efforts to develop and implement effective state programs for levee safety .