supplemental payments . in fiscal year 2010 , states and the federal government made at least $32 billion in supplemental payments — representing over 8 percent of the medicaid program's total expenditures — with a federal share of at least $19.8 billion . cms is responsible for overseeing these payment arrangements , including whether states are appropriately financing their share . states may also use provider taxes and certain other sources of revenue to finance their medicaid programs . provider taxes are taxes , fees , assessments , or other mandatory payments that states may impose on the provision of or payment for certain types of health care items or services , such as inpatient hospital and nursing facility services . states may use revenue from provider taxes for their state share of medicaid expenditures only if the taxes meet certain criteria . many states use revenue from a provider tax on a certain type of provider to increase medicaid payment rates for the same type of provider , and a state could effectively increase a payment rate for a provider without using additional state funds to finance the increase if the revenue from the provider tax and the federal share of the payment rates account for the total increase . see pub . 111-3 , § 104 , 123 stat . states are eligible for these performance bonuses for fiscal years 2009 through 2013 . under continuous eligibility , states allow children to remain eligible for medicaid or chip for a full year before any redetermination of eligibility , regardless of changes in household income . under the express lane eligibility option , states may rely on findings , including income data , from certain other state agencies for medicaid or chip eligibility determination . for presumptive eligibility , states may allow qualified entities , such as , community - based organizations or schools , to screen for eligibility and immediately enroll eligible individuals for a defined period of time . apply for or renew enrollment in medicaid using an electronic signature beginning in 2014 . of the 55 states that responded to our survey , 39 states provided specific data on average application processing times for new medicaid applications in 2012 , and 43 were able to report generally on whether average application processing time increased , decreased , or remained the same since 2008 . the average application processing time is the average number of calendar days between the receipt of a new application and the final determination of eligibility . among the 39 states that reported data , the current application processing ranged from 11 to 45 calendar days , with a median of 25 calendar days.could not report their average processing times , of which about half noted that they do not track these data or that they track them differently than how they were requested in our survey . for example , 4 states noted that they only tracked whether an application met the mandated time frames for the application — not the specific number of days . another state reported that its data on application processing times were not reliable because of differences in the way the data were reported by counties .