we also reviewed relevant literature . ( for additional information on our methodology , see appendix i. ) we conducted our work from july 2000 through may 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . fda is responsible for helping to ensure the safety and efficacy of drugs marketed in the united states . it does this by overseeing the drug development process , reviewing applications for the marketing of new drugs , and monitoring the safety and efficacy of drugs once they are marketed . in response to our 1992 report , fda issued policy guidance in 1993 regarding women in clinical drug trials , explicitly reversing its 1977 recommendation to restrict some women's participation in drug development . its 1993 guideline for the study and evaluation of gender differences in the clinical evaluation of drugs recommended that clinical drug trials should , in general , reflect the population that will receive the drug when it is marketed . this guidance also advised that enough men and women be included in clinical drug trials to allow for the detection of clinically significant sex differences in drug response , including those differences attributable to hormones and body weight variations . on august 10 , 1998 , fda implemented regulations amending requirements for inds and ndas to include demographic data . the regulation requires sponsors to tabulate the sex , age , and race of study participants in ind annual reports and to present available safety and efficacy data by sex , age , and race in two nda documents submitted to fda: the integrated summary of safety and the integrated summary of efficacy . the regulation also requires that evidence be presented to support dose determinations . fda has the authority under these regulations to refuse to accept , or “file,” any nda for review that does not include this information . in addition , fda promulgated regulations on june 1 , 2000 , allowing it to halt ind studies involving drugs that are intended to treat life - threatening diseases or conditions if men or women of reproductive potential are excluded from participation solely because of risks to their reproductive potential . this regulation does not , however , impose requirements to recruit or enroll a specific number of men or women with reproductive potential , and fda has not halted any studies under this authority . we did not evaluate whether fda should have invoked this rule . the language of the 1998 demographic regulation is less specific than the 1993 guidance . the 1998 regulation has the force and effect of law , while the 1993 guidance does not legally bind either fda or drug sponsors . the 1993 guidance specifically discusses the need to analyze clinical data by sex , evaluate potential sex differences in pharmacokinetics , including those caused by body weight , and conduct specific additional studies in women , where clinically indicated . the 1998 regulation requires the presentation of safety and efficacy data already collected in the nda by sex , but no analysis of such data is required . the regulation does not include a standard for the inclusion of women ; it requires only “presentation of data” without clarifying the extent of data or the format to be used .