monitoring . internal control monitoring should assess the quality of performance over time and ensure that the findings of audits and other reviews are promptly resolved . for example , as aoc develops new performance and financial information , it should ensure that this information is both useful to and used by program managers for purposes of managing program performance . aoc is working towards transforming its culture and instituting regularized personnel policies , procedures , and processes , but there are still areas for improvement . in addition to internal control standards , we have found that there are key practices that can assist agencies in effectively using human capital flexibilities . in broad terms , human capital flexibilities represent the policies and procedures that an agency has the authority to implement in managing its workforce to accomplish its mission and to achieve its goals . these practices include educating managers and employees on the availability and use of flexibilities , streamlining and improving administrative processes , and building transparency and accountability into the system . comments from a majority of our focus group participants indicate that supervisors are not perceived to have applied awards , overtime , and leave policies consistently ; that there was supervisory favoritism ; and that grade and pay levels are not consistent across jurisdictions and shifts . aoc has been addressing these concerns by developing a comprehensive leave policy and a strategy for communicating this policy , reviewing perceived inequities in job classification , and issuing specific guidelines and procedures for its employee awards program . aoc should continue to develop consistent and transparent human capital policies and procedures and communicate them . aoc has various offices and an employee council engaged in improving employee relations . aoc's senior managers could benefit from comprehensively collecting and analyzing data from these groups to allow it to determine its employee relations needs , and to measure its progress in achieving its strategic human capital goals and objectives . aoc has recently established its office of the ombudsperson , but should realign the office's reporting relationship directly to the architect to ensure that it is adhering to professional standards of independence . information and communications . according to internal control standards , such consistent procedures help to create a control environment that encourages employee trust in management . a majority of our focus group participants perceived that supervisors applied awards , overtime , and leave policies inconsistently and that there was supervisory favoritism . for example , some employees stated that supervisors determine on their own when an employee is entitled to sick or annual leave and are not consistent when allowing some employees to take off time from work . others remarked that there were varying procedures for signing into work and grace periods for lateness were not consistently applied for every employee . several employees commented that access to working overtime was uneven and felt as if only favored employees had the opportunity to work overtime . in addition , several employees believe that favoritism resulted in uneven and unfair distribution of work , and that hiring and promotions frequently are not based on qualifications and experience but on personal connections .