attorneys . to assess the reliability of statistical information and budget data we obtained , we discussed the sources of the data with agency officials and reviewed documentation regarding the compilation of data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we also interviewed headquarters officials about performance measurement initiatives and reviewed doj and dhs strategic plans , budgets , and performance reports , and we reviewed a doj office of inspector general report that evaluated the executive office of u.s. attorney's ( eousa ) case management system . we compared doj and dhs efforts to measure the results of their gang enforcement efforts to our prior work on effective interagency collaboration and results oriented government . ( 2 ) to what extent do doj and dhs measure the results of their gang enforcement efforts ? and ( 3 ) how does doj use grant funding to administer and / or support activities to reduce gang - related crime and what have been the reported results of grant - funded activities ? we also provide information on the nature and scope of the gang problem in the united states ( see app . i ) ; federal statutes , including federal racketeering statutes , used to prosecute gang members ( see app . ii ) ; and factors to consider in developing and implementing anti - gang approaches ( see app . iii ) . to examine the roles of doj and dhs agencies in gang enforcement efforts and the extent to which their efforts are coordinated with other federal , state , and local partners , we reviewed federal strategies and plans to combat gang crime and interviewed headquarters doj , dhs , and component agency officials involved in gang crime enforcement activities . we reviewed doj's , dhs's , and components' strategic plans including goals and objectives for efforts to combat gang crime . we compared doj and dhs coordination and information sharing efforts to criteria in our prior work on effective interagency collaboration and results - oriented government . we also examined staffing levels and budgets for doj agencies and ice . using semi - structured interview instruments , we interviewed the u.s. attorney or designated staff of u.s . attorneys offices ( usao ) and supervisory agents of doj and dhs law enforcement agencies involved in investigating and prosecuting gang members in 15 localities across the country . we also reviewed anti - gang strategies and other documentation of enforcement efforts to reduce criminal gang activity in these localities . the localities we visited were atlanta , ga. baltimore , md . brooklyn , n.y. ; chicago , il . cleveland , ohio ; dallas , tex . ; durham , n.c. ; los angeles , calif. ; manhattan , n.y. ; milwaukee , wisc . ; newark , n.j. ; pittsburgh , pa. ; raleigh , n.c. ; richmond , va. ; and tampa , fla. we selected these localities based on a mix of criteria that included population size , geographic location , violent crime rates , and receipt of federal grants to address gang - related crime problems .