for these 31 cities . we then re - ran the risk formula using these revised ncipp level 2 infrastructure counts , while holding all other data inputs constant , which resulted in a change to the relative risk score rankings for 5 of the top 31 cities . we also performed additional statistical analysis of the fema risk formula and data that showed uasi grant allocations are strongly associated with a city's current risk score , even when accounting for the influence of the previous year's grant allocations . based on our prior work with the fema uasi grant risk formula and interviews with fema officials about its data sources and quality assurance procedures , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . last , we met with iasd officials to discuss actions they have taken to identify the impact of changes , if any , on users of the list , and compared these actions with applicable criteria in the nipp and standards for internal control in the federal government to determine if they were consistent . regarding our second objective — to determine the extent to which dhs worked with states and ssas to develop the ncipp list — we reviewed relevant provisions of the 9 / 11 commission act and the guidelines dhs issued to state homeland security advisers and ssas to solicit nominations of high - priority infrastructure for inclusion on the ncipp list . we also conducted interviews with officials from 10 ssas and 15 state homeland security offices to obtain federal and state perspectives on dhs's change to consequence - based criteria and coordination of the ncipp program , as well as their views on nominating to and using the list . the ssa officials we interviewed represented the 8 sectors selected during our analysis for the first objective . specifically , dhs was the ssa for 4 of the sectors — the chemical , dams , government facilities , and transportation systems sectors . the departments of energy , defense , and the treasury were the ssas for 3 sectors — the energy , defense industrial base , and banking and finance sectors , respectively . two ssas , the department of agriculture and the food and drug administration , share responsibility for the agriculture and food sector . the state homeland security officials we interviewed represented 15 states — california , georgia , illinois , hawaii , oklahoma , maine , mississippi , nevada , new jersey , new york , texas , virginia , washington , west virginia , and wisconsin . we selected these states because they contained a range in the number of assets on the ncipp the list and represented at least 1 state from each of 9 psa regions.sector and state interviews are not generalizable to the universe of infrastructure sectors and states contributing to the ncipp list . however , our selection combined with dhs policy guidance , further informed us about dhs efforts to manage the ncipp program across a spectrum of states and partners nationwide .