obligations and a mix of products and services contracts . we analyzed justifications and other documents agencies used to seek approval to limit competition on the selected contracts to identify agencies' rationale for using the urgency exception and determined whether they met far requirements . we conducted legal research , analyzed dod , state , and usaid policies and guidance , and interviewed officials on use of the urgency exception . we compared agencies' policies and procedures with the standards for internal control in the federal government which calls for documenting transactions to provide evidence of implementation . to determine the extent to which agencies complied with the far requirement to limit the contract period and obtained competition , we performed an in depth review of contract files for 34 selected contracts that we identified from our sample of 62 contracts were awarded using the unusual and compelling urgency exception . in addition , we spoke with officials from the office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) in the office of management and budget ( omb ) — which has responsibility for federal procurement policy — about agencies' approaches to implement the far requirement to limit the period of performance for contracts awarded under the urgency exception . we compared agencies' approaches to implement the far requirement to limit the period of performance with standards for internal control in the federal government which calls for organizations to maintain proper controls to ensure transparency and accountability for stewardship of resources . in its written response , usaid concurred with the recommendations , and outlined steps it will take in response to them , including assessing and updating current guidance , policy and training components . in an email response , omb agreed that there is a need for clarification regarding the use of exceptional circumstance determinations when contracts awarded using the urgency exception exceed 1 year . these officials further noted that they intend to work with the far council , which updates the far , to discuss the issues raised in the report about the current far language and the best way to address those issues . we are sending copies of this report to the director of omb , the secretaries of defense and state , and the administrator of the u.s. agency for international development , and interested congressional committees . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or martinb@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix vii .