marshals service . officials stated that the joint munitions command and army deputy chief of staff for logistics ( g - 4 ) used informal methods to communicate with other government agencies on available excess ammunition . recognizing that there are benefits to such transfers , the office of the executive director for conventional ammunition , in its fiscal year 2014 cross - leveling end of year report , included remarks indicating efforts should be made to include other government agencies in the cross - leveling process . communicating with other government agencies on available excess ammunition could help reduce the cad stockpile . section 346 of ike skelton national defense authorization act , as amended , requires , among other things , that serviceable small arms ammunition and ammunition components in excess of military needs not be demilitarized , destroyed , or disposed of unless in excess of commercial demands or certified as unserviceable or unsafe by the secretary of defense . before offering the excess serviceable small arms ammunition for commercial sale , however , this provision outlines a preference that dod offer the small arms ammunition and ammunition components for purchase or transfer to other federal government agencies and departments , or for sale to state and local law enforcement , firefighting , homeland security , and emergency management agencies as permitted by law . according to officials , dod does not have a formal process for offering the excess small arms ammunition and components to other government agencies . this manual references 10 u.s.c . § 2576a , under which dod is permitted to transfer ( sell or donate ) ammunition to federal or state agencies where the secretary of defense determines that the ammunition is “ ( a ) suitable for use by the agencies in law enforcement activities , including counter - drug and counter - terrorism activities ; and ( b ) excess to the needs of the department of defense.” the ammunition must also be part of the existing stock of dod , accepted by the recipient agency on an as - is , where - is basis , transferred without the expenditure of any funds available to dod for the procurement of defense equipment , and transferred such that all costs incurred subsequent to the transfer of the property are borne or reimbursed by the recipient agency . finally , there is a stated preference for those applications indicating that the transferred property will be used in counter - drug or counter - terrorism activities of the recipient agency . training and qualification requirements . however , due to budget constraints the department of homeland security reduced the number of training classes . if dod guidance outlining a systematic process to share information on excess ammunition had been in place , the department of homeland security could have possibly been aware of and obtained selected ammunition needed for training classes . standards for internal control in the federal government states that management should ensure there are adequate means of communicating with , and obtaining information from , external stakeholders that may have a significant impact on the agency achieving its goals .