damage was widespread . for example , the red cross estimated that nearly 525,000 people were displaced as a result of hurricane katrina and approximately 90,000 square miles were affected . in some places , entire communities were obliterated . homes were declared uninhabitable , and streets , bridges , and other landmarks were destroyed . for the 2010 census , locating housing units and the people who reside in them will be critical to accurate population counts of places hit by the hurricanes , especially since it is estimated that hundreds of thousands of people have — either temporarily or permanently — migrated to other areas of the country . the bureau anticipates that by 2009 , residents will have decided whether to return to the region . however , bureau officials have not provided information regarding the basis of this conclusion . given the magnitude of the area , population , and infrastructure affected , it would be prudent for the bureau to begin assessing whether new procedures will be necessary , determining whether additional resources may be needed , and identifying whether local partners will be available to assist the bureau in its effort to update address and map data , as well as other census - taking activities . without having done a resource analysis , the bureau remains uncertain about whether additional funds will be needed to help locate and count residents affected by the hurricanes . in summary , the 2010 census is an expensive but vitally important undertaking , the success of which is needed to meet the information requirements of policymakers at all levels of government , as well as business interests , and academic researchers . the bureau responded to concerns about the accuracy , completeness , and cost - effectiveness of the 2000 census by reengineering the heretofore paper - based processes used in all previous censuses . at the same time , the projected life - cycle cost of $11.3 billion makes the next decennial census the most expensive in our history , and many factors can cause the 2010 census to be more expensive . it is important to consider that some factors that may increase the costs of the census — such as counting more people than ever who do not speak english or who live in alternative , hard - to - find housing — are inherent in the characteristics of the population that needs to be counted . largely , demographically related cost factors will continue to exist , regardless of actions taken by the bureau , and must be treated as givens by bureau planners . still , other factors that can cause cost increases can and should be mitigated . while needed , the reengineering introduced by the bureau presents new challenges and increased risks . the bureau needs to ensure that its new mcds work as designed , and that contractors perform according to requirements , on schedule , and at cost . moreover , the bureau still needs to fully resolve preexisting issues related to the accuracy and completeness of the address list . overall , we have long recognized that redesigning massive enterprises entail risks and uncertainties .