providers . in february 2017 , vha central office identified 320 outliers out of 8,351 providers at 94 vha medical facilities based on the relatively high proportion of their patients who were prescribed opioids . vha central office directed the vha medical facilities associated with these outlier providers to review their prescribing rates in the context of their clinical practice , and to report back with any feedback given or actions taken . according to officials from the five facilities in our review , outlier providers tended to be surgeons , pain management specialists , or physical rehabilitation providers who might be expected to prescribe opioids at a higher - than - average rate due to the nature of their specialty and the types of patients they treat . according to a vha central office progress report , the facilities provided feedback and follow - up actions for 319 out of 320 outlier providers . in may 2017 , vha identified a second round of 303 outliers out of 8,505 providers ; 187 of these providers were previously identified as outliers in february 2017 . according to one vha central office official , as of september 2017 , vha was reviewing these outlier data and will evaluate whether vha facilities will be asked to conduct further reviews of these prescribers . educating providers through academic detailing . to help change the prescribing patterns of providers , vha has also implemented a system - wide academic detailing program to educate providers and improve the delivery of evidence - based health care at facilities . in 2015 , vha required each visn to establish such a program to improve performance on all osi metrics . according to vha central office officials , academic detailers are responsible for reviewing facility - level data on the prescribing patterns of providers and identifying potential areas of improvement . detailers can educate providers with higher - than - average prescribing rates — such as those outliers identified in february and may 2017 by vha central office — to help ensure providers are delivering safe and effective care for pain . according to vha , as of january 2018 , academic detailers have conducted over 20,000 opioid - related visits to vha providers . according to vha officials , their data also show that academic detailing results in greater patient safety for veterans taking opioids . for example , compared with those who did not receive academic detailing visits , providers who did receive such visits experienced ( 1 ) greater reductions in the proportion of their patients on high - dose opioids , ( 2 ) reductions in their patients' average morphine milligram equivalent daily dosage , and ( 3 ) increases in their naloxone prescribing rates . based on our analysis of vha information , we found evidence suggesting that the agency has accomplished six of the nine 2014 osi goals . for example , the agency has seen increases in the use of urine drug screening for veterans on long - term opioid therapy , and it has developed provider tools to identify veterans at a higher risk for adverse events while using opioids .