ib . criteria for excluding programs 1 . exclude programs that exclusively provide services to post - 9 / 11 active - duty servicemembers who are transitioning to va or civilian employment or civilian life ( these programs are included in objective 2 ) . specific definition of terms for objective 2 ii . definition: dod , military services , or va programs or activities whose primary focus is to help post - 9 / 11 servicemembers transition or veterans or deactivated members of the reserve components readjust to civilian life , including their spouses or dependents . specific definitions for this objective: iia . primary focus: key reasons for which the program or activity was designed or created ( or one of its main missions or objectives ) as stated in the agency's description of the program or activity . iib . help: assist transition or readjustment through services and efforts , such as: providing physical and mental health services ; counseling and outreach ; training , job placement and support , employment benefits , and career guidance , education benefits ; campaigns designed to raise awareness of dod or va resources available to post - 9 / 11 servicemembers or veterans or their spouses or dependents ; providing technology like assistive technology , equipment ; case management , legal support ; housing benefits / support ; and , support for family or caregivers , benefits counseling , or other related efforts . iic . civilian life: time after separating from the military , including va care , services , or benefits ; nonmilitary employment ; or higher education . iid . criteria for excluding programs 1 . exclude programs that provide services to post - 9 / 11 servicemembers who remain in the military or transition back to active - duty . ( these types of programs are covered in objective 1. ) exclude programs to enhance overall coordination between dod and va ( eg , joint executive council ) . specific definition of terms for objective 3 iii . definition: dod , military services , or va programs whose primary focus is to raise civilian public awareness of the combat experiences of post - 9 / 11 active - duty servicemembers and the readjustment experiences of veterans . specific definitions for this objective: iiia . primary focus: key reasons for which the program or activity was designed or created ( or one of its main missions or objectives ) as stated in the agency's description of the program or activity . iiib . raise public awareness and understanding 1 . welcome home and reintegration events in communities and college campuses as well as parades and appreciation events aimed at informing the nonservicemember population . awareness and appreciation campaigns and events as well as public service announcements aimed at civilians , and efforts to educate business leaders about the skills veterans can provide employers , and other related efforts . iiic . criteria for excluding programs 1 . excludes programs and public awareness campaigns aimed specifically at providing assistance , service , or awareness to servicemembers , veterans or their families . ( these types of programs are covered in objective 2. )