ii. ) while ustr conducted a workforce analysis required by omb of all executive branch agencies in mid - 2001 , which incorporated many of these elements , it has not followed up on this analysis in a systematic , ongoing manner , or used it as the basis for strategic workforce planning . in addition , ustr management does not maintain the kind of up - to - date information on available staff and future human capital needs that would be necessary in conducting effective strategic workforce planning . ustr's personnel data files are maintained in eop's office of administration ; ustr itself maintains little human capital data . ustr's office of administration did not have the internal human capital information available that would be required for workforce analyses . for instance , it did not have a personnel roster associated with information such as employees' retirement eligibility or their specific knowledge and skills , such as language ability . ustr officials said that ustr is such a small organization that managers know the professional and skill backgrounds of the staff , therefore such a data system would not be needed . this means that , rather than establishing information systems , institutional knowledge at ustr depends on individuals . however , as we have previously reported , it is crucial that human capital leadership and planning be based on a data - driven decision - making process . the absence of such data can seriously undermine efforts to identify and respond to current and emerging human capital challenges , particularly in a small organization where turnover or unfilled positions could quickly deplete the institutional memory . ustr does not make full use of available human capital tools , despite facing recruitment and retention challenges ; and it does not link most employees' performance standards with organizational needs . while ustr can generally recruit staff with requisite skills , competitive pressures and postemployment restrictions on foreign representation could place limitations on ustr's ability to hire from the private sector . more use of available human capital flexibilities could help to better ensure consistent success in recruitment and retention . in addition , ustr risks inconsistent attainment of its strategic goals if it does not link individual performance expectations to its needs . ustr faces risks from recruitment and retention challenges , which in turn could hamper its interagency leadership role . ustr addresses these risks in part through limited use of human capital flexibilities , and ustr office managers said they do not have difficulties recruiting needed staff . however , senior managers said that the recruitment environment for staff with critical skills needed for ustr's interagency leadership role , such as trade attorneys , is becoming more competitive . not only can people with these skills find higher - paying positions outside the federal government , they also face restrictions on representing foreign clients after service with ustr , according to senior managers . ustr often seeks interagency trade experts for recruitment , according to ustr and other trade agency management . other trade agency officials have confirmed that ustr targets their high - performing staff and that several current ustr employees were hired from their agencies .