desk reviews . cms conducts these off - site reviews on specific aspects of states' program integrity activities , such as a state's progress toward implementing corrective action plans in response to perm findings and payments made to providers terminated from medicaid . officials from all seven selected states told us they faced challenges building the capacity and establishing the administrative processes needed to implement the new and expanded provider screening and enrollment requirements under ppaca and the 21st century cures act . these challenges included establishing procedures for risk - based screenings , using federal databases and collecting information from providers , and screening and enrolling an increased volume of providers . due , in part , to these challenges , officials from five selected states told us they have not yet implemented some of the requirements . officials from all seven selected states described challenges building their capacity to conduct risk - based provider screenings prior to enrollment into their medicaid programs . to incorporate database checks , site visits , fingerprint - based background checks , and other risk - based screening activities into state screening procedures ; state medicaid officials said they needed financial resources , leadership support , and time . specifically , officials from the selected states told us they used one of the following three approaches to build capacity to implement the screening and enrollment requirements . developing new information technology systems . officials from two of the seven selected states told us they developed new state information technology systems that automated screening and enrollment activities . for example , officials from one state told us they spent $5.9 million from 2015 through 2018 to develop a new provider screening and enrollment system that included an online provider application portal and automated screening activities , such as conducting database checks and flagging high - risk providers for site visits and fingerprint - based background checks . according to state officials , this new system helped the state implement provider screening and enrollment requirements , yielding efficiencies by allowing staff to focus on analyzing provider screening results rather than clarifying data entry errors and manually checking each database . ( see fig . contracting with vendors . officials from four other selected states told us they initiated or modified existing contracts with vendors to screen new provider applications and conduct revalidations on their behalf . for example , officials from one state told us their contract with a vendor resulted in screening and enrolling about 10,000 providers in 2018 , more than five times the number the state had processed in the previous year . another state used a vendor to revalidate more than 9,000 providers in 2016 ; about 12 percent of the state's enrolled provider population . modifying existing procedures . officials from our seventh selected state told us that they modified their existing state information technology system and procedures to manually screen and enroll providers . however , according to state officials , this approach has put pressure on their resources . officials said that they were working to automate some database checks as much as possible without requiring services from a contractor .