ii ) . the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , in the department of homeland security , is responsible for coordinating federal response and recovery efforts under presidential disaster declarations . fema works with other federal , state , and local agencies to assist individuals after major disasters , and volunteer organizations , such as the american red cross , also participate in these efforts.disaster recovery centers where individuals can meet with representatives from federal agencies , including fsa and sba ; obtain information about the recovery process ; and register for federal disaster assistance . in addition to crop insurance and nap , which are purchased before a disaster , fsa provides eight disaster assistance programs that become available to producers after a natural disaster . title xv of the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( the 2008 farm bill ) established five disaster assistance programs that provide assistance to agricultural producers who suffer crop and livestock losses incurred as a result of a disaster , adverse weather , or other environmental condition that occurred on or before september 30 , 2011 . agricultural producers may apply for this assistance following a natural disaster . usda's fsa administers these programs and funds them through the agricultural disaster relief trust fund providing approximately $3.6 billion in assistance through the end of calendar year 2011 to agricultural producers of all sizes . the five programs are the following: the supplemental revenue assistance payments program ( sure ) provides cash assistance for agricultural producers with crop production losses or crop quality losses . the tree assistance program ( tap ) provides partial cost reimbursements to orchard and nursery producers for replanting or rehabilitating lost or damaged trees , bushes , or vines . the livestock indemnity program provides cash assistance to producers for livestock deaths . the livestock forage disaster program provides cash assistance to livestock producers when their livestock are prevented from grazing due to drought or fire on federally managed land . the emergency assistance for livestock , honeybees , and farm - raised fish program ( elap ) provides cash assistance to eligible producers who have losses that are not covered under the other 2008 farm bill programs due to adverse weather and disease , among other things . fsa also administers three other disaster assistance programs that producers can apply for following a disaster . these programs are generally funded through annual appropriations and are as follows: the emergency forest restoration program , which also was created in the 2008 farm bill , provides payments to eligible owners of nonindustrial private forestland to carry out emergency measures to restore land damaged by a natural disaster . this program was implemented in 2010 to cover disasters starting in january 2010 . it has provided $2 million from fiscal years 2010 through 2011 . the emergency conservation program provides funding and technical assistance for farmers and ranchers who carry out emergency measures to rehabilitate farmland damaged by natural disasters and for carrying out emergency water conservation measures in periods of severe drought . this program provided $345 million from fiscal years 2008 through 2011 . the emergency loan program helps agricultural producers recover from production and physical losses .