( recommendation 3 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dod for review and comment . in its written comments , dod concurred with our three recommendations and noted planned actions to address them . dod's comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix ii . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the under secretary for personnel and readiness , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff ; the secretaries of the army , the navy and the air force ; and the commandant of the marine corps . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-5431 , or russellc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and of public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . the objectives of our review were to examine the extent to which ( 1 ) department of defense ( dod ) has used the global response force ( grf ) and assessed any risks associated with its use ; and ( 2 ) grf - assigned units are trained to meet grf missions , both individually and as a joint force . for our objective of determining the extent to which dod has used the grf and assessed any risks associated with its use , we reviewed the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff grf execute order ( exord ) to identify the grf's overall uses and the global mission scenarios it is intended to meet , as well as the operational requirements and forces assigned to meet the requirements . we also interviewed the responsible dod officials to understand how dod selects , designates , and validates forces on the grf , and the processes for making changes to the grf exord , as well as how dod decides when to use grf forces for either of the two intended uses of the grf . also , we reviewed standards for internal control in the federal government to identify relevant internal controls — specifically , that management should assess risks related to achieving defined objectives , analyze the identified risks to estimate their significance , define tolerances for levels of risk assumed , and design responses such that risks are within the defined risk tolerance — and compare them with dod's risk assessment efforts for the grf . also , we reviewed the joint staff's grf deployment information from 2010 to 2017 to understand the frequency of grf deployments and identify specific instances in which the grf's ability to accomplish its missions was affected — specifically , instances in which grf capabilities were unavailable for use during a grf operation .