such legislation has not been enacted . as we reported in january 2019 , ftc is primarily a law enforcement agency with authority to , among other things , address consumer concerns about internet privacy , both for internet service providers and content providers . it does so using its general authority under section 5 of the ftc act , which prohibits “unfair or deceptive acts or practices in or affecting commerce.” even though the ftc act does not speak in explicit terms about protecting consumer privacy , the act authorizes such protection to the extent it involves practices ftc defines as unfair or deceptive . according to ftc , an act or practice is “unfair” if it causes , or is likely to cause , substantial injury not reasonably avoidable by consumers and not outweighed by countervailing benefits to consumers or competition as a result of the practice . ftc has used this “unfairness” authority to address situations where a company has allegedly failed to properly protect consumers' data , for example . according to ftc , a representation or omission is “deceptive” if it is material and is likely to mislead consumers acting reasonably under the circumstances . ftc has applied this “deceptiveness” authority to address deceptions related to violations of written privacy policies and representations concerning data security , for example . ftc staff investigate internet privacy complaints from various sources and also initiate investigations on their own . if ftc staff have reason to believe that an entity is engaging in an unfair or deceptive practice , they may forward an enforcement recommendation to the commission . the commission then determines whether to pursue an enforcement action . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have at this time . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact alicia puente cackley at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or cackleya@gao.gov or mark goldstein at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or goldsteinm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include andrew huddleston , assistant director ; kay kuhlman , assistant director ; bob homan , analyst - in - charge ; melissa bodeau ; john de ferrari ; camilo flores ; nick marinos , and sean standley . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . apa section 553 establishes procedures and requirements for what is known as “informal” rulemaking , also known as notice - and - comment rulemaking . among other things , section 553 generally requires agencies to publish a notice of proposed rulemaking in the federal register . after giving interested persons an opportunity to comment on the proposal by providing “data , views , or arguments,” the statute then requires the agency to publish the final rule in the federal register .