part 4 . we analyzed nors data for wireless outages to determine the total number and the causes of wireless outages that occurred from 2009 through 2016 . fcc provides carriers a list of 19 main categories from which a carrier selects a root cause , direct cause , and contributing factor ( s ) for an outage . we examined the root cause and direct cause for each wireless outage reported to fcc . we collapsed several of the fcc categories to create 9 categories for ease of presentation . table 5 shows the crosswalk between the 19 fcc categories and our 9 collapsed categories . we also analyzed the data to identify the share of all wireless outages attributed to a physical incident — that is , a natural disaster ( eg , flooding , earthquake , wildfire ) ; accident ( eg , backhoe cut ) ; or manmade event ( eg , theft , malicious act ) . fcc provides carriers a list of categories from which they select a root cause , direct cause , and contributing factor ( s ) for an outage . using these fcc categories , we created three new categories for natural disasters , accidents , and manmade events ( see table 6 ) . we based these three new categories on the description and categorization of physical risks in fcc and dhs reports , including the communications sector - specific plan . to understand the distribution of causes across all wireless outages in our time frame , we focused primarily on the root cause for each wireless outage . however , we also examined the root and direct cause reported for each outage to better understand the multiple factors that may have led to an outage and to understand wireless network dependencies ( eg , power , backhaul ) . finally , we examined the number of outages , by month and by year , for which a wireless carrier reported a physical event as the root cause , direct cause , or contributing factor to better understand the total number of outages related to a physical incident during our time period . we also analyzed other characteristics of wireless outages such as location , duration , and whether the failure occurred in another company's network . to examine location , we focused on three nors fields — city , state , and description of location — to identify a city ( ies ) and state for each outage , and then we determined the latitude and longitude for each outage . we also examined nors data in conjunction with two other data sets . first , data on events for which fcc activated its disaster information reporting system ( dirs ) or “dirs - lite” to understand any correlation between wireless outages and major physical incidents . second , data from ctia's annual wireless survey on the number of wireless subscribers and other measures of wireless networks' size to understand any correlation between wireless outages and the size of the wireless industry . to assess the reliability of nors data , we reviewed fcc's data glossary and other fcc documentation on the nors data system and data elements .