v ) . dot as well as doc and fmc provided technical comments , which we have incorporated into the report where appropriate . usda did not have any comments on the draft report . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of the department of transportation , department of commerce , federal maritime commission , department of agriculture , and interested congressional requesters . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or flemings@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . , does the appropriate terminal or inland have capacity such as on - dock rail to handle additional volumes ? ) this report addresses the following objectives: ( 1 ) how recent changes in global shipping have impacted the movement of cargo at major u.s. west coast ports and how these ports and their stakeholders have responded ; ( 2 ) how selected shippers have been impacted by and responded to disruptions at west coast ports during 2014-2015 as well as other recent or potential disruptions ; and ( 3 ) how the department of transportation's ( dot ) current freight - related efforts support cargo movement through ports and whether these effort can be improved . to understand how global shipping changes have affected ports , we conducted three in - depth case studies of the largest port complexes on the west coast ports — los angeles - long beach , oakland , and seattle - tacoma , which were selected based on their total trade value ( imports and exports ) . for example , at the port of seattle in 2013 , after a shift in an alliance , a major ocean carrier directed its vessels to call on a different terminal , moving from a larger terminal to a smaller one , and increasing congestion within that terminal . additionally , marine terminal operators may abruptly end operations at a port , even when they have a long - term contract , if the operators are not able to attract sufficient cargo volumes to sustain profitability . this situation happened in oakland in 2016 , when a terminal operator filed for bankruptcy 6 years into a 50-year lease — publicly citing that it was choosing to concentrate its resources at its other terminals , including those at the port complexes of los angeles - long beach and seattle - tacoma . some state and local government officials from our case studies of port complexes said that information on port performance and supply chains would be helpful to help target operational and infrastructure efforts . for example , local officials in seattle indicated they have some information on truck counts , but lacked information about cargo loads ( eg , number of empty trucks versus trucks carrying heavy hauls ) and their interim and final destinations .