gao - 03-826t . washington , d.c.: may 28 , 2003 . nrc disagreed with some of our findings . in september 2003 , we reported that nrc's oversight of security at commercial nuclear power plants needed to be strengthened . the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks intensified the nation's focus on national preparedness and homeland security . among possible terrorist targets are the nation's nuclear power plants which contain radioactive fuel and waste . nrc oversees plant security through an inspection program designed to verify the plants' compliance with security requirements . as part of that program , nrc conducted annual security inspections of plants and force - on - force exercises to test plant security against a simulated terrorist attack . gao was asked to review ( 1 ) the effectiveness of nrc's security inspection program and ( 2 ) legal challenges affecting power plant security . at the time of our review , nrc was reevaluating its inspection program . we did not assess the adequacy of security at the individual plants ; rather , our focus was on nrc's oversight and regulation of plant security . we found that nrc had taken numerous actions to respond to the heightened risk of terrorist attack , including interacting with the department of homeland security and issuing orders designed to increase security and improve defensive barriers at plants . however , three aspects of nrc's security inspection program reduced the agency's effectiveness in overseeing security at commercial nuclear power plants . first , nrc inspectors often used a process that minimized the significance of security problems found in annual inspections by classifying them as “non - cited violations” if the problem had not been identified frequently in the past or if the problem had no direct , immediate , adverse consequences at the time it was identified . non - cited violations do not require a written response from the licensee and do not require nrc inspectors to verify that the problem has been corrected . for example , guards at one plant failed to physically search several individuals for metal objects after a walk - through detector and a hand - held scanner detected metal objects in their clothing . these individuals were then allowed unescorted access throughout the plant's protected area . by extensively using non - cited violations for serious problems , nrc may overstate the level of security at a power plant and reduce the likelihood that needed improvements are made . second , nrc did not have a routine , centralized process for collecting , analyzing , and disseminating security inspections data to identify problems that may be common to plants or to provide lessons learned in resolving security problems . such a mechanism may help plants improve their security . third , although nrc's force - on - force exercises can demonstrate how well a nuclear plant might defend against a real - life threat , several weaknesses in how nrc conducted these exercises limited their usefulness .