program is now being phased out . to provide financial assistance for the acquisition , construction , and improvement of public waste facilities . program is now being phased out . to assist local governments and tribes with the planning , design , acquisition , construction , and improvement of water pollution control facilities and related activities . program will continue until 2021 . to provide for the planning , design , acquisition , construction , and improvement of public waste disposal and management facilities . iii. ) we converted the annual amounts reported by the federal agencies and the states to constant year 2000 dollars . we are also collecting data from publicly and privately owned water utilities about their capital investment programs , which we will include in a subsequent report to you . drinking water infrastructure includes treatment and storage facilities and distribution systems ( pipes and conduits ) , while wastewater infrastructure includes sewage collection systems and treatment works . according to epa officials , there are some 2 million miles of pipe in drinking water systems alone . while estimates vary , the amount needed for future capital investments in water and wastewater infrastructure appears large . according to epa's most recent survey of drinking water systems , conducted in 1999 , the needs are $150.9 billion over 20 years . a 1996 report on a similar epa survey of wastewater systems identified needs of $128 billion over 20 years , and a subsequent analysis by epa estimated an additional $56 billion to $87 billion to correct existing sanitary sewer overflow problems . the water infrastructure network — a consortium of industry , municipal , and nonprofit associations — recently estimated needs of up to $1 trillion over the next 20 years for drinking water and wastewater systems combined , when both the capital investment needs and the cost of financing are considered . no description given . industrial development grant drinking water systems emergency loan fund ( dwself ) to make emergency loans to eligible applicants: ( 1 ) to make necessary repairs to existing drinking water systems to meet the emergency ; ( 2 ) to complete construction needed to provide a permanent correction to the problems that caused the emergency ; ( 3 ) to cover reasonable administration costs of the dwsrf program and / or the federal dwsrf program , and conducting activities under the local governments and rural water systems improvements revolving loan program act ; and ( 4 ) to earn interest on fund accounts . to help counties or cities finance small infrastructure projects to promote economic growth . to provide low - interest loans to counties and municipalities for capital improvements , such as water , sewer , and access roads . to make loans to eligible applicants for emergency projects for the purpose of making necessary repairs to existing water pollution control systems to meet the emergency . to offer low - interest loans to counties or incorporated cities to finance improvements necessary to implement private company investments . to provide funding for the planning , design , and construction of renewable resource projects .