this concludes our testimony . we are pleased to answer any questions you might have . for further information on this testimony , please contact mark goldstein at 202-512-2834 or by email goldsteinm@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include tida barakat , jonathan carver , tammy conquest , bess eisenstadt , daniel hoy , susan michal - smith , and lacy vong . fps concurred with our recommendation . fps's contract guards are the most visible component of fps's operations as well as the public's first contact with fps when entering a federal facility . moreover , fps relies heavily on its guards and considers them to be the agency's “eyes and ears” while performing their duties . however , as we testified at a july 2009 congressional hearing , fps does not fully ensure that its guards have the training and certifications required to be deployed to a federal facility . while fps requires that all prospective guards complete approximately 128 hours of training , including 8 hours of x - ray and magnetometer training , fps was not providing some of its guards with all of the required training in the six regions we visited . we reviewed training and certification data for 663 randomly selected guards in 6 of fps's 11 regions maintained either in certs , which is the agency's primary system for tracking guard training and certifications , databases maintained by some regions , or contractor information . we found that 62 percent , or 411 of the 663 guards who were deployed to a federal facility had at least one expired certification , including for example , firearms qualification , background investigation , domestic violence declaration , or cpr / first aid training certification . during the test , the magnetometer detected the knife , as did the hand wand , but the guard failed to locate the knife and the fps officer was able to gain access to the facility . according to the fps officer , the guards who failed the test had not been provided the required x - ray and magnetometer training . upon further investigation , only two of the eleven guards at the facility had the required x - ray and magnetometer training . however , fps personnel in its mobile command vehicle stated that the 11 guards had all the proper certifications and training to stand post . it was unclear at the time , and in the after action report , whether untrained guards were allowed to continue operating the x - ray and magnetometer machines at the facilities or if fps's lesos stood post until properly trained guards arrived on site . while fps has taken some actions to improve its ability to better protect federal facilities , it is difficult to determine the extent to which these actions address these challenges because most of them occurred recently and have not been fully implemented . it is also important to note that most of the actions fps has recently taken focus on improving oversight of the contract guard program and do not address the need to develop a risk management framework and a human capital plan . in response to our covert testing , fps has taken a number of actions .