market ) .details . we collected plan information on providers' public websites and validated it with each provider . in the second step , an analyst coded each transcript and then a second analyst verified those codes . any coding discrepancies were resolved by both analysts agreeing on what the codes should be . methodologically , focus groups are not designed to ( 1 ) demonstrate the extent of a problem or to generalize results to a larger population , ( 2 ) develop a consensus to arrive at an agreed - upon plan or make decisions about what actions to take , or ( 3 ) provide statistically representative samples or reliable quantitative estimates . instead , focus groups are intended to generate in - depth information about the reasons for the focus group participants' attitudes on specific topics and to offer insights into their concerns about and support for an issue . the projectability of the information produced by our focus groups is limited for several reasons . first , the information includes only the discussions from the internet consumers in the eight groups . second , while the composition of the groups was designed to ensure a range of age and education levels , the groups were not randomly sampled . third , participants were asked questions about their experiences or opinions , and other internet consumers not in the focus groups may have had other experiences or opinions . in order to review the potential effects of ubp on consumers , we completed a literature search to obtain and review documentation , research papers and studies , and articles related to the use of ubp and its potential effects . our search looked for relevant work , including economic literature , articles in scholarly journals , and industry publications , published in the past 5 years and used search terms including “data cap,” “throttling,” and “usage - based pricing.” we reviewed these papers and their methodologies to determine their reliability . we interviewed the 4 mobile and 13 fixed providers mentioned above regarding the potential effects of ubp on consumers . we also interviewed fcc as well as industry stakeholders including academics and researchers , public interest organizations , industry associations , and others . we determined industry stakeholders to interview based on our review of published literature and studies , as well as based on recommendations from providers and other organizations we interviewed . we conducted this performance audit from november 2013 to november 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . mark l. goldstein , ( 202 ) 512-2834 or goldsteinm@gao.gov . two public interest organizations claimed that because the marginal costs of data delivery are very low and falling , heavier users impose few additional costs to providers than lighter users do . according to fcc , however , prices set on marginal costs would generally not allow providers to recover their costs .