determining parentage . before july 10 , 2018 , to determine parentage for children ages 0 to 4 , hhs officials said they initially used dna swab testing instead of requiring documentation , such as birth certificates , stating that dna swab testing was a prompt and efficient method for determining biological parentage in a significant number of cases . on july 10 , 2018 , the court approved the use of dna testing “only when necessary to verify a legitimate , good - faith concern about parentage or to meet a reunification deadline.” hhs officials told us that at that point , to determine parentage , orr relied on the determinations made by dhs when the family was separated and information orr shelter staff had already collected through assessments of the children in their care . unless there were specific doubts about the relationship , orr did not collect additional information to confirm parentage , according to hhs officials . determining fitness and danger . to reunify class members , hhs also followed the procedures approved by the court on july 10 , 2018 for determining whether a parent is fit and whether a parent presents a danger to the child . hhs used the fingerprints and criminal background check of the parent conducted by dhs when the individual was first taken into dhs custody rather than requiring the parent and other adults living in the household to submit fingerprints to orr , as potential sponsors were typically required to do for unaccompanied children . according to hhs officials , orr personnel also reviewed each child's case file for any indication of a safety concern , such as allegations of abuse by the child . hhs did not require fingerprints of other adults living in the household where the parent and child will live . hhs also did not require parents to complete an orr family reunification application as potential sponsors are typically required to do for unaccompanied children . the specific procedures for physical reunification varied depending on whether the parents were inside or outside of ice custody . dhs and hhs took steps to coordinate their efforts to reunify children with parents who were in ice custody , but experienced challenges . generally , for parents in ice custody , dhs transported parents to a detention facility close to their child and hhs transported the child to the same facility . marshals service . in cases where parents were referred to doj for criminal proceedings and separated from their children , dhs and hhs officials stated they treated those children as uac . in such cases , dhs transferred these children to the custody of hhs's office of refugee resettlement ( orr ) and orr placed them in one of their shelter facilities , as is the standard procedure for uac . the president's executive order issued on june 20 , 2018 , directed , among other things , that the secretary of homeland security maintain custody of alien families during any criminal improper entry or immigration proceedings involving their family members , to the extent possible . this order stated that the policy of the administration is to maintain family unity , including by detaining alien families together where appropriate .