see table 2 . hhs officials told us that they have not used this authority since 2005 . hhs officials also told us that no other bioshield contracting authorities have been used to date , although the officials noted that these authorities may be needed for use in the future . in response to bioshield requirements , hhs has established internal controls on its special reserve fund ( purchasing ) and contracting authorities , but lacks adequate documentation of the risks of using the new contracting authorities . language in the bioshield act sets up a broad framework of controls over the procurement of countermeasures , including those with special reserve funds , by requiring hhs to coordinate with dhs and obtain approval by omb before the fund may be used . in addition to the language in the act , hhs officials told us that the internal controls for procuring countermeasures using the fund are documented in a variety of internal policy and procedure documents and interagency agreements , which provide guidance on roles and responsibilities for how the controls are to be implemented . these documents include: an hhs policy document that establishes an enterprise governance board to oversee requirements and priority - setting regarding emergency medical countermeasures for the civilian population . the document also outlines the authorities , organizational structure , and guidelines for the board ; an hhs budget execution document that delineates responsibilities and describes the processes for requesting contract actions , purchases , and interagency agreements ; a barda standard operating procedure document that provides contracting and other barda officials with guidance on source selection procedures and outlines specific responsibilities in carrying out those procedures ; a barda acquisition plan which details the pre - and post - award approval processes for procurements using the fund ; an interagency agreement between hhs and dhs dated september 25 , 2006 , that outlines the terms and conditions for when the fund can be used ; and an omb circular on transferring budget authority from one agency to another . hhs has also established internal controls for the contracting authorities that were specified in the bioshield act . on october 18 , 2005 , hhs issued a memorandum that provided guidance on the use of the following contracting authorities: the increased simplified acquisition threshold and its use with the special reserve fund , the increased micropurchase threshold , and the use of personal services contracts . hhs's memo is structured around the five elements of internal control: the control environment , risk assessment , control activities , information and communications , and monitoring . federal internal control standards state that management needs to comprehensively identify risks , analyze them for possible effect , and determine how risks should be managed . federal internal control standards also state that controls need to be clearly documented , readily available for examination , and distributed in a form and time frame that permits people to perform their duties efficiently . risk assessment statements we reviewed in the memo are generally not assessments of the risks involved in using particular authorities .