( fig . 3 shows ato after the may 2008 reorganization. ) according to faa's nextgen implementation plan , under this new structure , jpdo will focus on long - term planning and cross - agency cooperation . other offices within the nextgen and operations planning office will carry out other aspects of implementing and planning for nextgen . it is too early to tell how the reorganization will affect jpdo's overall role or its ability to coordinate and act as an honest broker among the federal partners . additional information on our methodology is found in appendix i . see appendix ii for our content analysis of the stakeholder interviews . for over two decades faa has been conducting a major modernization of its atc systems but , until the last several years , has had difficulties in meeting cost , schedule , and performance targets in acquiring major systems . in 1995 , gao designated the atc modernization program as a high - risk information technology initiative because of its size , complexity , cost , and problem - plagued past . we have issued numerous reports on faa's inability to meet its acquisition performance goals . user request evaluation tool jun - 02 sep - 06 uisition program baseline . x baseline approved in june 2002 , which added asde - x capabilities to seven asde - sites . the asde - x and asde - x acuisitions were combined in the september 2005 rebaselining . in addition to the contact named above , individuals making key contributions to this report include teresa spisak ( assistant director ) , kevin egan , elizabeth eisenstadt , brandon haller , bert japikse , edmond menoche , faye morrison , colleen phillips , taylor reeves , and richard scott . undertaken human capital initiatives to improve its acquisition workforce culture and build toward a results - oriented , high - performing organization . established annual acquisition performance goals to improve oversight and accountability over acquisition processes . additionally , agency executives have met regularly with gao and omb over the past 2 years to provide updates on faa's efforts to improve its handling of atc modernization and ensure transparency about these efforts both inside and outside the agency . these meetings have included updates on the status of a corrective action plan that faa is implementing to institutionalize sound acquisition management practices and successful performance and outcomes . faa is also working to establish an internal oversight capability to validate the information that executives receive on the status of the plan . omb has seen sufficient progress in faa's efforts to address the risk associated with atc modernization that the meetings now occur semiannually , rather than quarterly . while faa has made progress in improving acquisition management practices in the 4 years since ato was created , areas remain that need further improvement . for example , in prior work we found that faa does not publicly report changes in the cost and schedule baselines for some major atc acquisitions and thus may not provide congress and the public with a complete picture of the agency's overall performance in acquiring these systems . such unreported rebaselining could make budget increases and schedule delays more difficult to identify .