jab . the jab is made up of chief information officers from the department of defense ( dod ) , dhs , and gsa . it is the primary governing and decision - making body of the program . the jab is responsible for defining and establishing fedramp baseline security controls and accreditation criteria for third - party assessment organizations . the jab is also responsible for issuing a provisional authorization to operate ( p - ato ) for cloud services it determines will be leveraged across most of the federal government . federal agencies . they are consumers and , in some cases , providers of cloud services . agencies are responsible for ensuring that cloud services which process , transmit , or store government information , use fedramp's baseline security controls before they issue subsequent authorizations for using those cloud services . cloud service providers ( csp ) . these providers include commercial firms and some federal agencies that offer cloud services to agencies . providers are required to meet the fedramp security requirements and implement the program's baseline security controls . providers work with an independent third - party assessment organization to conduct an initial system assessment , create security assessment documentation per the program's requirements , and comply with federal requirements for incident reporting , among others . third - party assessment organizations . these fedramp accredited assessors perform initial and periodic assessments of cloud providers' controls to ensure they meet the program's requirements . in addition , these assessors must be accredited through fedramp if they are assessing a cloud provider seeking a provisional authorization from the jab . for details on the roles and responsibilities of other entities involved with the program , see table 6 in appendix ii . in december 2015 , the fedramp pmo developed a security assessment framework that is to be followed by the cloud service providers ( providers ) and agencies seeking to authorize cloud services through the program . in addition to outlining roles and responsibilities , the framework provides agencies and cloud service providers with guidance on elements key to issuing authorizations for using cloud services through the program . these elements are critical to developing the information system or cloud service authorization package . authorization packages include , but are not limited to the following artifacts: a control implementation summary , the security plan , the security test plan and assessment report , and remedial actions plan . these artifacts are described in table 1 . fedramp provides agencies with two options for authorizing cloud services . the first option , called a jab authorization , involves the agency authorizing the cloud service based on a provisional authorization issued by the board . the second option , called an agency authorization , involves the agency issuing an authorization after either sponsoring a cloud service provider through fedramp , or by leveraging another agency's fedramp authorization of that cloud service provider . using either of these options , the agency is to review the authorization package for that cloud service prior to issuing its authorization .