regulations . in january 2011 , u.s . dot updated its dbe regulations to , among other things , add a requirement for state dots to analyze in detail the reasons for any difference between their state dot dbe goal and the amount of federal funds the state dot committed to spend on dbes for each fiscal year . state dots must then establish specific steps and milestones to correct the problems they identified in their analysis and to fully meet its dbe goal in the next fiscal year . these requirements went into effect in february 2011 . according to u.s . dot , the added requirement will help state dots understand , when applicable , why their dbe goals are not being met , and will increase state dots' accountability for meeting dbe goals . based on fhwa's most recent data , 54 percent of state dots did not meet their dbe goals in fiscal year 2010 and would have been subject to this requirement in fiscal year 2010 if it had been in effect . see appendix iii for further information on the number and percent of state dots meeting their dbe goals based on committed spending . national review team ( nrt ) . in response to fhwa's 2009 risk assessment , fhwa established the nrt to review six areas , including the dbe program , that posed a nationwide risk of misuse of recovery act funds . fhwa used the results of the nrt review to identify areas for improved oversight and training . for example , the nrt identified concerns about the process that some state dots were using to evaluate whether prime contractors bidding on contracts made adequate good faith efforts to meet dbe contract goals . specifically , in one of these states , the nrt found that the state dot awarded a majority of its contracts to prime contractors who did not meet the dbe contract goals , but provided documentation that they made good faith efforts to do so . while dbe regulations allow state dots to award contracts based on bidders' good faith efforts and do not limit the number of contracts that can be awarded in this way , fhwa officials explained that awarding a high number of contracts on the basis of good faith efforts might be a reason state dots do not meet their state dbe goals . dot , in 2009 , about 27,000 dbes were certified under its program . generally , organizations within each state that receive dot funds decide which organizations within the state can certify dbes . while some states have multiple organizations certifying dbes , others have one certifying organization . for example , in the five states we focused on as part of this review , four states ( florida , minnesota , missouri , and wisconsin ) have multiple organizations within the state that certify dbes , and the remaining state ( washington ) has one organization that certifies dbes for the entire state . each state is required by dbe regulations to have a unified approach to certification so that the certification decisions of one organization are honored by all the organizations receiving u.s . dot funds in the state .