the cost of these improvements has not been determined . running y marsh is a privately owned 1,674-acre farm and wetland area adjacent to caledonia marsh with the potential to store about 10,000 gross acre - feet of water if converted to lake storage . however , because of the high value crops grown there , the owner is not currently interested in selling the property to reclamation . for all of these options , while it would be relatively easy to determine the amount of additional water storage provided by measuring changes in the lake surface area , there are a number of associated uncertainties and constraints . for example , since these storage areas are essentially extensions of the lake itself , filling the additional capacity is dependent upon adequate flows into the lake — if the lake does not fill to capacity , the storage areas would not be filled to their capacity . in addition , use of the additional stored water in these areas would be constrained by the minimum lake level requirements set out by the fws biological opinion for upper klamath lake to protect the two species of sucker . as an extension of the lake , the new storage areas could not be drained below these minimum levels . finally , the environmental impacts of developing water storage areas vary and would need to be addressed by reclamation as part of the water storage development process . the development of a separate reservoir would create a long - term storage area in the klamath basin that could far surpass the capacity of the water bank as a source of flows for the river , potentially benefiting all klamath river stakeholders and protected species . evaluation of such potential water storage areas has focused on long lake valley , located southwest of upper klamath lake . developing long lake valley into a reservoir would enable water to be stored that would otherwise be spilled into the klamath river when upper klamath lake's water level exceeds the maximum lake elevation . reclamation , irrigators , and others generally agree that long lake valley is the most viable option currently available for new reservoir development . according to reclamation , converting long lake valley into a reservoir could yield up to 250,000 acre - feet of water , with a depth of 250 to 300 feet when full . thus , long lake represents “deep” water storage , which generally contains colder water — beneficial to fish — than shallow upper klamath lake can provide . reclamation indicated that the reservoir's 250,000 acre - foot capacity would be filled by pumping water from upper klamath lake to long lake between march and june , using the piping system shown in figure 8 . however , much like the upper klamath lake expansion options , the certainty of long lake's water supply depends entirely upon the availability of spill water to fill it and , according to nmfs officials , the impacts on the river of diverting these flows to a reservoir need to be studied . once filled , long lake could provide a sustainable supply of water to supplement river flows .