usda did not provide any suggested technical corrections . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of agriculture , and other interested parties . aphis recently began tracking the results of tracebacks . our review of aphis's data revealed that about 13 percent of the tracebacks in fiscal year 2009 were incomplete , and preliminary aphis data from fiscal year 2010 confirmed that incomplete tracebacks are continuing . additionally , we found that by not analyzing traceback data , the agency is not yet making full use of the new traceback information it is collecting . without analyzing this information — for example , by determining whether the same sellers or inspectors were consistently involved in late or incomplete tracebacks — aphis cannot ensure it is detecting problems in a timely manner and that tracebacks are conducted according to the agency's guidance , which would reduce the potential that lost or stolen dogs or cats could be used in research . in addition , having accurate , consistent , and reliable oversight cost data for the aphis animal care program is a key element in managing the program effectively and enforcing awa . to determine the number of class b dealers that sell random source dogs and cats for research , we reviewed aphis documents , such as prior agency annual reports , and usda and aphis information previously reported to the senate and house appropriations committees in april 2006 and to an individual member of congress in june 2009 . the use of dogs and cats in research has dropped significantly over the last 30 years . this article helped build momentum for legislation to address this concern . in a more recent example , a 2006 television documentary on an arkansas random source dog dealer vividly showed the harsh way in which this dealer treated his dogs . congress passed the animal welfare act ( awa ) in 1966 to protect animal owners from theft by preventing the use or sale of stolen animals . as amended , awa is also intended to ensure the humane treatment of all animals that are intended to be used in research facilities , kept as pets , exhibited to the public , or commercially transported , among other things . awa names the secretary of agriculture as responsible for its implementation and enforcement . that responsibility is delegated to the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) , which is responsible for the licensing and oversight of dealers who acquire and sell a variety of animals . dealers who sell random source dogs and cats — animals obtained from pounds or shelters , auction sales , or from owners who bred and raised the animal on the owner's premises — are referred to as random source class b dealers . they are a subset of class b dealers and deal in animals that they did not exclusively breed and raise themselves . some researchers maintain that the attributes of random source dogs and cats are important to biomedical research because these animals generally are more genetically diverse and older than those obtained from dealers who breed their own animals .