developing stronger partnerships . the plan emphasizes the need to build partnerships with state and local entities , improving coordination , and resolving jurisdictional issues . moreover , many recommendations incorporate consultations with states and other affected parties as part of the implementation process . for example , regarding rapid response , the plan calls for the council to develop — in consultation with the states — draft legislation , including the possibility of a permanent funding mechanism and matching grants to states to develop strong partnerships . other recommendations call for developing ( 1 ) clearly defined processes and procedures to help resolve jurisdictional and other disputes regarding invasive species and ( 2 ) a national public awareness campaign , emphasizing public and private partnerships . these are only a few examples of the initiatives aimed at developing stronger partnerships . improving technologies for use in rapid response . the plan calls for developing and testing methods to determine which rapid response measures are most appropriate for specific situations . in addition , the plan recommends ( 1 ) preparing a catalog of existing aquatic and terrestrial control methods and proposing strategies to determine their effectiveness in different u.s. habitats ; ( 2 ) establishing and coordinating a long - and short - term research capacity ( ranging from basic to applied research ) on invasive species ; and ( 3 ) as part of a cross - cutting budget proposal for fiscal year 2003 , including an initiative to adequately fund federal invasive species research programs . since the plan is relatively new , implementation of its recommendations is just getting underway . the council has , however , taken steps to establish priority areas for implementation , rapid response being one of these areas , according to its executive director . some non - native species arrive in the united states as accidental tourists ; others are brought in purposely — for example , to beautify gardens or as fish or game for sportsmen . however , one thing invasive species have in common is that their numbers are increasing dramatically . the explosive growth of invasive species has been accompanied by an increased awareness of the threat they pose and damages they cause . however , heightened awareness has not yet resulted in a systematic national approach to rapid response . as a result , opportunities for eradicating potentially devastating invasive species continue to be lost . currently , if an invasive species is a serious threat to agricultural crops or livestock there is a good chance that aphis will address it in some way . aphis has a process in place for evaluating new invasive species and obtaining resources for responding to serious threats . on the other hand , if an infestation threatens primarily natural areas , the odds of it being rapidly responded to are significantly less . for these infestations , it is sometimes uncertain which , if any , agency will take the lead ; ready access to funds is often a problem ; and generally no one agency is held accountable if the infestation spreads .