when establishing the u.s . export assistance centers ( useac ) in 1993 , the trade promotion coordinating committee ( tpcc ) designated the u.s. department of commerce as the primary provider of export promotion services , such as market information and counseling , to export - ready firms . the other useac partners , the u.s. export - import bank ( eximbank ) and the small business administration ( sba ) , were to provide firms with export financing support . in addition , sba was to provide training for new - to - export firms through its export trade assistance partnership program . the program provides training , counseling , and trade mission opportunities available from federal , public , and private organizations . commerce's office of u.s. and foreign commercial service and sba's office of international trade oversee their staffs at the 19 useacs — generally one sba loan officer and several commerce trade specialists per useac . the useacs are aided by a nationwide network of 55 domestically focused commerce district export councils ( comprised of local businesses ) as well as over 1,000 small business development centers , partially funded by sba . in addition , useacs partner with chambers of commerce , trade centers , and colleges and universities to encourage small businesses to expand their export activities and to assist small businesses seeking to export . to increase the number of u.s. exporters , commerce and sba seek to identify export - capable firms that are not yet exporting and provide them with export training opportunities . commerce and sba staff recruit attendees through trade associations , chambers of commerce , advertising , seminar attendance , and cold - calling firms . sba's office of international trade requires its staff to conduct one export trade assistance partnership program annually . export assistance centers . commerce and sba track certain pre - export activities as outputs for the purpose of measuring both useac and staff performance . commerce collects data on the number of new clients' export actions ( such as going on an overseas trade mission ) and export successes , but it does not track these measures specifically for trainees . sba regularly collects loan data for its clients , but it does not systematically collect data on export sales generated by training participants . for example , sba headquarters officials requested data on export sales generated by export trade assistance partnership program participants in fiscal year 2000 , but several sba staff at the useacs that we visited told us that no such request has been made for fiscal year 2001 . however , an sba official told us that sba intends to collect this information again in fiscal year 2001 . useac training programs ideally increase the number of new exporters and also expand the demand for commerce and sba products as firms seek information on specific markets and export finance . however , few of the useac training participants used an export product , such as customized market research , following training . in response to our request for data on its export - training participants , sba initiated a useac - wide survey of its trainers in april 2001 .