( see app . iv for a complete copy of usda's policy ) . furthermore , usda strategic planning documents contain a beginning farmer performance goal specific to the fsa loan programs , but they do not integrate usda's and its multiple agencies' several efforts to assist beginning farmers . a crosscutting , departmental strategic beginning farmer goal could provide needed direction for usda agencies and help ensure their efforts to assist beginning farmers work toward a common purpose and serve similar clients . for example , such a crosscutting goal could help address concerns about whether fsa's loans and nrcs's conservation assistance are directed toward similar groups of beginning farmers . fsa's loan programs are geared toward beginning farmers with limited economic resources — those who cannot access credit from another source . however , nrcs's definition of a beginning farmer does not contain any income limitations . not only are these programs serving different groups of farmers , there are unintended consequences as well . according to an nrcs document , the agency's higher cost - share rates for beginning farmers have the potential to attract wealthy , retired , and absentee landowners . for example , an nrcs official told us of a case where a beginning farmer receiving nrcs assistance reported having an income of about $1 million , and another said his state did not offer a higher eqip cost - share rate for beginning farmers because of concerns that wealthy beginning farmers would benefit . appendix v contains information about nrcs's and fsa's beginning farmer definitions . while usda has not established a crosscutting , departmental strategic goal for beginning farmers , two usda agencies — fsa and rma — have each developed their own beginning farmer performance goals . these goals set targets for the volume of their beginning farmer activities — the number of farmers assisted and the dollars they receive — rather than outcomes . specifically , fsa annually tracks the volume of its lending to a combined grouping of its borrowers — including beginning farmers and socially disadvantaged farmers ( racial and ethnic minority farmers and women farmers ) . fsa measures its performance by the increase in lending to these combined groups . usda also stated that fsa has virtually no discretion in setting the definition of a qualified beginning farmer and rancher . however , we believe that if usda determines that consistency between fsa's and nrcs's programmatic definitions would better ensure that beginning farmer dollars work toward a common purpose , it should consider what changes are needed and how best to effect those changes . if usda finds the changes in definitions require legislative action to achieve consistency across programs or focus efforts on particular outcomes , it should provide its analysis to congress for consideration . finally , usda provided examples of rma partnership programs that provided higher scores to applicants partnering with organizations that help beginning farmers and other underserved producers . although the partnership programs direct risk management assistance to a broad class of producers rather than specifically to beginning farmers , we clarified the language in our report to acknowledge how the application scoring process can benefit beginning farmers .