training services . these include occupational skills training , on - the - job training , customized training , and skill upgrading and retraining . training services are available to qualified adults and dislocated workers who are unable to obtain or retain employment after receiving at least one intensive service . supportive services . these include services — such as transportation , child care , and housing — that are necessary to enable wia participants to take part in wia activities . wia requires the use of itas , which allow qualified individuals to purchase the training they determine best for themselves . we attempted to assess the reliability of the responses to survey questions that asked for quantitative data relating to wia funds used for training and numbers of clients served . we included questions in the survey that asked whether or not the local board carried out certain practices or procedures to ensure that databases or data systems used to produce the financial and client information we asked for were in fact reliable . these questions asked ( 1 ) if there were written procedures that defined data elements or specified how data were collected ; ( 2 ) if routine internal reviews of data were conducted to check for errors in completeness , accuracy , or reasonableness ; ( 3 ) if periodic monitoring or audits of the data were conducted to check for errors in completeness , accuracy , or reasonableness ; and ( 4 ) whether or not routine quality control procedures were in place such as data verification to source documents or computer edit checks . we asked these four questions separately for both the financial data and the client data obtained in the survey . if the local area responded that it had used at least two of the four practices or procedures to monitor the quality of the financial and participant data provided in their survey , we either accepted the responses or called for clarification , depending on which procedures were used . if the local board responded that three or four of these practices or procedures were not used for either financial or client data , we did not use those data . in cases where the local board responded that it was not sure whether these practices or procedures had been carried out or did not answer three or more of the four questions , we telephoned the board to try to determine whether or not it had actually carried out these practices or procedures . in cases where we determined that the data actually did meet our data reliability criteria , based on these telephone calls , we accepted the responses . on the basis of the criteria , we accepted the financial data for all 428 of the completed surveys and we accepted the participant data for 425 of the completed surveys . in the three cases where we did not accept the participant data , we did retain and use responses from other sections of the survey . in addition to including the questions on data reliability in the survey , we also checked the consistency of responses on a number of survey questions that asked for numeric data .