we disagree . the draft report clearly states that changing a diagnosis can lead to different treatment and , ultimately , a different outcome for the patient . the report also states that timeliness is important because it can affect patient treatment and outcomes . va appears to assume that dod will not be able to obtain timely and quality consultative services through the pmo . in the report , we stated that obtaining quality consultation services in a timely manner through the pmo is one of the challenges that dod would have to address . until dod develops its strategies , we would not have a basis to determine whether it would be likely to meet this challenge . va commented on the potential high cost in procuring alternative sources for afip's services . we did not conduct an overall assessment of whether it would cost dod more to obtain consultations from other sources than it would to maintain afip . dod considered costs when developing its recommendation to the brac commission to outsource consultations . however , as we have reported previously , implementing other brac recommendations has led to lower cost savings than dod had estimated . regarding the costs for va , we state in our report that earlier studies had found that the costs of the services that afip provided to va exceeded the value of the paid positions va provided in exchange . afip officials indicated that this continued to be true in fiscal year 2007 . as a result , depending on how and where va obtains consultation services , its costs could increase . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from this date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of defense , the secretary of va , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or williamsonr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi .