ii ) . the applications for the four programs are very similar and are organized into two main sections . the first section requests such information as a proposed summary budget , a detailed itemization of proposed annual expenses , and student data including the language groups and number of both limited english and english - proficient students to be served . the second section , the bulk of the application , is a narrative in which applicants describe the proposed project by demonstrating how it meets the selection criteria established by education . although the application forms and the selection criteria for all four programs are very similar , school districts and schools use the application to describe projects tailored to their specific local needs . school districts may submit applications to receive funding from more than one of the programs . at the end of the grant competition cycle , education ranks the applications and awards funding to grantees . obemla's management plan contains safeguards to prevent individual schools from receiving funding from more than one bilingual education program . in fiscal year 2000 , education funded approximately 28 percent of the 665 applications it received . according to obemla staff , the following number of grants were awarded in fiscal year 2000 to school districts to serve children with limited english proficiency: 18 systemwide grants averaging $551,000 each ; 75 comprehensive grants averaging $245,300 each ; and 92 pdi grants averaging $156,200 each . no enhancement grants were awarded in fiscal year 2000 . in coming years , education plans to award a greater proportion of the grants to schools in the early stages of developing and implementing new programs . congressional interest in the bea has centered on the appropriate federal role in meeting the special needs of children with limited english proficiency . the 107th congress is considering several bills as it deliberates bea reauthorization in fiscal year 2001 . one bill recommends the elimination of the four grant programs and another seeks to significantly increase funding for bilingual education programs and consolidate the four programs into a single grant program . the president's budget proposes to implement changes in bilingual and immigrant education that would consolidate all currently funded bilingual and immigrant programs , as well as the foreign language assistance program , into a single flexible performance - based state grant program . all four federal bilingual education programs share the same performance goals and measures , possess similar eligibility criteria , and allow similar uses of program funds ( see table 1 ) . the four programs target students with limited english proficiency in kindergarten through 12th grade . the overall objectives of these four programs are to provide bilingual or special alternative education programs to children with limited english proficiency and to help such children reach high academic standards . under each program , students' achievement is measured biannually to determine if they have demonstrated continuous progress in oral and written english , as well as in language arts , reading , and math . leas are eligible to apply for funding under the four bilingual education programs ; however , only leas with high concentrations of such students are eligible to apply for grants from the comprehensive and systemwide programs .