we developed this model for our march 2008 report . the model uses standard formulas to determine the amounts of enriched uranium and tails produced from given quantities of uranium and enrichment services . the model also uses uranium price data that we obtained from nuclear industry trade publications . these data are commonly used in the nuclear industry as standard measures of the market price for uranium . we interviewed knowledgeable doe officials to determine the extent to which these data are used by the department and the industry and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report . our prior work on doe's depleted uranium , as well as the work conducted for this statement , was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . since the 1940s , one mission of doe and its predecessor agencies has been processing uranium as a source of nuclear material for defense and commercial purposes . a key step in this process is the enrichment of natural uranium , which increases its concentration of uranium - 235 , the isotope of uranium that undergoes fission to release enormous amounts of energy . before it can be enriched , natural uranium must be chemically converted into uranium hexafluoride . the enrichment process results in two principal products: ( 1 ) enriched uranium hexafluoride , which can be further processed for specific uses , such as nuclear weapons or fuel for nuclear power plants ; and ( 2 ) leftover “tails” of uranium hexafluoride . these tails are also known as depleted uranium because the material is depleted in uranium - 235 compared with natural uranium . since 1993 , uranium enrichment activities at doe - owned uranium enrichment plants have been performed by the u.s. enrichment corporation ( usec ) , formerly a wholly owned government corporation that was privatized in 1998 . however , doe still maintains over 700,000 metric tons of depleted uranium tails in about 63,000 metal cylinders in storage yards at its paducah , kentucky , and portsmouth , ohio , enrichment plants ( see figure 1 ) . instead , the policy statement stated that this effort will occur “in the near future.” our march 2008 report therefore recommended that doe should complete the development of a comprehensive uranium management assessment as soon as possible . we stated that the assessment should contain detailed information on the types and quantities of depleted , natural , and enriched uranium the department currently manages and a comprehensive assessment of doe's options for this material , including the department's authority to implement these options . furthermore , we stated that the assessment should analyze the impact of each of these options on the domestic uranium industry and provide details on how implementation of any of these options should be adjusted in the event that market conditions change .