this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have . these practices are shown in figure 1 . another step in meeting the government's human capital challenges is for policymakers to continue to pursue incremental legislative reforms to give agencies additional tools and flexibilities to hire , manage , and retain the human capital they need , particularly in critical occupations . the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , for example , is facing shortages in its workforce which could likely worsen as the workforce continues to age and the pipeline of talent shrinks . this dilemma is more pronounced among areas crucial to nasa's ability to perform its mission , such as engineering , science , and information technology . nasa is addressing this challenge through strategic planning , a new workforce planning and analysis system , and requesting additional personnel flexibilities , among other initiatives . over time , however , it will be important for all interested parties to work together to identify the kinds of comprehensive legislative reforms in the human capital area that should be enacted . these reforms should place greater emphasis on knowledge , skills , and performance in connection with federal employment , promotion , and compensation decisions . this summer the comptroller general will be convening a forum to discuss the key actions needed for significant human capital reform . federal agencies need to continue to incorporate a crucial ingredient found in successful organizations: organizational cultures that promote high performance and accountability . effective performance systems align organizational goals with daily operations and thereby create a “line of sight” between an individual's efforts and results that the organization is trying to achieve . in doing so , performance management systems can be a strategic tool to drive internal change and achieve external results by creating a shared perspective and demonstrating how unit , team , and individual performance can contribute to overall organizational goals . agencies can also foster a results - oriented culture by the way that they treat and manage their people , building commitment and accountability through involving and empowering employees . effective changes can only be made and sustained through the cooperation of leaders , union representatives , and employees throughout an organization . we have work under way , at the request of congress , to assess the extent to which employees are involved in the formation of the human resource system at the department of homeland security . we collaborated with the office of personnel management ( opm ) and omb in developing language for the standards for success that opm released . as opm , omb , and the agencies learn to evaluate themselves against the standards for success in implementing strategic human capital management approaches , opm and omb will need to ensure that the standards are consistently and appropriately applied while they assess agencies' progress in managing their human capital . importantly , omb's support will be needed as agencies identify targeted investment opportunities to address human capital shortfalls .