is it the primary mission of the agency or program ? similar goals and objectives: does the agency or program being considered for the new department share primary goals and objectives with the other agencies or programs being consolidated ? leverage effectiveness: does the agency or program being considered for the new department create synergy and help to leverage the effectiveness of other agencies and programs or the new department as a whole ? in other words , is the whole greater than the sum of the parts ? gains through consolidation: does the agency or program being considered for the new department improve the efficiency and effectiveness of homeland security missions through eliminating duplications and overlaps , closing gaps , and aligning or merging common roles and responsibilities ? integrated information sharing / coordination: does the agency or program being considered for the new department contribute to or leverage the ability of the new department to enhance the sharing of critical information or otherwise improve the coordination of missions and activities related to homeland security ? compatible cultures: can the organizational culture of the agency or program being considered for the new department effectively meld with the other entities that will be consolidated ? while national needs suggest a rapid reorganization of homeland security functions , the transition of agencies and programs into the new department is likely to take time to achieve . at the same time , the need for speed to get the new department up and running must be balanced with the need to maintain readiness for new and existing threats during the transition period . moreover , the organizational transition of the various components will simply be the starting point – as implementation challenges beyond the first year should be expected in building a fully integrated department . as i stated earlier , it could take 5 to 10 years to fully implement this reorganization in an effective and sustainable manner . a comprehensive transition plan needs to be developed . field structures and approaches to achieving missions vary considerably between agencies . impact on excluded agencies: what is the impact on departments losing components to dhs ? what is the impact on agencies with homeland security missions left out of dhs ? in addition to the above criteria that the congress should consider when evaluating what to include and exclude from the proposed dhs , there are certain critical success factors the new department should emphasize in its initial implementation phase . over the years , gao has made observations and recommendations about many of these success factors , based on effective management of people , technology , financial , and other issues , especially in its biannual performance and accountability series on major government departments . these factors include the following: strategic planning: leading results - oriented organizations focus on the process of strategic planning that includes involvement of stakeholders , assessment of internal and external environments , and an alignment of activities , core processes and resources to support mission - related outcomes . organizational alignment: the organization of the new department should be aligned to be consistent with the goals and objectives established in the strategic plan . communications: effective communication strategies are key to any major consolidation or transformation effort .