( see app . i for an overview of existing commercial llrw disposal facilities. ) when we last reported on llrw disposal in 1999 , we found that states were not developing new disposal facilities and that within 10 years the only facility available to waste generators in most states for their class b and c wastes could be full . our report noted that this situation raised questions about the willingness of the states , under authorities granted to them in the act , to develop new facilities . our report also assessed options that the congress could take to deal with a disposal shortfall if there were no change in conditions . ( see app . ii for a discussion of legislative options. ) in this context , you asked us to report on ( 1 ) any changes in llrw conditions since our 1999 report , ( 2 ) recent llrw annual disposal volumes and potential future volumes , ( 3 ) any current or anticipated shortfalls in llrw disposal availability , and ( 4 ) potential effects of any such shortfall . to conduct our work , we interviewed regulators and disposal operators in the states that have or are proposing llrw disposal facilities . we also spoke with representatives from doe , nrc , a nuclear power association , environmental groups , llrw generators , department of defense executive agent for llrw , and an independent nonprofit association of llrw stakeholders . we obtained disposal volume data directly from the three commercial facility operators and compared these data with information contained in doe's online national llrw database . this comparison and other analyses were used to assess the usefulness and reliability of this database in estimating disposal volumes . we also reviewed applicable laws and regulations , including the atomic energy act , as amended , and the llrw policy act , as amended . finally , to identify any potential effects of a disposal shortfall , we sought information from groups likely to know about such effects: state and compact officials , and those engaged in the practice , science , or technology of radiation safety . specifically , we surveyed officials from all compacts and unaffiliated states , and sent a separate e - mail questionnaire to the approximately 2,000 subscribers of the radsafe listserv for radiation safety officers . we also placed a notice in the health physics society newsletter , which has a circulation of about 6,000 , and asked for volunteers to answer the same questions that we had sent to the radsafe listserv subscribers . our work was conducted in conformance with generally accepted government auditing standards between august 2003 and may 2004 . ( see app . iii for further information on the scope and methodology of our review. ) the disposal of llrw is only the end of the radioactive material life cycle that spans its production , use , processing , interim storage , and disposal . in general the cycle starts with procurement of the radioisotopes that have medical , industrial , agricultural , and research applications . the isotopes come in either sealed or unsealed sources .