legal review . ofac provides the evidentiary package first to treasury's office of general counsel and then to doj's civil division for legal review . treasury's office of general counsel reviews the package for legal sufficiency , while doj assesses the risks associated with potential future litigation resulting from the identification or designation . according to ofac and doj officials , attorneys often seek clarification or additional evidence from ofac at this stage . in those cases where treasury's office of general counsel deems the basis for designation or identification to be legally sufficient and doj determines that the identification or designation presents an acceptable level of litigation risk , they give ofac clearance to finalize the evidentiary package and proceed with the action . consult with partner agencies . once the evidentiary package passes legal sufficiency , ofac consults with all of its partner agencies to obtain concurrence . denying visas . treasury provides information to state so it can decide whether to cancel existing visas and deny visa applications of kingpin act designees . penalties for nondesignees . treasury may enforce criminal and civil penalties for any u.s. person who willfully violates the prohibitions in the kingpin act , associated regulations , or license rules . penalties for violations of the kingpin act range from civil penalties of up to $1.5 million per violation to more severe criminal penalties . criminal penalties for corporate officers in violation may include up to 30 years in prison and fines up to $5 million for individuals and $10 million for corporations . treasury is required to report to congress on the status of sanctions imposed under the kingpin act , including the personnel and resources directed toward imposing such sanctions during the preceding fiscal year . on july 1st of each year , the ofac director , as delegated by the secretary of the treasury , is required to submit a report to the permanent select committee on intelligence of the house of representatives and the select committee on intelligence of the senate on the status of sanctions imposed under the kingpin act , the personnel and resources directed toward imposing sanctions under the kingpin act during the preceding fiscal year , and background information with respect to the newly identified significant foreign narcotics traffickers and their activities . treasury is also required to report on foreign persons who are sanctioned under the kingpin act to the director of the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) ; ondcp is the executive branch office responsible for issuing an annual national drug control strategy and coordinating the efforts of the national drug control program agencies implementing any aspects of the strategy . treasury's ofac leads a process generally involving six steps to designate kingpin act targets . this process allows ofac to coordinate its investigations and designations with u.s. partner agencies and foreign governments . ( see fig . we determined the designation process through interviews with ofac and partner agency officials , and selected nine cases to review the implementation of the designation process . ofac's kingpin act designation process includes the following six steps: 1 . identify potential targets . ofac first identifies potential targets for investigation and kingpin act designation .