membership . mandatory — the state bar of california licenses attorneys to practice law in the state of california . as of april 2015 , the state bar reported it had approximately 253,000 licensees , of which more than 183,000 were active . registration . to receive a license , individual attorneys must pass the california bar examination and pay their annual membership fees to the state bar . the 2015 membership fee was $430 for active members . funding . the state bar had $138 million in operating revenue in 2014 , of which 60 percent came from membership fees and donations . examination application fees , grants , and seminars provided additional funding . government role . the state bar is a public corporation within the judicial branch . the primary purpose of the state bar is to serve as the administrative adjunct to the california supreme court in all matters pertaining to the admission , discipline , and regulation of california lawyers . source of authority . the state bar was created by the state legislature in 1927 . finra is responsible for writing and enforcing rules governing the activities of broker - dealer firms and their registered individuals , including examining firms for compliance with those rules , fostering market transparency , and educating investors . funding . finra had total revenue in fiscal year 2014 of $970 million . of this amount , 15 percent came from fees paid by broker - dealers based on the number of registered individuals employed by firms . the principal sources of revenue were regulatory activities and assessments , fines , contract services , and dispute resolution . government role . the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) reviews and approves all of finra's proposed rules and monitors and inspects finra's regulatory activities . source of authority . finra is a self - regulatory organization whose function as a national securities association was authorized under the securities exchange act and approved by sec in july 2007 . msrb is responsible for writing the rules that regulate the broker - dealers and municipal advisory firms that underwrite , sell , and trade municipal securities and provide municipal advisory services — with the goals of protecting investors and issuers and promoting a fair and efficient marketplace . msrb also provides guidance to finra , sec , and bank regulators in the oversight of compliance with msrb rules . membership . mandatory — all professionals associated with municipal advisory firms must be registered with sec and meet msrb's qualification requirements before engaging in any transaction . according to the msrb , there were approximately 3,300 associated professionals in fiscal year 2014 . registration . each municipal advisory firm pays a $300 annual membership fee for each associated professional and all the firm's professionals must pass a qualification examination . funding . msrb had total revenue of $32 million in fiscal year 2014 , less than 5 percent of which came from fees that municipal advisory firms paid for each associated professional . principal sources of revenue include fees on transactions , underwriting , and technology . government role . msrb is required by statute to conduct rule - making in certain areas and sec reviews and provides final approval of msrb rules .