gao - 04-877 . washington , d.c.: september 30 , 2004. t nectous disease preparedness: federal chalenges in responding to i f i influenza outbreaks . gao - 04-1100t . washington , d.c.: september 28 , 2004 . emergng infecious diseases: asian sars outbreak challenged i tnernational and natonal responses . influenza vaccine takes several months to produce . deciding which viral strains to include in the annual influenza vaccine depends on data collected from domestic and international surveillance systems that identify prevalent strains and characterize their effect on human health . fda decides which strains to include in the vaccine and also licenses and regulates the manufacturers that produce the vaccine . hhs has limited authority , however , to directly control influenza vaccine production and distribution . fda has approved four antiviral medications ( amantadine , rimantadine , oseltamivir , and zanamivir ) for prevention and treatment of influenza . however , influenza virus strains can become resistant to one or more of these drugs , and so they may not always be effective . in the united states , responsibility for disease surveillance is shared — involving health care providers ; more than 3,000 local health departments , including county , city , and tribal health departments ; 59 state and territorial health departments ; more than 180,000 public and private laboratories ; and public health officials from multiple federal departments and agencies . states , through the use of their state and local health departments , have principal responsibility for protecting the public's health and therefore take the lead in conducting disease surveillance and supporting response efforts . according to the institute of medicine ( iom ) , most states require health care providers to report any unusual illnesses or deaths — especially those for which a cause cannot be readily established . generally , local health departments are responsible for conducting initial investigations into reports of infectious diseases . laboratory personnel test clinical and environmental samples for possible exposures and identification of illnesses . epidemiologists in health departments use disease surveillance systems to detect clusters of suspicious symptoms or diseases in order to facilitate early detection and treatment . local and state health departments monitor disease trends . local health departments are also responsible for sharing information they obtain from providers or other sources with their state departments of health . state health departments are responsible for collecting surveillance information — which they share on a voluntary basis with cdc and others — from across their state and for coordinating investigations and response efforts . public health officials provide needed information to the clinical community and the public . at the federal level , several departments and agencies are involved in disease surveillance and response . for example , hhs has primary responsibility for coordinating the nation's response to public health emergencies . as part of its mission , the department has a role in planning to prepare for and respond to an influenza pandemic . one action the department has taken is the development of a draft national pandemic influenza plan , titled “pandemic influenza preparedness and response plan.” cdc is charged with protecting the nation's public health by directing efforts to prevent and control diseases and responding to public health emergencies .