automatic iras . this scenario is drawn from our understanding of h.r . 4049 the automatic ira act of 2012 . for our scenario , we assumed that private sector employers began offering automatic iras in 2014 . what are the earnings and tax rates of households that do not have dc plans or iras ? what are the effects of the saver's credit on retirement income ? how would automatic iras affect retirement income , especially for low - and middle - income workers ? to answer the two subsequent questions , we used the policy simulation group's ( psg ) microsimulation models to assess the distributional effects of the existing saver's credit , the president's 2011 budget proposal to modify the saver's credit , and h.r . 4049 , which would have established automatic iras and which was pending before the 112th congress . we also reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations , as well as , presidential and legislative proposals related to the saver's credit and automatic iras . we conducted a data reliability assessment of the psg models and selected variables from the scf by conducting electronic data tests for completeness and accuracy , reviewing documentation on the dataset , or interviewing knowledgeable officials about how the data are collected and maintained and their appropriate uses . we found that for the purposes of our analysis , the data that we analyzed were sufficiently reliable . finally , we interviewed experts in the area of retirement income security . we conducted this performance audit from may 2012 to august 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . according to one study , in 2011 , 54 percent of wage and salary workers aged 21-64 worked for an employer that sponsored a pension plan , such as a defined benefit ( db ) plan or a dc plan , but only about 45 percent of wage and salary workers aged 21-64 actually participated in the plan . db plans provide periodic benefits in retirement that are generally based on employees' salaries and years of service . employers may also choose to sponsor dc plans , under which both employers and employees can make contributions to the plan . distributions in retirement are , in turn , based on contributions and investment returns in these accounts . private sector employer - sponsored db and dc plans are generally subject to the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) , as amended , which establishes standards for private sector pension plans and sets forth protections for participants in these plans . the department of labor's employee benefits security administration ( ebsa ) generally administers and enforces the title i provisions of erisa . these employer - sponsored plans must also meet certain requirements in the internal revenue code ( irc ) , which are enforced by the internal revenue service ( irs ) .