our final report will be issued in may 2003 . we conducted our work between september 2002 and march 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , cfsa has taken actions to address various asfa requirements and met several selected performance criteria , enacted child protection and foster care placement policies and procedures , and enhanced its working relationship with the d.c. family court ; however , much remains to be done . cfsa met two - thirds of the asfa requirements and half of the selected foster care performance criteria we used , and developed written plans to address two of the three unmet asfa requirements and three of the four unmet performance criteria . in addition , cfsa has adopted child protection and foster care placement policies and procedures that are comparable to most , but not all , of those recommended by organizations that develop standards applicable to child welfare programs . however , cfsa has not adopted some key policies and procedures for ensuring the safety and permanent placement of children , and caseworkers have not consistently implemented or documented some of the policies and procedures that have been adopted . for the other three policies , we reviewed case files and examined related data from faces for 30 cases , because officials told us that the information related to these policies was not routinely recorded in faces . one policy requires caseworkers to complete a case plan within 30 days of a child's entry into foster care . our analysis and file review found that case plans were not routinely completed within 30 days . another policy requires conducting administrative review hearings every six months . these reviews ensure that key stakeholders are involved in permanency planning for the child . we found that administrative review hearings were rescheduled for a variety of reasons , such as the caseworker had to appear at a hearing for another case or the attorney was not available . the third policy requires caseworkers to identify and arrange for services for children and their families . it was difficult to determine whether services recommended by caseworkers were approved by supervisors or if needed services were provided . managers said that sometimes services are arranged by telephone and the results not entered into faces . officials said that several factors affected the implementation of some of the policies we reviewed . agency officials explained that , in part , the data on implementation of the initial investigations and safety assessment reflected that the district's metropolitan police department was responsible for the initial investigation of child abuse cases until october 2001 and that data was not entered into faces . cfsa now has responsibility for both child abuse and neglect investigations . further , program managers and supervisors said that several factors contribute to the time frames required to initiate face - to - face investigations , including difficulty in finding the child's correct home address , contacting the child if the family tries to hide the child from investigators , and even obtaining vehicles to get to the location .