there are fundamental differences between inspections and audits . inspections and audits are typically conducted under separate standards with different basic requirements . that is , igs are required by the ig act to conduct audits in accordance with government auditing standards ( also known as generally accepted government auditing standards ) . in contrast , the igs follow cigie's quality standards for inspection and evaluation when conducting inspections as required by law . by d audits performed under government auditing standards are subject to more in - depth requirements for levels of evidence and documentation supporting the findings than are inspections performed under cigie's inspection standards . also , auditing standards require external quality reviews of audit organizations ( peer reviews ) on a 3-year cycle , while inspection standards do not require such external reviews . specifically , the appearance of objectivity is severely limited by this potential impairment to independence resulting in a detrimental effect to the quality of the inspection results . in our 2007 audit , we found that the state oig's emphasis on inspections limited its effectiveness because it resulted in gaps in the audit coverage of the state department's high - risk areas and management challenges . these critical areas were covered almost exclusively through oig inspections that were not subject to the same level of scrutiny that would have been the case if covered by audits . specifically , we found gaps of oig audit coverage in key state department programs and operations such as ( 1 ) information security , ( 2 ) human resources , ( 3 ) counterterrorism and border security , and ( 4 ) public diplomacy . in these areas the state oig was relying on inspections rather than audits for oversight . in the 10 inspections that we examined , we found that the state oig inspectors relied heavily on invalidated agency responses to questionnaires completed by the department staff at each inspected bureau or post . we did not find any additional testing of evidence or sampling of agency responses to determine the relevance , validity , and reliability of the evidence as would be required under auditing standards . in addition , we found that for 43 of the 183 recommendations contained in the 10 inspections we reviewed , the related inspection files did not contain any documented support beyond written report summaries of the findings and recommendations . in our 2007 report we also found that inspections by the oig's office of information technology were not included in the internal quality reviews that the oig conducts of its own work . information security is a high - risk area and management challenge for the state department , and the oig relied almost exclusively on inspections for oversight of this area . therefore , the quality of these inspections is key to the oig's oversight effectiveness . in addition , cigie's standards for inspections require that ig inspections be part of a quality - control mechanism that provides an assessment of the inspection work . we found in 2007 that there was inadequate assurance that the investigative efforts of the state department were coordinated to avoid duplication or to ensure that independent oig investigations of the department would be performed .