ii. ) where , ( 1 ) i is the individual student , ( 2 ) low - income is determined by eligibility for free and / or reduced lunch , and ( 3 ) race and ethnicity are distinct codes dependent upon the geographical area . we also performed analyses on different groupings of the comparison schools in denver , cleveland , and st. paul . in denver , 2 of our matched schools were in a distinct neighborhood that school district personnel believed might be atypical ; in cleveland and st. paul several of the matched schools were magnet or former magnet schools . we re - analyzed the data in each of these cities using these groupings as factors . the overall results were unchanged , with the exception that in denver , reading scores were not significantly different when the privately managed school was compared with the 2 schools not in the distinct neighborhood . in conducting these analyses , we performed certain diagnostic and analytic tests to confirm both the appropriateness of aggregating categories in our analyses and the reasonableness of assumptions pertaining to normality and homogeneity of variance . in addition , we determined the extent of missing data and performed sensitivity analyses to assess the effect on our results . we determined that missing case level data had a negligible effect on our results . to illustrate the magnitude of differences found , we computed effect sizes based on standardized mean differences . using the ols regression results , we divided the unstandardized coefficient associated with school type by the pooled standard deviation to obtain z - scores for average students in the privately managed and traditional schools . the reported percentile was the area of the normal curve associated with the z - scores . tables 5-12 in appendix ii list the regression results and independent variables included in our analyses . the size and significance of the differences we report were derived from ols regression models . we obtained results that were almost identical to the ols results when we used robust estimation procedures to calculate the standard errors associated with the estimated differences . we also considered robust regression models that allowed for the clustering , and lack of independence , of students within schools . these models yielded somewhat fewer differences that were statistically significant at the 95-percent confidence level . we do not focus our reporting on the results of the models that account for clustering , however , since the statistical properties and validity of such models when applied to data with a very small number of clusters ( in this case , 3 to 5 schools ) is questionable.however , changes to significance levels of the school type coefficients due to robust standard errors and robust standard errors with clustering are noted in appendix ii . the findings in this study are subject to typical limitations found in quasi - experimental designs . we examined the highest elementary grades tested for school years 2000-01 and 2001-02 , and student achievement in these grades and years may not be indicative of student achievement in other grades and years in those schools . in addition , our matching process may not have produced equivalent groups for comparison .