( see fig . to replace these controllers , faa plans to hire 15,004 new controllers from fiscal years 2006 through 2016 , according to the agency's march 2007 controller workforce plan . this recent hiring target is higher than faa's june 2006 hiring target to reflect recent data indicating that controllers are retiring at a faster rate than faa anticipated . what standards should be set for uas safety and reliability ? how should faa classify uass , which can range in size from very small , hand launched systems to those similar in size to a large passenger aircraft ? what pilot qualifications are needed for uas operators ? faa has begun to answer such questions by reviewing its existing safety regulations developed for manned aircraft to determine how or whether they need to be modified to enable uass to be safely integrated into the national airspace system . faa expects this to be a 5- to 10-year effort . in the meantime , faa will continue its existing oversight approach and review each request to operate on a case - by - case basis . if faa determines that a uas can operate safely under specified conditions , the agency issues a certificate of authorization and the airspace is restricted during the period of operation . in fiscal year 2006 , faa processed 96 applications for certificates of authorization and issued 62 certificates . faa projects that it will receive over 400 applications in 2010 . the agency may have difficulty handling such an increase under its existing case - by - case process , which could serve as a de facto limit on the number of uass operating in the next few years . faa cannot rely on its current oversight approach , which focuses on labor - intensive inspections to maintain and expand the margin of safety , especially if substantial growth in air traffic materializes . faa acknowledges this situation and sees the need to establish a safety information system that can provide an early warning of hazards that may lead to accidents and help the agency manage risk . however , our past work has found problems with the accuracy and completeness of faa's safety data . for example , faa does not collect actual flight activity data for general aviation operators , air taxis , or air ambulances . as a result , faa lacks information to monitor the rate of accidents and determine the effectiveness of its oversight . we have recommended that faa improve the accuracy and completeness of its safety data and evaluate this information to identify nationwide trends . faa is in the early planning stages of addressing our recommendations , but more work remains . an important aspect of faa's safety oversight is the use of over 13,000 private individuals and organizations , known as designees , to leverage inspector resources . designees act as representatives of the agency to conduct many safety certification activities , such as administering flight tests to pilots , inspecting repair work by maintenance facilities , and approving designs for aircraft parts . in reviewing faa's designee programs , we found that the agency's oversight of designees was hampered , in part , by limited data on designees' performance .