s&t is developing a new technology . oha is developing an interim solution to enhance the detectors currently in use . s&t is developing new detection technology known as generation 3.0 which would replace the existing technology used by the biowatch program . this new technology is to provide a fully automated detector which not only collects air samples but also analyzes them for threats . the current technology collects air samples which are periodically manually removed from the equipment and taken to a laboratory for analysis , a process that could take 10 to 34 hours . officials stated that automating analysis of air samples could reduce the elapsed time between air sampling and testing it for threats from the current 10 to 34 hours to 4 to 6 hours , reducing detection time by at least 4 hours and possibly as much as 30 hours . in addition to the automated detection capability , generation 3.0 is to detect a broader range of identified biological agents to eventually cover all the biological agents on the biowatch threat list — a list of specific biological agents that could pose a health threat if aerosolized and released to the environment . the estimated cost for acquiring these detectors is $80,000 to $90,000 per unit , with yearly operation and maintenance costs of $12,000 to $41,000 per unit . operational testing and evaluation of this technology is scheduled for april 2009 , about a year later than initially planned because oha provided s&t with revised functional requirements about 4 months before s&t was scheduled to complete the generation 3.0 prototype detector . s&t developed the original requirements for the generation 3.0 technology , which required the automatic detectors to , among other things , operate continuously , detect more biological threats , be less expensive to operate , and be deployed in both indoor and outdoor environments . s&t planned to complete the development of the hardware and software and conduct field tests of its prototype generation 3.0 detectors by april 2008 , at which point oha was to take responsibility for final operational testing and evaluation of the detectors . nbic does not have isas or iaas in place with any of its current and potential member agencies . according to nbic officials , one difficulty in finalizing the isas is due , in part , to defining the data - sharing arrangements with member agencies given the constraints on arrangements for sharing data imposed by the traditional roles of these agencies . for example , interagency coordination for the purposes of characterizing a biological event may require data that nbic member agencies have not previously shared with other agencies . in addition , dhs faces difficulty finalizing iaas , the formal mechanisms through which nbic obtains detailees from federal agencies . in the absence of iaas , according to nbic's draft concept of operations , the center cannot effectively perform its integration and analytical mission without the subject - matter knowledge from interagency detailees . as of july 2008 , nbic has been able to secure one detailee from a member agency . officials were unable to predict how many additional mous , isas , iaas , or detailees nbic will have in place by september 30 , 2008 .