materials shortages . in grenada , disruptions following the hurricane , as well as the island's relatively remote location , led to shortages of construction materials that periodically delayed housing repairs and new housing construction . according to usaid , obtaining building materials in grenada became more challenging following hurricane emily in 2005 . in jamaica , according to usaid , increased duties on imported cement , heavy rains that soaked the cement quarries , and a labor strike that occurred in the country's only cement factory led to shortages that delayed housing repairs and construction . as of march 2006 , usaid reported that construction in jamaica continued to be slowed by a shortage of cement because the production site that supplies the region shut down after producing low - quality cement . difficulty in establishing land titles . in grenada , difficulties in establishing land title or ownership caused construction delays . a usaid housing contractor in grenada told us that although it originally identified 400 to 500 prospective beneficiaries who met selection criteria established by the grenadian government , many of these people lacked the land titles or proof of ownership , which usaid required of new - housing beneficiaries . because the process of verifying ownership was so time consuming , the contractor eventually ran advertisements soliciting respondents who met the selection criteria and had proof of land ownership . delays in obtaining bank guarantees . in haiti , delays encountered by contractors seeking bank guarantees contributed to implementation delays of some construction projects . usaid staff in haiti explained that the agency requires construction contractors to provide a bank guarantee in order to receive advance disbursements to buy materials and pay for labor , which usaid officials said is common commercial practice . however , haiti's economic situation made it difficult for local contractors to obtain bank guarantees , even when the contractors were reputable and had a valid contract with an international organization . because contractors could not begin work without the guarantees , some construction activities were delayed . for example , according to usaid officials , one highway construction contractor lost a month and a half of work time and another contractor lost 2 months while obtaining bank guarantees . ngo - related and subcontractor challenges . in grenada , contractors encountered challenges in working with local ngos and subcontractors . the implementing contractor in grenada relied on ngos to help identify people who met government criteria to receive housing support . however , according to the contractor , the ngos had difficulty quickly selecting beneficiaries and , as a result , housing construction was delayed . in jamaica , usaid worked with ngos to perform housing repairs . according to usaid staff , it was difficult to attract ngos that could fulfill the agency's documentation and reporting requirements in order to receive grants for the housing repairs . in addition , according to an april 2006 rig report , the sole subcontractor hired to build houses performed poorly , which also contributed to construction delays . in haiti , kidnappings and continued violence in areas affected by the tropical storm presented security challenges that disrupted usaid's recovery work .