iii. ) we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . if you or your staff have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7101 . other contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix iv . our review focused on issues related to health care provided by the department of defense ( dod ) that are specific to women , including preventive and reproductive care . to address the key questions , we analyzed pertinent documents ( including policies , procedures , and survey results ) and interviewed officials from dod's health affairs' office of clinical and program policy , dod's tricare management activity ( tma ) , the surgeons general offices for the air force , army , and navy , and the american college of obstetricians and gynecologists ( acog ) . we reviewed selected health care plans under the federal employees health benefits program ( fehbp ) to compare the covered benefits with those provided by tricare . we selected bluecross and blueshield service benefit plans , a fee - for - service and preferred provider plan with the largest number of participants in fehbp , and kaiser foundation health plan of the mid - atlantic states , inc. , one of the fehbp's largest health maintenance organization ( hmo ) plans . in addition , we reviewed completed studies addressing military health care , including those we conducted and those conducted by dod . we also conducted a site visit to walter reed army medical center to review the in vitro fertilization services offered at this military treatment facility ( mtf ) . to further address these questions , we agreed with the committees of jurisdiction to conduct a high - level review to obtain dod beneficiaries' perceptions on women's health care services and identify potential concerns about women's health care in dod . to do this , we interviewed dod headquarters officials and relied on two dod surveys: a dod - wide health care survey on beneficiary satisfaction and a survey targeted at inpatient care during childbirth at selected mtfs . both of these surveys are from 2000 — the most recent data available . we also conducted interviews with the defense advisory committee on women in the services ( dacowits ) , a group that advises the secretary of defense on issues concerning active duty women , including health care , and the national military family association ( nmfa ) , an advocacy group that obtains beneficiary views on issues concerning military families , including health care . to supplement these interviews , we relied on our past work on dod health care . we did not independently validate the information we received from dod , dacowits , or nmfa , nor did we determine the prevalence of beneficiary concerns . additionally , while our review focused on health care for women beneficiaries , some of our findings pertained to men as well , which we have noted in our report where appropriate . our work was conducted from november 2001 through april 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .