l.. no . 93-638 ) and administered by the indian health service . provide treatment for tuberculosis . receives funds under the native hawaiian health care act of 1988 ( 42 u.s.c . §§ 11701 et seq. ) provide comprehensive health promotion and disease prevention services to native hawaiians . receives financial assistance under title xxvi of the phsa ( 42 u.s.c . §§ 300ff - 11 et seq. ) serve as a “payer of last resort” to cover the cost of providing hiv - related medications to low - income individuals who are uninsured or underinsured and cannot afford to pay for drugs or who cannot afford their health insurance coverage for drugs . number of sites enrolled by entity type ( july 1 , 2011 ) administering agency within the department of health human services ( hhs ) description of covered entity type provide primary care and support services to individuals with hiv or aids . receives a grant under section 501 ( a ) ( 2 ) of the social security act ( 42 u.s.c § 701 ( a ) ( 2 ) ) provide medical care to individuals with hemophilia . black lung clinics receives funds under section 427 ( a ) of the black lung benefits act ( 30 u.s.c . § 937 ( a ) ) provide medical treatment to individuals disabled from pneumoconiosis ( black lung ) as a result of their employment at u.s. coal mines . general acute care hospitals paid under the medicare inpatient prospective payment system . occasionally the formula results in a negative price for a 340b drug . in these cases , hrsa has instructed manufacturers to set the price for that drug at a penny for that quarter — referred to as hrsa's penny pricing policy . manufacturers are responsible for calculating the 340b price on a quarterly basis . covered entities must follow certain program requirements as a condition of participating in the 340b program . for example , covered entities are prohibited from diverting any drug purchased at a 340b price to an individual who does not meet hrsa's current definition of a patient . this definition was issued in 1996 and outlines three criteria which generally state that diversion occurs when 340b discounted drugs are given to individuals who are not receiving health care services from covered entities or are only receiving non - covered services , such as inpatient hospital services , from covered entities . ( see table 1 for more information on hrsa's definition of a 340b patient. ) covered entities are permitted to use drugs purchased at the 340b price for all individuals who meet the definition of a patient , whether or not they are low income , uninsured , or underinsured . covered entities also are prohibited from subjecting manufacturers to duplicate discounts whereby drugs prescribed to medicaid patients are subject to both the 340b price and a rebate through the medicaid drug rebate program . to avoid duplicate discounts , covered entities can either purchase drugs for medicaid patients outside the 340b program , in which case the state medicaid agency may claim the rebate , or they can use drugs purchased at 340b prices , in which case the agency may not claim the rebate .