development and acquisition . based on these criteria , we interviewed faa officials in the free flight program office , the office of air traffic planning and procedures , and the office of independent operational test and evaluation . to review test reports and other documentation highlighting technical and operational issues confronting these tools , we visited faa's william j. hughes technical center in atlantic city , new jersey , and faa's prime contractors that are developing the three free flight tools . we also visited the national aeronautics and space administration's ames research center at moffett field , california , to understand how its early efforts to develop free flight tools are influencing faa's current enhancement efforts . to determine the extent to which the free flight tools will increase capacity and efficiency while helping to minimize delays , we analyzed the relevant legislative and office of management and budget's requirements that recognize the need for agencies to develop performance goals for their major programs and activities . we also interviewed faa officials in the free flight program office and the office of system architecture and investment for information on the performance goals of the free flight tools during phase 1 . in addition , we held discussions with officials from rtca , which provides a forum for government and industry officials to develop consensus - based recommendations . we also reviewed documentation explaining how the tools are expected to and actually have helped increase system capacity and efficiency , thereby helping to minimize delays . we conducted our review from october 2000 through july 2001 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in addition to those named above , nabajyoti barkakati , jean brady , william r. chatlos , peter g. maristch , luann m. moy , john t. noto , and madhav s. panwar made key contributions to this report . ( see table 1. ) faa officials told us that because the preliminary data showed that the benefits were occurring more rapidly than anticipated , they believe it is unnecessary to wait for the results from the evaluation plan to make a decision about moving forward . to help airports achieve their maximum capacity for arrivals through free flight , faa's controllers will undergo a major cultural change in how they will manage the flow of air traffic over a fixed point ( known as metering ) . our review focused on three free flight phase 1 tools — the user request evaluation tool , the traffic management advisor , and the passive final approach spacing tool — because they account for approximately 80 percent of faa's $630 million estimated investment for phase 1 and approximately 80 percent of faa's $717 million estimated investment for phase 2 . we did not review the surface movement advisor or the collaborative decision making tools because generally they had been implemented at all phase 1 locations when we started this review and faa does not intend to deploy their identical functionality in phase 2 .