( see fig . because these beneficiaries qualify for medicare's home health benefit , the skilled nursing services — such as training , medication administration , and assessment of the patient's condition — as well as certain equipment and supplies used at home are covered . these services , equipment , and supplies are provided by or arranged for by a home health agency according to a physician's plan of care . any care coordination or clinical monitoring services needed with home infusion therapy would be provided by the home health nurse assisting the beneficiary at home or by the physician who ordered the therapy . none of the insurers reported significant problems with improper payments for home infusion therapy services . while none of the insurers identified significant quality of care problems related to home infusion therapy , they all employ certain practices to help ensure care delivered meets quality standards . most health insurers we interviewed use two standard industry practices — prior authorization , postpayment claims review , or both — to manage utilization of home infusion therapy for their members . to obtain prior authorization , providers must request and receive approval from the health plan before the therapy is covered . the plan typically requires providers to submit patient information in advance to support a request for coverage and receive payment authorization . with postpayment review , once a claim has been processed , the plan determines if it was billed and paid appropriately , and if not , the plan may seek a refund or adjust future payments . generally , a health plan auditor would review a sample of claims to see if the patients had medical conditions for which the proposed treatment was required . the equipment and supplies covered for homebound beneficiaries include certain infusion pumps covered as dme and supplies such as intravenous and catheter supplies . homebound beneficiaries who require other equipment , such as disposable infusion pumps , would not have coverage for those items , and therefore have limited coverage . although coverage of drugs is specifically excluded under the home health benefit , coverage for infusion drugs may be obtained through other parts of the medicare ffs program . for beneficiaries with certain conditions , certain drugs are considered supplies for needed equipment and are therefore covered under the dme benefit . in addition , infusion drugs may be covered for beneficiaries who are enrolled in part d plans or have other prescription drug coverage . in 2008 , approximately 90 percent of all medicare beneficiaries had prescription drug coverage through part d plans , retiree plans , or other sources . cms requires part d plans to ensure appropriate beneficiary access to commonly infused drugs or drug classes by including them in their formularies and making sure that multiple strengths and dosage forms are available for each covered drug . for non - homebound beneficiaries with certain conditions , medicare part b provides limited coverage of home infusion therapy . specifically , the dme benefit covers certain equipment and associated drugs for beneficiaries with specified conditions , but does not cover other equipment and drugs or any skilled nursing services . ( see fig .