enumerators did not understand procedures for visits to property managers . property managers are a key source of information on non - respondents when enumerators cannot find people at home . they can also facilitate access to locked buildings . further , developing a rapport with property managers has helped the nrfu process , such as when repeated access to a secured building or residential complex is needed on subsequent days by different enumerators . in response to problems observed during the bureau's 2014 and 2015 census tests and to complaints from property managers about multiple uncoordinated visits by enumerators , the bureau's 2016 census test introduced specific procedures to conduct initial visits to property managers in large multi - unit apartment buildings . the procedures sought to identify up front which , if any , units needing follow - up were vacant , eliminating the need for enumerators to collect this information from property managers with subsequent visits on a case - by - case basis . according to bureau officials , the automated case management system was designed to allow for an enumerator to make up to three visits to property managers to remove vacant units . according to the bureau , the 2016 census test demonstrated that vacant units could quickly be removed from the nrfu workload using these procedures in cases where a property manager was readily available ; however , in other cases the procedures caused confusion . for example , whenever an initial visit was unsuccessful , all of the cases at that location — up until then collated into only one summary row of the enumerator's on - screen case list — would suddenly expand and appear as individual cases to be worked , sometimes adding several screens and dozens of cases to the length of the list , which the enumerators we spoke with found confusing . furthermore , without the knowledge of which units were vacant , enumerators may have unnecessarily visited these units and increased the cost and the time required to complete nrfu . during debriefing sessions the bureau held , enumerators and their supervisors identified training in these procedures as an area they felt needed greater attention in the future . bureau officials said that they are pleased that the test demonstrated their progress in automating case management at multi - unit locations , but at the same time , they recognize the need to better refine the initial property manager contact procedures and integrate multi - unit procedures into the training . there are around 225,000 housing units in each test area . in november 2016 , we testified on the progress of the test as well as other key preparations , and described important lessons learned from the 2010 census that can apply to the 2020 census . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of commerce , the counselor to the secretary with delegated duties of the undersecretary of commerce for economic affairs , the director of the u.s. census bureau , and interested congressional committees . the report also will be available at no charge on our website at http: / / www.gao.gov .