we did not independently verify this information . the dod inspector general has cited deficiencies and internal control weaknesses as major obstacles to the presentation of financial statements that would fairly present the defense working capital fund's financial position for fiscal years 1993 through 2002 . our review was performed from july 2002 through june 2003 in accordance with u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards . the navy provided the budgeting and accounting information referred to in this report . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the secretary of defense or his designee . dod provided written comments , and these comments are presented in the agency comments and our evaluation section of this report and are reprinted in appendix ii . the following are gao's comments on the department of defense's ( dod ) letter dated june 10 , 2003 . see the agency comments and our evaluation section of this report . as discussed in the agency comments and our evaluation section of this report , we have modified this recommendation and the related section of the report in response to dod's comment . staff who made key contributions to this report were francine delvecchio , karl gustafson , william hill , christopher rice , ron tobias , and eddie uyekawa . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . you can print these documents in their entirety , including charts and other graphics . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . the list contains links to the full - text document files . to have gao e - mail this list to you every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to e - mail alerts” under the “order gao products” heading . however , if another activity group performs $400 million of work in a year and had $100 million in carryover at year - end , this group would have 3 months of carryover . the congressional defense committees and dod have acknowledged that some carryover is necessary at fiscal year - end if working capital funds are to operate efficiently and effectively .