we did not evaluate the validity of the requirements . dod is attempting to mitigate some of the shortages . for example , the army plans to procure more than 500,000 hoods through fiscal year 2002 , and the defense logistics agency was procuring more of the existing generation of boots at the time of our report . some opportunities also exist for one service to assist another . for example , the army and marine corps reported significantly more gloves on hand than required and could transfer some to the air force to offset air force shortfalls since all the services use the same gloves . however , other available equipment is not interoperable and cannot be easily shared . for example , the navy and marine corps suits are hooded , so they do not have separate hoods and therefore cannot help alleviate the army's shortage . to determine the compatibility of the nine major supply systems , we interviewed the responsible dod officials , compared system inventory procedures , checked records against physical inventories , and obtained relevant documents . to determine how long shelf life items can be used and to estimate equipment expiration rates , we interviewed officials from the army's soldier biological and chemical command in maryland ; natick soldier center in massachusetts ; and rock island arsenal in illinois ; the naval sea systems command in virginia ; the air force headquarters directorate of supply in washington , d.c. ; and the marine corps' combat development command in virginia and materiel command in georgia . we also interviewed officials and obtained documents from the defense logistics agency offices in pennsylvania showing planned or actual procurement of jslist suits and other equipment . to determine how the services and depots identify which items will expire and need replacement , we inspected or inventoried chemical protective suits stored at the bluegrass army depot in richmond , ky ; the defense logistics agency's war reserve depot in albany , ga ; the air force's mobility bag center in avon park and macdill air force base , fl ; and aboard ships at the norfolk navy base , norfolk , va. at these locations , we met with officials and obtained supply records and suit and other equipment expiration data . the following is our response to the department of defense letter dated september 18 , 2001 . while dod presents the data in the cited annual report to congress and logistics support plan annexes , the data is presented on an item - by - item basis and not an ensemble basis . consequently , the information as presented does not give a fully reliable risk assessment . dod acknowledges that it has scarce resources and must manage risk within those resource constraints . consequently , dod also indicated in its comments that it will rely on industrial surge capacity to make up any shortfall in required ensemble components . nonetheless , the department's risk assessment is based on having 120 days of supply at the units or in war reserve .