interior concurred with our recommendations . we issued reports in october 2010 and july 2016 that included several recommendations regarding steps interior should take to better account for and manage natural gas emissions associated with oil and gas development . in october 2010 , we reported that data collected by interior to track venting and flaring on federal leases likely underestimated venting and flaring because they do not account for all sources of lost gas . for onshore federal leases , operators reported to interior that about 0.13 percent of produced gas was vented or flared . estimates from the environmental protection agency and the western regional air partnership showed volumes as high as 30 times higher . we reported that economically capturing onshore vented and flared natural gas with then - available control technologies could increase federal royalty payments by $23 million annually . we also found limitations in how interior was overseeing venting and flaring on federal leases , and made five recommendations geared toward ensuring that interior had a complete picture of venting and flaring and took steps to reduce this lost gas where economic to do so . interior generally concurred with our recommendations . in july 2016 , we found that limitations in interior's guidance for oil and gas operators regarding their reporting requirements could hinder the extent to which the agency can account for natural gas emissions on federal lands . without such data , interior could not ensure that operators were minimizing waste and that blm was collecting all royalties that were owed to the federal government . we recommended , among other things , that blm provide additional guidance for operators on how to estimate natural gas emissions from oil and gas produced on federal leases . blm concurred with the recommendation . interior has taken steps to implement our past recommendations regarding the control of natural gas . accounting for natural gas is important for ensuring that the federal government receives all royalties it is due and because methane — which comprises approximately 80 percent of natural gas emissions — is a potent greenhouse gas that has the ability to warm the atmosphere . in addition , we reported in july 2016 that increased oil production in recent years has resulted in an increase in flared gas in certain regions where there is limited infrastructure to transport or process gas associated with oil production . in november 2016 , interior issued regulations intended to reduce wasteful emissions from onshore oil and gas production that were consistent with our recommendations . in june 2017 , however , interior postponed the compliance dates for relevant sections of the new regulations and then suspended certain requirements in december 2017 . interior subsequently issued revised regulations in september 2018 that are not consistent with the findings and recommendations in our prior work . in our prior work and preliminary observations in our ongoing work , we have found that some states have requirements that are more stringent than blm's regarding accounting for and managing natural gas emissions .