under both systems benefits can be taxed . feca beneficiaries can receive up to 75 percent of their preinjury income , tax - free , if they have dependents and 66-2 / 3 percent without dependents . because returning to work could mean giving up a feca benefit for a reduced pension amount , concerns have been raised by some that the program may provide incentives for beneficiaries to continue on the program beyond retirement age . ( 2 ) which beneficiaries would be affected ? ( 3 ) what criteria , such as age or retirement eligibility , would initiate changed benefits ? ( 4 ) how would other benefits , such as feca medical and survivor benefits , be treated and administered ? ( 5 ) how would benefits , particularly retirement benefits , be funded ? feca is administered by labor's office of workers' compensation programs ( owcp ) and currently covers more than 2.7 million civilian federal employees from more than 70 different agencies . feca benefits are paid to federal employees who are unable to work because of injuries sustained while performing their federal duties . under feca , workers' compensation benefits are authorized for employees who suffer temporary or permanent disabilities resulting from work - related injuries or diseases . feca benefits include payments for ( 1 ) loss of wages when employees cannot work because of work - related disabilities due to traumatic injuries or occupational diseases ; ( 2 ) schedule awards for loss of , or loss of use of , a body part or function ; ( 3 ) vocational rehabilitation ; ( 4 ) death benefits for survivors ; ( 5 ) burial allowances ; and ( 6 ) medical care for injured workers . wage - loss benefits for eligible workers with temporary or permanent total disabilities are generally equal to either 66-2 / 3 percent of salary for a worker with no spouse or dependent , or 75 percent of salary for a worker with a spouse or dependent . wage - loss benefits can be reduced based on employees' wage - earning capacities when they are capable of working again . owcp provides wage - loss compensation until claimants can return to work in either their original positions or other suitable positions that meet medical work restrictions . each year , most federal agencies reimburse owcp for wage - loss compensation payments made to their employees from their annual appropriations . if claimants return to work but do not receive wages equal to that of their prior positions — such as claimants who return to work part - time — feca benefits cover the difference between their current and previous salaries . currently , there are no time or age limits placed on the receipt of feca benefits . with the passage of the federal employees' compensation act of 1916 , members of congress raised concerns about levels of benefits and potential costs of establishing a program for injured federal employees . as congress debated the act's provisions in 1916 and again in 1923 , some congressional members were concerned that a broad interpretation threatened to make the workers' compensation program , in effect , a general pension .