parts . industrial operations activities must ascertain whether the dod supply system has the right quantity and mix of spare parts to perform the work . army lcmcs and industrial operations activities must conduct production planning , material provisioning , and command scheduling to ensure sufficient coordination of available parts with all sources of supply to meet requirements . tools and equipment . industrial operations activities must ascertain whether the activities have all required tools , production equipment , handling equipment , and quality and testing equipment to perform the work . process . industrial operations activities must ascertain whether the activities have processes that define the scope of work and include approved technical data , documented internal processes , and capacity to complete the work . assets . industrial operations activities must ascertain whether assets needing repair will be available at the scheduled time for beginning work at the activities . requirements . industrial operations activities must ascertain whether the workload accepted by the activities has a well - defined scope of work . this includes having information on required production , impact of back orders , average monthly demand , potential surge requirements , available technical data package / work instructions , and alternate sources of supply for unique critical parts and components . funding . industrial operations activities must ascertain whether the accepted workload has available funding to adequately support production of required deliverables . third , amc is consolidating and updating operational responsibilities and guidance for planning , accepting , scheduling , controlling , and reporting depot maintenance and other functions , such as ammunitions operations , into a single draft regulation titled amc organic industrial base operational management policy and implementation guidance . according to an amc official , the draft guidance is planned to be issued during fiscal year 2016 . the draft regulation provides guidance on the scope of work and parts as well as coordination and communication among both amc and non - amc stakeholders involved in industrial operations depot activities . for example , the draft regulation states that the work requirements and changes to the scope of work should be documented and attached or referenced on the order , and that every effort should be made to ensure that work specifications and changes are clear and well documented , especially where new work requirements are involved . the draft regulation also establishes procedures for managing the currency and accuracy of production data , including applicable bills of material , technical data packages , and other technical production data , in coordination with program executive offices , program managers , responsible engineering support activities , and depots . the army's issuance and implementation of the draft amc regulation has the potential to help resolve scope of work and parts problems that we identified during our review of orders . for example , the draft amc regulation would require a process similar to that the army used on a particular mrap vehicle referred to as the maxxpro , and this resulted in the successful performance of work on this vehicle .