evaluate sources . what are the risks associated with outsourcing ? how cost - effective is outsourcing ? is the level of satisfaction of customers served by contractors comparable to those served by postal employees ? what impact does increased use of contractors have on the safety of the mail , mail facilities , employees , and customers ? stakeholders may raise questions about effectiveness , cost savings , and other anticipated outcomes . responses to these questions will be important to inform decision - making . as it considers future outsourcing , the service faces a number of challenges , including differing messages from congress and the administration on outsourcing and the potential impact of outsourcing on its relations with its employee unions . provide some other value ? looking forward , the service is considering another major outsourcing initiative involving its bulk mail processing network , which could impact work done by two unions . two bills pending in congress could affect the service's outsourcing efforts . 4236 would require the service to bargain with postal unions before it engages in outsourcing and s. 1457 would limit the service's ability to outsource . service officials say outsourcing is a critical tool to help the service meet its financial goals but union officials oppose expanded use of outsourcing . both the service and unions have indicated that the appropriate way to resolve issues related to outsourcing is through the collective bargaining process . however , most unions have said the service would not negotiate with them on this issue and have therefore sought congressional intervention . the service agreed in the most recent collective bargaining process to try and resolve its differences on this issue with the two carrier unions . legislative and administration initiatives send differing messages to the service on the scope of its outsourcing effort , from initiatives that support outsourcing as a means to reduce costs , increase efficiency , and improve quality , to initiatives that question the value of outsourcing and propose to curtail it . support for the service to operate more like a business dates back at least to 1970 , when congress passed legislation that gave the service unique status as an independent establishment of the federal government and authorized it to finance its operations through sales of its products and services instead of appropriations . congress also stated in the 2006 postal accountability and enhancement act that the postal service should implement commercial best practices in its purchasing policies to achieve greater efficiency and cost savings by taking full advantage of private - sector partnerships , as recommended in the july 2003 report by the president's commission on the united states postal service . similarly , the current and previous administrations have advanced proposals to promote more efficient and effective government operations , including outsourcing government operations . in particular , in 2001 , the bush administration launched the president's management agenda to focus attention on ensuring that the resources entrusted to the federal government are well - managed and wisely used . the president's management agenda encourages opening federal commercial activities to competition among public and private sector sources to achieve increased savings and improve performance .