, the incremental costs ) . the international pacific halibut commission manages the halibut fishery under a treaty between the united states and canada . the halibut commission adopts conservation regulations , such as seasons and area catch limits , which it forwards to the united states and canada for approval . nmfs , in consultation with the north pacific fishery management council , has the authority to develop other regulations that do not conflict with the halibut commission's regulations . historically , there was no limit on the number of people who could participate in the halibut and sablefish fisheries , and , starting in the mid - 1970s , the number of boats in these fisheries began to increase rapidly . by the late 1980s , overcapitalization of the halibut and sablefish fleets led to seasons that lasted less than 2 days in some areas and a race for fish that put boats and fishermen at risk and resulted in gear loss , excessive bycatch of nontarget species , and poor product quality , among other things . in response to these conditions , the north pacific council developed an ifq program that was implemented by nmfs in 1995 . the program was designed , in part , to help improve safety for fishermen , enhance efficiency , reduce excessive investment in fishing capacity , and protect the owner - operator character of the fleet . the program set caps on the amount of quota that any one person may hold , limited transfers to bona fide fishermen , issued quota in four vessel categories , and prohibited quota transfers across vessel categories . this appendix describes ifq cost - sharing programs in australia , canada , and new zealand . the term “individual fishing quota” as used in this appendix includes individual transferable quota and individual vessel quota . australia's fishing zone , the third largest in the world , supports many high - value fisheries . the gross value of australia's commercial fisheries production was an estimated au$2.3 billion in fiscal year 2003 . australia introduced ifqs in the early 1980s and currently has at least 20 federal and state fisheries under ifq management . these fisheries account for about 22 percent of the total value of australia's commercial fisheries . australia began recovering fishery management costs in the mid - 1980s as part of a governmentwide initiative to introduce user charges for government services . the fishing industry ( i.e. because of concerns that the resource could not support unlimited expansion , the south atlantic fishery management council added wreckfish to the snapper - grouper fishery management plan and set the catch limit at 2 million pounds per year . the council developed an ifq program for wreckfish in 1991 . after the ifq program was implemented in 1992 , wreckfish landings declined rapidly , in part because of the difficulty and costs associated with fishing wreckfish in relation to their market value , and quota holders started participating in easier , less costly fisheries with higher market values . today , the wreckfish fishing fleet is small , with only 2 vessels reporting wreckfish landings in 2003 . wreckfish are sold fresh or frozen as a market substitute for snapper and grouper .