operational . in addition to fraud or error , contractor or privileged access information security weaknesses could negatively impact agency operations , including delivering products ; managing information ; maintaining operations and transaction processing ; customer service ; systems development and support ; and internal control processes . shared environment . contractors may use one system to service multiple clients and , as a result , this system - sharing may pose more risks than an in - house environment . for example , sharing a common network or a processing environment , such as a general purpose server , across multiple clients can increase the likelihood of one organization having access to the sensitive information of another . the risks identified can present complex challenges to federal agencies . many of the complexities stem from risks related to people , processes , or technologies that , if not properly overseen or managed , can potentially harm an agency's operations , information , or systems . most agencies ( 17 of 24 ) reported that they recognize contractor risks to their information and information systems . these people , process , and technology risks can degrade or diminish the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of agency information systems or data . examples of agency - identified risks are summarized in table 1 . in addition to the risks identified in the table , agencies identified specific risks from contractor software development activities and off - site operations . these risks include the following a poor patch management process could impact federal operations , such as agency web sites ; the hosting infrastructure may not separate customer and company the need for oversight at an off - site facility . without proper controls , the risks associated with software development and work performed off site could be very damaging to federal information and systems . for example , loss of confidentiality , integrity , or availability of data can disrupt federal operations and services and may impede the ability to ensure the performance of mission - critical functions . many agencies reported their risks from other users with privileged access to federal data and systems . seventeen agencies indicated that they assess the risks posed by other users with privileged access to federal data and systems . agency - identified risks included lack of controls on network connections ; unauthorized use or release of information , such as grantee information being revealed to another grantee ; malicious activity that introduces viruses and worms ; and poor electronic access controls that could permit customer passwords to be compromised and exploited by identity theft . of the remaining 7 agencies , 5 indicated that other users do not possess or use their data and systems ; 1 indicated that it had not assessed risks of other users with privileged access ; and the other agency did not respond regarding whether they had assessed risks of other users with privileged access to federal data and systems .