iv ) . in response to our recommendation to expeditiously allow reimbursement for indirect costs within ccp , both departments commented that allowing reimbursement for such costs will promote broader participation of local service providers . in its comments , dhs also said that the inclusion of indirect costs will help expedite the application review process and that fema has been working with samhsa to revise ccp policy to allow reimbursement for indirect costs . hhs stated that the draft report accurately reflected concerns regarding the exclusion of indirect costs and that samhsa had previously given fema a recommendation supporting a change in this policy . although dhs and hhs indicated that they are working on a revision of the policy to allow reimbursement of such costs , they did not provide a timeline for completing this activity . ( 2 ) what have been the states' experiences in obtaining and using ccp grants to respond to the psychological consequences of catastrophic disasters ? in general , to address our objectives , we obtained program documents from federal agencies involved in disaster preparedness and response activities — including dhs and hhs . we also interviewed officials from these agencies , academic institutions , and national organizations that focus on mental health , substance abuse , and emergency management . we conducted additional work in six judgmentally selected states . we included new york , florida , louisiana , and mississippi because they were directly affected by one of three catastrophic disasters that we included in our scope: the wtc attack in 2001 , hurricane charley in 2004 , and hurricane katrina in 2005 . we included texas because it hosted a large number of people displaced by hurricane katrina , and we included washington because it both hosted people displaced by hurricane katrina and has features that make it vulnerable to natural and man - made disasters , such as large ports . results from this nongeneralizable sample of states cannot be used to make inferences about other states . to examine actions by federal agencies to help states prepare for the psychological consequences of catastrophic disasters , we identified federal grants awarded and other activities that occurred during fiscal year 2002 through fiscal year 2006 to help states prepare for the psychological consequences of disasters . we also reviewed mental health and substance abuse disaster plans from the six states in our review and interviewed officials from these agencies . to examine states' experiences in obtaining and using ccp grants to respond to the psychological consequences of catastrophic disasters , we interviewed mental health officials from the six states in our review concerning their experiences in applying for ccp funding and implementing their programs . we also reviewed ccp grant applications or other relevant documentation submitted by the six states in our review . in addition , we interviewed officials from fema and samhsa to obtain their perspectives on the states' applications and the states' experiences implementing programs using ccp funds . we also reviewed reports by gao and other entities and pertinent legislation . ( for additional information on our methodology , see app . we conducted our work from march 2006 through february 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .