gao - 08-510 . washington , d.c.: april 30 , 2008 digital television transition: increased federal planning and risk management could further facilitate the dtv transition . gao - 08-43 . washington , d.c.: november 19 , 2007 . digital television transition: preliminary information on progress of the dtv transition . ntia also developed a resource guide . according to ntia , it has provided information to operators of low - power stations so they can inform their viewers of the options they have regarding the dtv transition . ntia said it has encouraged converter box manufacturers to consider the needs of all viewers , including viewers of low - power stations , in the development of converter boxes . nab and others have added information about low - power stations to their web sites and clarified that only full - power stations are transitioning in february 2009 . however , the community broadcasters association , which represents low - power stations , believes public and private education efforts about the dtv transition focus on the end of analog broadcasts and are misleading to viewers . while public and private efforts are ongoing to inform the public about low - power stations not transitioning to digital , some have expressed concerns that the messages intended to explain this issue are instead confusing the public . further complicating matters , many consumers do not know the difference between full - power and low - power stations or whether the signals they receive are full or low power . we heard from advocacy groups for disadvantaged populations that the messages intending to explain the low - power issue could be overly confusing . for example , one group questioned how those watching low - power stations would understand that ( 1 ) they are viewing low - power broadcasts , ( 2 ) these stations are not transitioning to digital , and ( 3 ) what actions they need to take to maintain the ability to watch low - power broadcasts . this group said many spanish speakers are reliant on low - power stations to view spanish language broadcasts but many in that community are not aware of the issue with low - power stations or that they are reliant on low - power stations . most households will be unaffected by the dtv transition and a vast majority have heard of the transition . according to our consumer survey results , about 84 percent of the population has heard of the transition , but smaller numbers of people have more specific knowledge of the transition date and why the transition is taking place . those at higher risk of being affected by the transition — households viewing over - the - air television signals — have higher levels of awareness than those who will be unaffected . over half of the population has heard of the converter box subsidy program and those in households at risk of losing television service who plan to take action are likely to utilize the program . however , only a third of those indicating plans to purchase boxes and utilize the coupons know how to obtain coupons .