gao - 15-758t . washington , d.c.: july 8 , 2015. insider threats: dod should strengthen management and guidance to protect classified information and systems . this resource is available to defense small businesses . the federal communications commission hosts a planning tool on its website , known as the fcc small biz cyber planner 2.0 that is targeted to small businesses and available to the public . this online planner provides guidance to small businesses on developing their cybersecurity plans and is available to defense small businesses . see appendix ii for a listing of the 15 resources we identified . while dod osbp officials recognized the importance of identifying and disseminating cybersecurity resources through outreach and education efforts to defense small businesses , they also identified a number of factors that had , to date , limited their progress in doing so . specifically , dod osbp officials were not aware of existing cybersecurity resources such as those we identified when we met with them in june 2015 , there had been leadership turnover within the office , and the office had been focused on one of its key initiatives — developing the training curriculum for dod professionals who work with small businesses . osbp officials also stated that they had been focused on their statutory requirements such as training the dod workforce that works with small businesses , advocating for small businesses within the government , and reaching out to small businesses in the private sector . while we recognize that these factors could affect progress , federal government internal controls state that management should ensure that there are adequate means of communicating with , and obtaining information from , external stakeholders who may have a significant impact on the agency's achieving its goals . while they had not yet identified or disseminated information about existing cybersecurity resources to defense small businesses , officials agreed that doing so could help the businesses to become more aware of cybersecurity practices and cyber threats . in addition , by identifying and disseminating this information , dod osbp could help defense small businesses to protect their networks against cyber exploits , which would support the 2015 dod cyber strategy goals of working with the private sector to help secure defense industrial base trade data and build layered cyber defenses . furthermore , by identifying existing federal government resources , osbp's efforts would be in line with dod instruction 5134.04 , which states that the osbp director shall use the existing services and systems of dod and other federal agencies , when practicable , to avoid duplication and to achieve maximum efficiency and economy . finally , once osbp has identified the resources , it can also share them with military department and component small business offices so that they can use them for their own outreach and education efforts with defense small businesses . dod spends billions of dollars contracting with defense small businesses , and relies on these businesses to support its missions . however , defense small businesses face challenges in protecting their corporate networks and information from increasing cyber threats .