ii ) . kennedy center officials generally agreed with our findings and recommendations . they said that they found the recommendations helpful , and that they have initiated efforts to address them . further , these officials provided additional comments to clarify information regarding the project estimates , project management data , and human capital resources , which we have incorporated throughout the report as appropriate . to meet our first objective of comparing the garage expansion and site improvement project's most recent estimates on costs , time frames for completion , and scope with estimates previously provided to congress in 1997 and 1998 , we analyzed kennedy center construction project documents , such as contracts , estimates , and plans . to gain a better understanding of the construction project , we accompanied a kennedy center official on a tour of the construction site during which the official pointed out the major components and features of the project . in addition , we interviewed officials with the kennedy center , the construction management contractor , the architectural firm involved with the project , and the u.s. army corps of engineers . timely construction data . the kennedy center does not always receive timely construction data on schedules and costs . these data are necessary for monitoring construction costs and measuring results , such as estimated total project costs . for example , the kennedy center's construction manager told us that he provided cash flow reports only when requested , and that , at times , he provided the reports at a rate of once every 3 months , instead of on a monthly basis as required by the contract . in addition , the kennedy center decided to waive the submission of key timely written project management reports from the construction manager and to rely instead on weekly meetings . in commenting on a draft of this report , kennedy center officials said that they had received timely scheduling data on the garage project , on a weekly and monthly basis , at various meetings . however , these meetings were no substitute for timely written reports , which are typically used in construction project management and would have provided additional detailed information on schedules and costs that could have been helpful in project oversight . kennedy center officials agree that they should have obtained monthly project management reports and are now doing so . human capital resources and expertise . kennedy center officials lack key human capital resources and expertise that would be highly beneficial in managing the construction process . for example , the kennedy center experienced significant turnover in both in - house staff and contractor personnel during the design stages of the project , which has contributed to reduced institutional knowledge of the project and has increased the time necessary to finalize design decisions . in addition , two key management positions were left vacant for an extended period . the project executive position became vacant in september 2001 . the person in this position is responsible for directing and managing all capital repair and construction projects . we concluded that the kennedy center did not have sufficient capability to effectively manage large - capital construction projects .