we revised the report accordingly . we revised the report to clearly show that nmfs has not collected enough ecosystem data and that the frequency and range of recruitment surveys are limited . the statement does not address untrawlable habitat . for this reason , we did not change the report . we changed “survivability” to “sustainability.” 34 . we changed “survivability” to “sustainability” and added fishery “resources” for clarification . noaa commented that gao does not adequately convey the different degrees of precision associated with the stock assessments and gao's conclusion that the reliability of the five assessments we reviewed is questionable and could easily be misconstrued to mean all these assessments are an unreliable basis for management of the west coast groundfish fishery . noaa also commented that the five assessments gao reviewed all passed scientific review and are serving as the basis for formal status determination and fishery management . our report acknowledges that stock assessments are scientifically reviewed and are a key tool for managing fisheries . however , we found the reliability of the five assessments questionable for the three reasons we highlighted in our report , and we recommended actions on how to improve the reliability of the stock assessments . we added clarification to the report to show that stock assessments are a key tool for managing fisheries and are important in making decisions about setting harvest levels and developing plans to rebuild overfished stocks . noaa also commented that quality assurance for non - nmfs data is not absent . as stated in our response number 20 , we found that although nmfs does have collection and quality assurance procedures for state - collected non - nmfs data , nmfs does not check or have a standard process to verify that these data have been reviewed for reliability . as discussed in our report , some assessors chose to review the raw data , while others did not . assessors who voluntarily reviewed raw non - nmfs data found mistakes that either made some of the data unusable or could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments . for these reason , we did not change the report . noaa commented that it is more pertinent to focus on the degree of standardization of the survey data than the source . by categorizing data as nmfs data and non - nmfs data , we were not implying that non - nmfs organizations could not conduct useful fishery - independent surveys . we categorized the data in this manner because nmfs currently conducts nearly all of the fishery - independent surveys and non - nmfs organizations collect most of the fishery - dependent data . footnote 7 in the report states that nmfs generally refers to its data as fishery - independent data and to non - nmfs data as fishery - dependent data . for these reasons , we did not change the report . we believe the pacific hake biomass estimates are questionable because the assessment used non - nmfs data that nmfs did not check or subject to standard data reliability testing .