this report is our sixth in response to that provision . for this report , we assessed the extent to which ( 1 ) the jwst project is managing technical challenges and integration risks in order to meet its schedule commitments , and ( 2 ) technical challenges and higher - than - planned contractor workforce levels are affecting the jwst project's ability to meet its cost commitments . the element or major subsystem with the least amount of schedule reserve determines the critical path for the project . any delay to an activity that is on the critical path will reduce schedule reserve for the whole project , and could ultimately impact the overall project schedule . cost reserves are additional funds within the project manager's budget that can be used to address unanticipated issues for any element or major subsystem , and are used to mitigate issues during the development of a project . for example , cost reserves can be used to buy additional materials to replace a component or , if a project needs to preserve schedule reserve , reserves can be used to accelerate work by adding shifts to expedite manufacturing . nasa's goddard space flight center ( goddard ) — the nasa center with responsibility for managing jwst — has issued procedural requirements that establish the levels of both cost and schedule reserves that projects must hold at various phases of development . in addition to cost reserves held by the project manager , management reserves are funds held by the contractors that allow them to address cost increases throughout development . we have found that management reserves should contain 10 percent or more of the cost to complete a project and are generally used to address various issues tied to the contract's scope . jwst has experienced significant cost increases and schedule delays . prior to being approved for development , cost estimates of the project ranged from $1 billion to $3.5 billion , with expected launch dates ranging from 2007 to 2011 . before 2011 , early technical and management challenges , contractor performance issues , low level cost reserves , and poorly phased funding levels caused jwst to delay work after cost and schedule baselines were established , which contributed to significant cost and schedule overruns , including launch delays . the chair of the senate subcommittee on commerce , justice , science , and related agencies requested from nasa an independent review of jwst in june 2010 . nasa commissioned the independent comprehensive review panel , which issued its report in october 2010 , and concluded that the baseline funding did not allot adequate reserves , resulting in an unexecutable project . integrate the completed otis element with the spacecraft element and test the full observatory in the fifth and final integration phase , which includes another set of challenging environmental tests . mitigate approximately 47 remaining tracked hardware and software risks to acceptable levels and continue to address the project's 300+ potential single point failures to the extent possible . prepare and ship the observatory to the launch site and complete final launch site processing , including installation of critical release mechanisms .