dhs agreed with our recommendation . according to relevant federal guidance , the decision to invest in a system or system component should be based on a clear definition of what capabilities , involving what stakeholders , will be delivered according to what schedule and at what cost . moreover , such investment decisions should be based on reasonable assurance that a proposed program will produce mission value commensurate with expected costs and risks . as noted earlier , dhs funding plans have collectively allocated about $250 million to a number of exit efforts through 2006 , but without having adequately defined or economically justified them . now , in 2007 , it risks repeating these same mistakes as it embarks on yet another attempt to implement a means by which to biometrically track certain foreign nationals exiting the united states , first at airports , and then at seaports , with land exit capabilities being deferred to an unspecified future time . based on the department's latest available documentation , it intends to spend $27.3 million ( $7.3 million in fiscal year 2007 funding and $20 million in fiscal year 2006 carryover funding ) on air and sea exit capabilities . however , it has not produced either the plans or the analyses that adequately define and justify how it intends to invest these funds . rather , it has only generally described near - term deployment plans for biometric exit capabilities at air and sea poes , and acknowledged that a near - term biometric solution for land poes is not possible . more specifically , the us - visit fiscal year 2007 expenditure plan states that dhs will begin the process of planning and designing an air and sea exit solution during fiscal year 2007 , focusing initially on air exit and then emulating these technology and operational experiences in completing the sea exit solution . according to this plan , air exit efforts will begin during the third quarter of fiscal year 2007 , which ends in 2 days . since then the scope of the first three increments has changed . the current scope is increment 1 ( air and sea entry ) , increment 2 ( air , sea , and land entry ) , and increment 3 ( land entry ) . increment 4 is still intended to define , design , build , and implement a more strategic program capability , which program officials stated will consist of a series of incremental releases or mission capability enhancements that will support business outcomes . in increments 1 through 3 , the program has built interfaces among existing ( “legacy” ) systems , enhanced the capabilities of these systems , and deployed these capabilities to air , sea , and land poes . these first three increments have been largely pursued through existing system contracts and task orders . increment 4 strategic system enhancements are being pursued through a systems integration contract awarded to accenture and its partners in may 2004 . through fiscal year 2007 , about $1.7 billion has been appropriated for us - visit .