veterans . we reported on the availability of qualified nursing staff at the va medical centers , inconsistencies in processing veterans' disability benefits , improvements needed to support eligibility decisions for veterans' disability benefits , and the need to improve monitoring of veterans' antidepressant use and the accuracy of veterans' suicide data . health care . we reported on the need to address improper payments in the medicare and medicaid programs , expand efforts to reduce antipsychotic drug use among older adults receiving care in homes and community - based settings , improve indian health care services , and improve oversight of tax provisions for individuals under the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) . science and technology . we reported on the need to enhance the nation's biosurveillance capabilities , address safety lapses at high - containment laboratories , address potential gaps in environmental satellite coverage , and minimize long - term federal exposure to climate - related risks . our technology assessments included reducing freshwater use in hydraulic fracturing and thermoelectric power plant cooling . we maintain a list for congress of high - risk areas , which focuses on government operations that are at high - risk of fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement , or that need broad - based transformation to address economy , efficiency , or effectiveness challenges of government operations . selected examples of programs on the high - risk list include: strengthening the foundation for efficiency and effectiveness . restructuring the u.s . postal service to achieve sustainable financial viability and funding the nation's surface transportation system . transforming the department of defense ( dod ) program management . dod financial management and dod supply chain management . ensuring public safety and security . strengthening the department of homeland security management functions , ensuring the security of federal information systems and cyber critical infrastructure and protecting the privacy of personally identifiable information . managing federal contracting more effectively . doe's contract management for the national nuclear security administration and office of environmental management , and nasa acquisition management . assessing the efficiency and effectiveness of tax law administration . enforcement of tax laws and confronting identity theft tax fraud . modernizing and safeguarding insurance and benefit programs . improving and modernizing federal disability programs and the national flood insurance program . in 2015 , we issued our biennial update of our high - risk list . this report offers solutions to 32 identified high - risk problems , including two new high - risk areas: managing risks and improving va health care . since 2000 , we have reported about va facilities' failure to provide timely health care . in some cases , these delays or va's failure to provide care at all have reportedly harmed veterans . although va has taken actions to address some of our recommendations , more than 100 have not been fully addressed , including recommendations related to the following areas: ( 1 ) ambiguous policies and inconsistent processes , ( 2 ) inadequate oversight and accountability , ( 3 ) information technology challenges , ( 4 ) inadequate training for va staff , and ( 5 ) unclear resource needs and allocation priorities .