we believe that this assessment is highly optimistic . the development schedule for the j - 2x engine , the critical path for the ares i development , is already recognized as aggressive , allowing less than 7 years for development . the development of the space shuttle main engine by comparison took 9 years . further , nasa anticipates that the j - 2x engine is likely to require 29 rework cycles to correct problems identified during testing . given the linear nature of a traditional test - analyze - fix - test cycle , even large funding increases offer no guarantee of program acceleration , particularly when the current schedule is already compressed and existing nasa test facilities are already maximized . according to nasa , at this time , existing test facilities are insufficient to adequately test the ares i and orion systems . existing altitude test facilities are insufficient to test the j - 2x engine in a relevant environment . to address this issue , nasa is in the process of constructing a new altitude test facility at stennis space center for the j - 2x . also , current facilities are inadequate to replicate the orion vibration and acoustic environment . there are considerable schedule pressures facing both the ares i and orion projects . these are largely rooted in nasa's desire to minimize the gap between the retirement of the space shuttle and availability of the new vehicles . because of this scheduling goal , nasa is planning to conduct many interdependent development activities concurrently — meaning if one activity should slip in schedule , it could have cascading effects on other activities . but it is not certain that added resources will enable nasa to deliver the ares i when expected . with respect to orion's thermal protection system , facilities available from the apollo era for testing large - scale heat shields no longer exist . therefore , nasa must rely on two facilities that fall short in providing the necessary capability and scheduling to test ablative materials needed for orion . additionally , nasa has no scheduled test to demonstrate the thermal protection system needed for lunar missions . nasa is exploring other options , including adding a lunar return flight test and building a new improved test facility . due to the scheduled first lunar flight , any issues identified during such testing would need to be addressed in the time between the flight test and the first flight . nasa is poised to invest a significant amount of resources to implement the vision over the long term and specifically to develop the ares i and orion projects over the next several years . accordingly , you asked us to articulate indicators that congress could use to assess progress . our prior work has shown that investment decisions of this magnitude need to be based on an established and executable business case and that there are several key indicators that congress could be informed of to assess progress throughout development . these include areas commonly underestimated in space programs , such as weight growth and software complexity , as well as indicators used by best practice organizations to assess readiness to move forward in the development cycle .