see table 13 . the total amount of funds obligated to each contractor in fiscal years 2009 through 2018 to perform medicare quality measurement activities varied , ranging from $1,000 to $139,397,410 . for fiscal years 2009 through 2018 , 91 percent of funds obligated to contracted organizations for medicare quality measurement activities went to 12 of 59 contracted organizations . see table 3 . to make decisions on which measures to include in the muc list , cms officials review the submissions . according to cms , officials from each medicare quality program , referred to as quality program leads , separately review each measure submitted for use in that program . cms officials told us that as necessary , they consult with technical experts and with other cms or department of health and human services ( hhs ) officials . according to cms officials , the program leads make recommendations to higher level officials , such as division directors , on whether cms should accept or reject each measure . cms internal guidance outlines factors that , among other things , officials should consider . some of these factors reflect the strategic objectives laid out in the meaningful measures initiative , and the guidance also indicates that officials may consider additional factors in their decision - making . cms officials told us that , when making measure selection decisions , program teams are given the flexibility to develop criteria that best suits their programs' needs , noting that some programs are intended to address a broad range of areas , such as the inpatient quality reporting program , while others have a more limited focus , such as the hospital readmissions reduction program . cms officials told us that the director of cms's center for clinical standards and quality , which is responsible for quality measurement , makes the final measure selection decisions and , in doing so , generally accepts the recommendations of the program teams . our analysis of cms's quality measures indicates that the number of candidate quality measures submitted to cms for the muc list has decreased from 335 measures in 2014 to 67 in 2018 . cms officials told us the decline in the number of candidate measures submitted reflected cms efforts to more clearly define a targeted set of quality measurement priorities for measure developers and to reduce provider reporting burden . minimizing provider burden is one of cms's strategic objectives , and , according to cms officials , it represents a priority communicated by the cms administrator . for more information about cms's measure selection decisions for its annual muc list in 2014 through 2018 , see appendix iii . cms officials also make decisions annually about which existing measures cms will remove from its medicare quality programs . the muc list then undergoes public review by multiple stakeholders . after this review , cms chooses which measures to include in the formal rulemaking processes that ultimately determine which measures are added to its quality programs .