the sdvosb program is an extension of this policy . it is also intended to honor the extraordinary service rendered to the united states by veterans with disabilities incurred or aggravated in the line of duty during active service in the armed forces . the veterans benefits act of 2003 , which established the program , permits contracting officers to award set - aside and sole - source contracts to any small business concern owned and controlled by one or more service - disabled veterans . executive order 13360 also requires federal procurement officials and prime contractors to provide opportunities for these firms to increase their federal contracting and subcontracting . in order to be eligible for a set - aside or sole - source sdvosb contract , a firm must meet certain criteria . it must be majority - owned by one or more service - disabled veterans who manage and control daily business operations . a firm must also qualify as a small business under the north american industry classification system ( naics ) industry - size standards . currently , in the governmentwide sdvosb program , firm officials are allowed to self - certify themselves as being sdvosb by attesting that they meet the criteria . the small business administration ( sba ) which , along with federal procuring agencies , administers the sdvosb program , reported in fiscal year 2008 that $6.5 billion in federal contracts were awarded to firms that self - certified themselves as sdvosbs . government contracts to sdvosbs accounted for only 1.5 percent of all government contract dollars paid in fiscal year 2008 . since the sdvosb program began , the government has not met its annual mandated goal of 3 percent . in addition to sba's statutory authority over administration of the sdvosb program , several other government agencies have separate authority over issues related to the sdvosb program . the veterans benefits , health care , and information technology act requires the department of veterans affairs ( va ) to maintain a database of sdvosbs and veteran - owned small businesses ( vosb ) so a contractor's eligibility can be verified , and requires va to determine the eligibility of firms bidding on va sdvosb and vosb contracts . preventive controls for the sdvosb program should , at a minimum , be designed to verify that a firm seeking sdvosb status is eligible for the program . however , during our investigation , we found that there are no governmentwide controls that verify whether firms who self - certify as sdvosbs meet program requirements . va performs some level of validation of contractors claiming to be sdvosbs that bid on va contracts , but even that process was primarily based on a review of self - reported data . the key to the validation process within the sdvosb program must be verifying self - reported contractor data with independent third - party sources . key data to validate with preventive controls should include whether the owner or owners are service - disabled veterans , whether the service - disabled veteran owner ( s ) manage and control daily operations , and whether the business qualifies as a small business under the primary naics industry - size standards for the sdvosb contract awarded .