this is not necessarily the case . again , ideally , these technology transfer issues would be anticipated before a development or production contract is competed or awarded . with this knowledge , the jsf program office and lockheed martin could suggest adjustments to work packages or bidders' lists if the technology or companies in question are likely to raise export control concerns . regardless , the end result could still be the selection of a single source — one that advances affordability and protects sensitive u.s. technology . dod also concurred with our recommendation that the secretary of defense direct the jsf program office to ensure that information concerning the prime contractors' selection and management of suppliers is collected , closely monitored , and used for program oversight . in its comments , dod stated that the jsf program office would work closely with lockheed martin to achieve effective program oversight with regard to partner expectations and program goals . however , dod did not specify how it plans to collect and monitor this information or elaborate on other steps the jsf program office would take to identify and resolve potential conflicts between partner expectations and program goals . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the navy and the air force ; the commandant of the marine corps ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . our objective was to review how the department of defense ( dod ) is managing the integration of partner countries and suppliers into the joint strike fighter ( jsf ) program . specifically , we identified international relationships and the benefits they are expected to provide and assessed how dod is managing cost sharing , technology transfer , and partner expectations for industrial return . to conduct our work , we reviewed various guidance and agreements related to the jsf program . we also interviewed cognizant government officials and industry experts , including those in several jsf partner countries . to determine what relationships are necessary to integrate international partners into the program , we identified and examined documents related to jsf international arrangements and agreements , including information from dod ; the jsf program office in arlington , virginia ; and the lockheed martin aeronautics company in fort worth , texas . specifically , we obtained documents from the office of the under secretary of defense ( acquisition , technology , and logistics ) , the department of state ( office of defense trade controls ) , the secretary of the air force ( international affairs ) , the navy international programs office , and the department of commerce ( bureau of industry and security ) . we discussed the guidance and processes for developing and negotiating agreements for international participation with officials from each of these offices .