data management . in 1998 , doe identified quality assurance problems with the quality and traceability of data , specifically that some data had not been properly collected or tested to ensure its accuracy and that data used to support scientific analysis could not be properly traced back to its source . doe found similar problems in april and september 2003 . software management . doe quality assurance procedures require that software used to support analysis and conclusions about the performance and safety of the repository be tested or created in such a way to ensure that it is reliable . from 1998 to 2003 , multiple doe audits found recurring quality assurance problems that could affect confidence in the adequacy of software . model validation . amrs contain the scientific analysis and modeling data that demonstrate the safety and performance of the planned repository and , among other quality requirements , must be traceable to their original source material and data and be transparent in justifying and explaining their underlying assumptions , calculations , and conclusions . in 2003 , based in part on these problems , as well as doe's long - standing problems with data , software , and modeling , nrc conducted an independent evaluation of three amrs to determine if they met nrc requirements for being traceable , transparent , and technically appropriate for their use in the license application . in all three amrs , nrc found significant problems with both traceability and transparency . nrc concluded that these findings suggested that other amrs may have similar problems and that such problems could delay nrc's review of the license application , as it would need to conduct special inspections to resolve any problems it found with the quality of technical information . to address problems of traceability and transparency , doe initiated an effort in the spring of 2004 called the regulatory integration team ( rit ) to perform a comprehensive inspection and rework of the amrs and ensure they met nrc requirements and expectations . according to doe officials , the rit involved roughly 150 full - time personnel from doe , usgs , and multiple national laboratories such as sandia , los alamos , and lawrence livermore . the rit decided that 89 of the approximately 110 amrs needed rework . according to doe officials , the rit addressed or corrected over 3,700 problems , and was completed approximately 8 months later at a cost of about $20 million . in a february 2005 letter to doe , the site contractor stated that the rit effort had successfully improved the amrs' traceability and transparency . subsequently , however , doe identified additional problems with traceability and transparency that required further inspections and rework . doe initiated a review of additional amrs that were not included in the scope of the 2004 rit review after a march 2005 discovery of e - mails from usgs employees written between may 1998 and march 2000 implying that employees had falsified documentation of their work to avoid quality assurance standards . these additional amrs contained scientific work performed by the usgs employees and had been assumed by the rit to meet nrc requirements for traceability and transparency .