we discussed each of these adjustments with ssa officials . we reviewed data provided by ssa on the increase in overtime pay in 2000 over the prior year . using this information , we allocated a part of the increase in overtime pay to the center's attorney fee work , reducing the estimate by $0.5 million ( 1 percent ) to $37.8 million . we eliminated the costs associated with the subcategory “atfee misc” from the costs . ( see the appendix for further details on our proposed cost adjustments. ) we compared our adjusted estimate of $35.4 million with ssa's original estimate of $54 million . in 2000 , ssa processed $512 million in attorney fee payments . comparing the original estimate to these payments , ssa's administrative costs were 10.5 percent of the total payments . however , using the adjusted estimate , ssa's administrative costs were 6.9 percent of the attorney payments . table 1 presents both the original and adjusted estimates . although most fees were processed in far less time in 2000 than in 1999 , over 20 percent of the fees in both years still took longer than 6 months from the date of the oha decision to the date when the attorneys were paid . while the major reason for the improved performance in 2000 was the elimination of the 15-day protest period by the ticket to work act , the underlying reasons for the longest periods of delay remained largely unchanged . the state agency would then have denied the claim in an initial review and denied it again after reconsidering the claim . once ssa notified the claimant of denial of benefits , the claimant would have then appealed to oha . at oha , the claimant would have had a hearing before an administrative law judge who would have reversed the decision of the state agency , finding the claimant eligible for di benefits . generally , the claimant appoints an attorney for the oha level appeal . the fees that attorneys representing di applicants can charge are limited by law and must be approved by ssa . this office would have then forwarded the claim to a state agency to examine the claimant's evidence for medical disability . since 1967 , ssa has administered fee payments to attorneys representing di claimants . to be compensated , attorneys must file with ssa either a fee agreement — a formal contract signed by the applicant and the attorney setting the fee as a percentage of the applicant's past - due benefits — or a fee petition that lists the specific costs associated with the case . in contrast , the fee petitions require attorneys to itemize expenses and hourly charges , and ssa must determine a reasonable fee to compensate the attorneys . assuming either a fee agreement or a fee petition is approved , ssa withholds the amount of the fee from the beneficiaries' past - due benefits and pays the attorneys directly . historically , attorneys representing claimants before ssa submitted fee petitions for their services .