they provide this support in a variety of ways . two hospice - based palliative care programs use social workers to assist families and caregivers with end - of - life decision making and accessing community agencies and resources . another hospice - based palliative care program uses an interdisciplinary care team to assist families in making end - of - life decisions . one hospital - based palliative care program , two hospice - based palliative care programs , and one palliative care program operated by a health care system provide bereavement support to family members . one health care system's palliative care program provides 24-hour nursing support for individuals in their homes , which assists caregivers , and another palliative care program operated by a hospice assists family members with coordinating in - home support services . two hospital - based palliative care programs assist families with coordinating care upon an individual's discharge from the hospital . officials from one hospice - based palliative care program and a palliative care program operated by a hospital both stated that they provide education about end - of - life care to family members . the programs we identified communicate frequently with individuals and their families regarding end - of - life issues . representatives of the pace , wpp , and palliative care providers and altcs officials we interviewed stated that they work with individuals and their families to develop a plan of care that reflects each individual's choices . for example , a representative of a pace provider described how the interdisciplinary care team fosters communication with the individual about what type of care he or she wants to receive at the end of life , including pain and symptom management . representatives of a provider of both pace and wpp described how the interdisciplinary care team establishes goals with the individual and includes a physician and social worker to facilitate discussions involving end - of - life issues . a hospital - based palliative care program's interdisciplinary care team holds meetings with family members to discuss an individual's health status , prognosis , and end - of - life wishes , and another palliative care program has discharge coordinators follow up with individuals for as long as services are required . an altcs official stated that case managers discuss with beneficiaries what their needs are and what care they want to receive . representatives of palliative care , pace , and wpp providers informed us that they develop close , trusting relationships with individuals through their frequent communication to facilitate discussions about end - of - life care . representatives of pace , wpp , and palliative care providers we interviewed stated that communicating with individuals and their families about end - of - life issues earlier , rather than later , in the individual's illness makes it easier for both the individual and family to manage the decisions they face when the individual is closer to death . representatives of a wpp provider stated that they have continuous conversations with individuals and families about plans for the end of life , and representatives of a pace provider noted that they have these discussions early because such discussions become more challenging when someone is very near the end of life .