licensing . the colorado med and the washington state lcb have established four types of recreational marijuana licenses that allow licensees ( or accredited testing facilities ) to conduct specific tasks , including producing , processing , or selling marijuana products , or testing marijuana products for potency and potential contaminants . figure 4 shows the types of recreational marijuana licenses issued in colorado and washington . table 1 shows the number of active recreational marijuana licenses by type as of august 2015 , as reported by each of the 2 states' recreational marijuana regulatory agencies . background checks . both colorado and washington conduct background checks to determine if applicants are eligible to obtain a license to operate a recreational marijuana facility . as part of the licensing process , both states' regulations require applicants to submit documentation that may include biographical information , fingerprints , financial information and funding sources , and facility floor plans . the regulatory agencies review this documentation to determine whether applicants meet eligibility requirements including state residency , age , and criminal history requirements . to what extent is doj monitoring the effects of state marijuana legalization relative to doj's 2013 marijuana enforcement policy guidance ? what factors have doj field officials reported affecting their marijuana enforcement actions in selected states that have legalized marijuana for medical purposes ? to determine how colorado and washington regulate the production , processing , and sale of recreational marijuana , we reviewed laws and regulations governing recreational marijuana in colorado and washington as well as reports describing the development and implementation of these laws and regulations , such as the state of colorado task force report providing recommendations for implementing colorado's recreational marijuana legalization law . to obtain additional perspectives on these regulations , we interviewed officials from the state regulatory agencies responsible for developing , implementing , and enforcing the regulations , including the colorado department of revenue's marijuana enforcement division ( med ) and the washington state liquor and cannabis board ( washington state lcb ) . in addition , we observed washington state lcb officials conduct inspections at three recreational marijuana facilities . we also interviewed officials from each of the states' state patrols and offices of the attorney general , to obtain their perspectives on implementation and enforcement of the regulations . to determine how doj is monitoring the effects of state marijuana legalization laws relative to doj's 2013 marijuana enforcement policy , we reviewed doj documentation related to its marijuana enforcement and monitoring efforts , including marijuana enforcement guidance memorandums the office of the deputy attorney general ( odag ) issued to federal prosecutors beginning in 2009 , and information doj provided to the senate judiciary committee regarding its marijuana enforcement policy . we interviewed doj headquarters officials from odag , dea , the executive office for united states attorneys ( eousa ) , and other doj components including the criminal division and the office of justice programs . we also interviewed officials from the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) , with which doj reported coordinating as part of its efforts to monitor the effects of state marijuana legalization .