 not met . dhs provided evidence that did not satisfy any aspects of the element or provided no evidence . to determine the extent to which dhs had implemented iv&v on its large it system acquisitions , we first collected information on the status and program characteristics of the 53 level 1 and 2 it acquisitions listed in dhs's major acquisitions oversight list of may 26 , 2010 . ii. ) despite dhs's reported widespread use of iv&v , the eight programs selected for our review did not consistently implement the elements of effective iv&v . these programs — ace , tasc , itp , tecs - mod , ncps , itip , c4isr , and transformation — all reported that they planned and performed iv&v on system development and / or acquisition activities throughout their respective program life cycles , at a total estimated cost of about $91 million . ( see app . iii for a description of the iv&v efforts and costs of these programs , as reported by dhs. ) however , our review of documents and artifacts for these programs determined that , in most cases , there were gaps in their implementation of iv&v . notably , one program — ncps — demonstrated almost none of the elements of iv&v leading practices . table 4 summarizes the extent to which each program implemented key elements of effective iv&v . a high - level discussion of implementation across the programs , with selected examples , follows the table . appendix iv provides the detailed results of our analysis .  decision criteria . none of the eight programs had fully established decision criteria to guide their iv&v efforts . the five programs that partially met our criteria determined how or when to apply iv&v results to improve the program's management , but they did not establish and use a risk - based approach for deciding whether or to what extent to use iv&v . for example , tasc officials told us that they meet weekly to review key findings and determine how they can improve the management of the program , but that they did not follow a structured , risk - based process in deciding to use iv&v . the remaining three programs did not incorporate either of these aspects into their program decision processes . while department policy suggests performing iv&v on life cycle activities such as requirements definition , requirements management , and operational readiness activities , department policy does not require that its component agencies or acquisition programs critically assess their it acquisition programs to determine and document the appropriate scope of iv&v efforts for each program . in addition , the policy does not require that such efforts identify and document compliance criteria for the validation and verification activities .  required program resources . dhs acquisition policy does not require ( or require that its component agencies ensure ) that it acquisitions identify and document the resources needed to execute their efforts — including facilities and tools . it is also silent on other essential aspects of planning the effort , including funding and human resources .  management and oversight .