cost . the subprogram had a cost estimate for its planned work through fiscal year 2022 but at the time of our review had yet to update its cost estimate for the overall subprogram through its new planned completion date of fiscal year 2027 . specifically , as of june 2017 , the subprogram had a cost estimate of about $595 million , according to our analysis of information provided by the subprogram . this estimate covered the planned work scope of all three subprogram components to be completed during fiscal year 2017 through 2022 . the subprogram , however , did not have estimated costs for completing work scope planned during fiscal years 2023 through 2027 . according to nnsa officials , as of june 2017 , they were developing a cost estimate for the remaining years , although the officials did not specify when the cost estimate would be completed . measuring performance against baselines . the subprogram did not measure its overall performance against schedule and cost baselines . nnsa reported to congress in july 2014 that the subprogram planned to remove or disposition approximately 3,000 kilograms of nuclear material by fiscal year 2022 at an estimated cost of about $600 million . however , the subprogram did not track information on its performance against the cost estimate . according to nnsa officials , removal projects have too many uncertain costs . instead , nnsa officials said that they update the subprogram's life - cycle cost each year as part of the annual planning for the next fiscal year's budget request . until the subprogram develops schedule and cost estimates to support the recently revised life - cycle completion date of fiscal year 2027 , it does not have the baselines it needs to measure its overall schedule and cost performance . although the subprogram did not measure its overall performance against established schedule and cost baselines , according to monthly performance reports , the subprogram baselined and measured the schedule performance of individual removal projects by tracking the difference in number of days between forecasted project completion dates and baseline completion dates . however , the subprogram did not have information that integrated project performance information to provide an overall picture of schedule performance for the entire subprogram . the heu reactor conversion subprogram had schedule and cost estimates that covered the remaining work scope to complete two of three subprogram components by fiscal year 2033 but not for a third component estimated to be completed in fiscal year 2035 . specifically , the subprogram's schedule was not up - to - date for 22 of the 44 international reactors in the subprogram's planned work scope to support the estimated fiscal year 2035 completion date for these reactors . instead , in the subprogram's schedule , these reactors had estimated completion dates by fiscal year 2030 . nnsa officials explained that the schedule was not up - to - date for these reactors because the reactors are in countries where the subprogram cannot currently plan or implement the conversions due to limitations in cooperation with these countries .