voting area . figure 5 shows some key polling place features that we examined , and appendix iv contains a complete list of potential impediments . these features primarily affect individuals with mobility impairments , in particular voters using wheelchairs . many of the polling places that had potential impediments offered curbside voting or other accommodations to assist voters who may have had difficulty getting to or making their way through a polling place . for all polling places , we found that 45.3 percent had one or more potential impediments and offered curbside voting , 27.4 percent had potential impediments and did not offer curbside voting , and 27.3 percent had no potential impediments . some polling places provided assistance to voters by bringing a paper ballot or provisional ballot to a voter in a vehicle . in addition to curbside voting , officials we interviewed at most polling places said they would provide assistance to help people with disabilities vote in the polling place . for example , some polling places had wheelchairs available , if needed . similar to our findings in 2000 , the majority of potential impediments at polling places in 2008 occurred outside of or at the building entrance , although improvements were made in some areas . fifty percent of polling places had one or more potential impediments in the path from the parking area to the building entrance ( see fig . at the same time , the percentage of polling places with potential impediments at the building entrance dropped sharply — from 59 percent in 2000 to 25 percent in 2008 . as shown in table 1 , the most common potential impediments in 2008 were steep ramps or curb cuts in the parking area , unpaved or poor surfaces in the path from the parking lot or route to the building entrance , and door thresholds exceeding ½ inch in height . figure 7 shows an example of a polling place with two potential impediments from the parking area to the building entrance . it is important to note that our assessment of polling places in 2000 did not include measurements of ramps or curb cuts in the parking area . with this additional accessibility indicator , we did not see a reduction of potential impediments in the parking area overall . however , polling places made significant gains in providing designated parking for people with disabilities , which decreased from 32 percent with no designated parking in 2000 to only 3 percent in 2008 . in comparison to our findings in 2000 , the proportion of polling places with multiple potential impediments decreased in 2008 . specifically , polling places with four or more potential impediments decreased significantly — from 29 percent in 2000 to 16 percent in 2008 ( see fig . at the same time , the percentage of polling places with one , two , or three with one , two , or three potential impediments stayed about the same as in 2000. potential impediments stayed about the same as in 2000 . all but one polling place we examined had at least one accessible voting system — typically , an accessible machine in a voting station — to facilitate private and independent voting for people with disabilities .