open . the internal revenue service's ( irs ) exam policy has expanded its action plan to include short - term actions for fiscal year 2008 . by june 30 , 2008 , it plans to issue a memorandum to emphasize the importance of training employees who calculate interest and outline available training modules . by september 30 , 2008 , it plans to offer assistance reviews as requested to verify adherence to procedures , and to improve the process for employees to elevate issues to the program office for resolution . by january 1 , 2009 , exam policy will coordinate additional interest - related training to target field exam and collection personnel . open . in testing a statistical sample of 45 manual interest transactions recorded during fiscal year 2006 , we found eight errors relating to the calculation and recording of manually calculated interest . based on this , we estimated that 18 percent of irs's manual interest population contains errors and concluded that irs's controls over this area remain ineffective . the ineffectiveness of these controls contributes to errors in taxpayer records , which is a major component of the material weakness in irs's unpaid assessments . during fiscal year 2007 , irs did not make any significant improvements to controls related to manual interest calculations . we will continue to evaluate irs's corrective actions in future audits . irs plans to assess the results of the test and implement the irm procedures as appropriate . irs continues to identify and submit work requests and information technology assets management system tickets to enhance the assessment process and provide for efficiencies in the cpm process . these include but are not limited to the systemic generation of the form 5942 , redefining the current inventory assignment system and creating inventory and management reports . open . to ensure quality , timeliness , and accuracy of the tfrp process , the irs initiated a quality review process that focused on two primary areas , the first being consolidation of all tfrp work to one campus . consolidation of all sb / se atfr work to the ogden campus was completed in september 2005 . all w&i business unit tfrp work was transferred to sb / se campuses as of january 2006 . the second area irs undertook was the task of rewriting the atfr area office user component to provide system flexibility that better replicates the realities of the current trust fund investigation / proposal process . irs continues to monitor the accuracy and effectiveness of the tfrp process and all corrective actions already in place . according to irs , it completed consolidation of atfr work at its ogden campus by september 2005 . however , during our fiscal year 2007 audit , we continued to find long delays in irs's processing and posting of tfrp assessments . in one case , we noted that irs did not record the assessment against the responsible officer until 4 years after it made the determination that the officer was responsible for the tfrp . in another case , irs did not record the tfrp assessment against the officer until almost 3 years after it made the determination that the officer was responsible for the tfrp .