( see app . we will send copies of this report to the secretary of transportation , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . specifically , they agreed to hold bi - monthly updates on the progress of each of the vulnerability assessments , discuss program task methodologies and approaches , and identify options for addressing the challenges facing program researchers in conducting the program's vulnerability assessments . the first update was held in march 2003 . furthermore , rspa's associate administrator agreed to provide tsa's director for threat assessment and risk management with information on the tia program's findings , challenges , and lessons learned . in our discussions with tsa's director for threat and risk assessment , she said that such information regarding the tia program would be helpful in guiding tsa's future efforts in planning and conducting transportation security research . because of actions taken by rspa and ois to improve coordination we are making no recommendations at this time . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have questions about this report , please call me on ( 202 ) 512-2834 or chris keisling on ( 404 ) 679-1917 . other key contributors included colin fallon , bert japikse , steve morris , and jason schwartz . supervisory control and data acquisition vulnerabilities ( 1997 ) national air space vulnerabilities ( 1997 ) traffic ( surface ) central systems vulnerabilities ( 1997 ) white papers: electromagnetic threats to rail / transit operations ( 1997 ) criminal use of transportation infrastructure ( 1997 ) railroad bridges and tunnels vulnerability ( 1998 ) railroad signaling and control vulnerability ( 1998 ) intermodal cargo security best practices ( 1999 ) transportation infrastructure assurance research and development plan ( 1999 and 2000 ) workshops: emerging issues in transportation information infrastructure security ( 1996 ) global positioning study interference and mitigation ( 1998 ) chemical / biological incidents ( 1998 ) marine safety and port security ( 2000 ) intermodal cargo security best practices ( 1999 ) transportation infrastructure assurance research and development plan ( 1999 and 2000 ) dot communications ( security ) reports ( 2001 ) updated supervisory control and data acquisition ( scada ) study ( 2002 ) global positioning system vulnerability study ( 2001 ) . we provided a copy of the draft report to dot and rspa officials who agreed with the contents of the report and provided technical clarifications that we incorporated into the report . options to transition hazardous materials transportation security guidelines to security requirements: the purpose of this assessment is to evaluate the tradeoffs in the transportation of hazardous materials that exist between security , economic , proprietary , and delivery factors . rspa plans to provide an analysis and description of these tradeoffs in different threat scenarios for different modes of transportation . figure 5 provides an overview of the types of transportation being assessed .