currently , the u.s . i would be pleased to answer any questions you and the subcommittee members may have . for further information about this testimony , please contact richard stana at 202-512-8777 . other key contributors to this statement were blake ainsworth , frances cook , michelle cooper , rebecca gambler , kathryn godfrey , lara laufer , shawn mongin , justin l. monroe , john vocino , robert e. white , and paul wright . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . in cases when eev cannot confirm an employee's work authorization status either through the automatic check or the check by an immigration status verifier , the system issues the employer a tentative nonconfirmation of the employee's work authorization status . these services , designed to ensure accurate employer wage reporting , are offered free of charge . in this case , the employers must notify the affected employees of the finding , and the employees have the right to contest their tentative nonconfirmations by contacting ssa or uscis to resolve any inaccuracies in their records within 8 days . mandatory electronic employment verification would substantially increase the number of employers using the eev system , which would place greater demands on uscis and ssa resources . according to ssa officials , the automated secondary verification capability is tentatively scheduled to be implemented by october 2007 . i appreciate the opportunity to be here today to participate in this hearing on electronic employment verification . if participation in the eev program were made mandatory , the program may have to accommodate all of the estimated 5.9 million employers in the united states . uscis officials estimate that to meet a december 2008 implementation date , this could require about of 30,000 employers to register with the system per day . the mandatory use eev can affect the capacity of the system because of the increased number of employer queries . uscis has estimated that a mandatory eev could cost uscis $70 million annually for program management and $300 million to $400 million annually for compliance activities and staff . the costs associated with other programmatic and system enhancements are currently unknown . according to uscis , cost estimates will rise if the number of queries rises , although officials noted that the estimates may depend on the method for implementing a mandatory program . ssa officials told us they have estimated that expansion of the eev program to levels predicted by the end of fiscal year 2007 would cost $5 to $6 million , but ssa was not yet able to provide us estimates for the cost of a mandatory eev . according to ssa officials , the cost of a mandatory eev would be driven by the increased workload of its field office staff due to resolving ssa tentative nonconfirmations .