gao - 07-733 . washington , d.c.: may 14 , 2007. business systems modernization: dod needs to fully define policies and procedures for institutionally managing investments . washington , d.c.: february 12 , 2007. business systems modernization: strategy for evolving dod's business enterprise architecture offers a conceptual approach , but execution details are needed . gao - 07-451 . washington , d.c.: april 16 , 2007 . high - risk series: an update . gao - 07-310 . washington , d.c.: january 2007 . defense business transformation: a comprehensive plan , integrated efforts , and sustained leadership are needed to assure success . the department's comments are reprinted in appendix ii . in its overall comments , dod expressed concern about what it characterized as gao's belief that the department placed improper emphasis on business systems modernization to the detriment of overall business transformation efforts . in particular , dod stated that business systems modernization is a critical step in achieving overall business transformation , and that lessons learned and governance structures developed for modernizing business systems acquisition processes are being evaluated for implementation beyond the business side . it further stated that the deputy's advisory working group and the defense business systems modernization committee both focus more broadly on defense business transformation . dod also believed we had overstated the nature of “broad - based consensus” between gao , the institute for defense analyses , and the defense business board about the need for a cmo in dod , noting that the institute for defense analyses had examined four alternate methods for institutionalizing the roles of the cmo and ultimately supported the department's position that those duties be vested in the deputy secretary of defense . we disagree with dod's characterization of our report with respect to the emphasis of the department's efforts and the nature of the broad - based consensus on the need for a cmo . the report specifically gives dod credit for progress to date on setting up an overall framework for broader business transformation , and in no way suggests that any specific steps taken regarding modernizing business systems are detrimental to this progress . rather , we note that the framework , as currently structured and implemented , focuses on business systems , is a foundation to build upon , and needs to be expanded to more fully address broader transformation issues . the report also recognizes the establishment of the deputy's advisory working group and the defense business systems modernization committee . while dod suggests these two groups focus more broadly on business transformation , our work shows that dod has not clearly defined or institutionalized interrelationships , roles and responsibilities , or accountability for broader business transformation among these entities . also , differences of opinion exist within dod about the roles and scope of the various entities . further , contrary to dod's view , we did not overstate the nature of the “broad - based consensus” regarding the need for a cmo . in fact , the defense business board , institute for defense analyses , and the department are on record in their support for establishing a cmo at dod .