gsa warehouses . in 2014 , we found that some gsa warehouses listed as “used” had been vacant for as long as 10 years . gsa only lists warehouses as unused if they are in the process of being disposed , making it difficult to identify which warehouses are actually underutilized or vacant . two examples located in washington , d.c. are shown in figure 11 . we recommended that gsa improve its data related to warehouses . gsa agreed with the recommendations . gsa , however , continues to lack a strategic approach to prioritize warehouses and make long - term , informed decisions about government warehouse space . as a result , gsa may have limited ability to address this potentially growing gap as well as the unique challenges facing gsa's warehouse portfolio . such a strategy would enable gsa and tenant agencies to prioritize their needs and take a long - term view of the warehouse inventory to support better informed decisions . gsa high - value leases . to reduce its overreliance on costly leases , we recommended in september 2013 that gsa develop a long - term , cross - agency strategy that facilitates consideration of targeted investments in ownership . gsa agreed with our recommendation and has taken steps to prioritize lease purchases , but has not yet developed a strategy that considers its full portfolio of high - value leases . such a strategy would strengthen the business case for stakeholders to increase ownership investments in high - value leased properties — a necessary step for fully addressing gsa's overreliance on leasing in situations where ownership would be more cost effective in the long run . the administration and congress have taken recent steps to reform real property management and address the long - standing challenge of reducing excess and underutilized property . for example , in 2015 , omb implemented our recommendation by issuing government - wide guidance — the national strategy for the efficient use of real property — which aligns with many of the desirable characteristics of effective national strategies that we have previously identified . in december 2016 , two real property reform laws were also enacted that could address the long - standing problem of federal excess and underutilized property . the federal assets sale and transfer act of 2016 may help address stakeholder influence by establishing an independent board to identify and recommend civilian federal buildings for disposal . the president has not yet appointed the board , but gsa has started gathering information from the agencies to support the board once it is constituted . in addition , the federal property management reform act of 2016 codified the federal real property council ( frpc ) — a group of senior real property officers from each federal agency — to collaborate to improve real property management and reduce costs to the federal government . for example , the act requires that the frpc , in consultation with omb and gsa , update annually a property management plan template with government - wide performance measures to reduce surplus property and achieve better utilization of underutilized property . in fiscal year 2015 , federal agencies spent about $4.3 billion on over 640,000 vehicles that agencies own or lease . incremental development .