dod concurred with both of our recommendations . dod's comments are reprinted in appendix iv . dod concurred with our first recommendation , indicating that the department's better buying power initiative contains efforts to streamline documentation requirements and staff reviews and its recent ( february 2015 ) set of legislative proposals to congress seeks to reduce some dod reporting requirements . we acknowledge these efforts as steps in the right direction . we believe dod can and should do more to eliminate reviews and information requirements that do not add value and are no longer needed . one has even stalled . examples of these efforts include: in 2011 , the under secretary for acquisition , technology and logistics delegated the approval authority for three milestone documents from the office of the secretary of defense level to the service level . this reduced the number of levels of review and reviewers of these documents . a dod official told us the approval authority for additional documents could be delegated in the future , but no additional documents are currently being considered . in 2013 , the under secretary for acquisition , technology and logistics asked the service acquisition executives to identify programs where the milestone decision authority could be potentially delegated from the office of the secretary of defense to a lower level . delegation to the lower level also reduces the number of levels of review and reviewers . the services identified 18 programs: 7 programs from the air force ; 5 programs from the navy ; and 6 programs from the army . in september 2014 the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics delegated the authority to act as the milestone decision authority to the secretary of the air force for 3 programs , the secretary of the navy for 1 program , and the secretary of the army for 1 program . in april 2013 , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics issued guidance that included a potential pilot test of a “skunkworks” process for major defense acquisition programs . the under secretary requested that each service recommend one candidate program for a pilot test by july 2013 . as of october 2014 , programs had not been identified and the effort has been placed on hold . office of the secretary of defense officials stated it has been difficult to identify programs that meet the under secretary's expected preconditions — namely to identify programs that have well defined requirements , a strong relationship with industry , and a highly qualified and appropriately staffed government team that can remain with the program until it is delivered . in 2014 , dod began using an electronic coordination tool designed to electronically disseminate and track the progress of documentation being reviewed . the tool is used to enforce time limits for the review of documents and provide near real - time views of all comments made during the review process to promote greater efficiency across the department . dod officials have begun using this tool with the acquisition strategy and hope to add more documents over time .