pub . 111-5 , § 2005 , 123 stat . federal law sets forth broad coverage provisions for the categories of workers that are covered by the ui program , as well as some benefit provisions , the federal tax base and rate , and administrative requirements such as what program data will be reported . within the framework established by federal law , states can determine key elements of their ui programs , such as eligibility / disqualification provisions , the benefit amount , and the amount of taxes that employers must pay . within the context of the federal - state partnership , labor has general responsibility for overseeing the ui program to ensure that the states are operating the program effectively and efficiently . for example , labor is responsible for monitoring state operations and procedures , providing technical assistance and training , as well as analyzing ui program data to diagnose potential problems . the federal - state structure of the ui program places primary responsibility for its administration on the states , and gives them wide latitude to administer their programs in a manner that best suits their needs within the guidelines established by federal law . in addition , an administrative decision made by labor in 1986 provided states “bottom line authority” in administering their ui programs , giving them greater control over their expenditures and reducing federal monitoring of administrative expenditures . in particular , bottom - line authority permits states to move resources among cost categories — such as from benefit payment control activities to claims processing — and across quarters within a fiscal year . it also permits states to use ui administrative resources based on the state's assessment of its particular needs . to oversee the program , the office of unemployment insurance within labor's eta and eta offices in six geographic regions are responsible for working with the states . the regional offices are the states' main points of contact with labor and serve as a link between the department and the states for providing technical assistance and clarifying program policies , objectives , and priorities . moreover , the regional offices have primary responsibility for overseeing the fiscal and management integrity of the ui program . this oversight includes ensuring that states do not provide unemployment compensation to ineligible recipients and ensuring that states detect these overpayments when they do occur . the ui program was designed to be forward funded and self - financed by states , with each state's trust fund building up reserves from employer taxes during periods of economic expansion in order to pay ui benefits during economic downturns . because unemployment can vary substantially during a business cycle , it is important that states build sufficient trust funds to remain solvent during recessionary times . toward this end , the program is financed primarily by taxes levied on employers , with each state setting tax rates and a tax base which must be at least equal to the federal wage base ( currently set at $7,000 ) to automatically finance regular ui benefits . in addition , in accordance with the federal unemployment tax act , employers pay a federal tax .