doing so would address our recommendation . usda also provided technical comments . we incorporated these comments as appropriate . the department of health and human services did not have any comments . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of agriculture , the administrator of the food safety and inspection service , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or morriss@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . in addition to regulating meat and poultry sold in commerce , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) also purchases food and , in some cases , has additional food safety requirements for food it purchases . usda's agricultural marketing service ( ams ) purchases beef and other food for various federal nutrition assistance programs , including the national school lunch program . usda provides this food to states in support of about 100,000 public and private nonprofit schools that provide lunches to about 30 million children . ground beef is a staple of school menus . for example , according to ams officials , during fiscal year 2016 , the agency purchased more than 110 million pounds of raw beef , over 90 percent of which was delivered to the national school lunch program . further , according to ams officials , about 41 million pounds ( 37 percent ) were delivered raw while the rest was delivered to a federally inspected processing facility for cooking prior to delivery to school lunch program agencies . beef to be delivered raw to the national school lunch program is tested for pathogens ( salmonella and shiga - toxin - producing e. coli , two pathogens that can cause foodborne illness in humans ) and certain microorganisms such as aerobic plate count bacteria , coliform bacteria , and generic e. coli that serve as indicators of the effectiveness of slaughter and processing plants' process controls to limit pathogens . national school lunch program according to usda , the national school lunch program is a federally assisted meal program operating in public and nonprofit private schools and residential childcare institutions . it provides nutritionally balanced , low - cost or free lunches to children each school day . the program was established under the national school lunch act , signed by president harry truman in 1946 . usda's food and nutrition service administers the program at the federal level . ( recommendation 1 ) . the administrator of fsis should set time frames for determining what pathogen standards or additional policies are needed to address pathogens in beef carcasses , ground beef , pork cuts , and ground pork .