scheduling . to determine the extent to which fcc developed and maintained a reliable schedule , we analyzed the project schedule as of september 2012 against the 10 best practices documented in the exposure draft of the gao schedule assessment guide . these include , for example , capturing all activities , integrating activities horizontally and vertically , and maintaining a baseline schedule . we also interviewed project officials about the schedule , the practices used in developing it , and reasons for deficiencies we identified . project risk management . to assess whether fcc effectively managed the risks associated with executing the esn project , we compared fcc's risk management practices to best practices for system acquisition . in doing so , we reviewed the risk management plan , risk logs , and related documentation of project plans and activities . we also interviewed commission officials about these processes and the risks facing the project , as well as reasons for deficiencies we identified . it investment management . to assess whether fcc made effective decisions about selecting the project and is providing sufficient oversight , we compared fcc's investment management practices to statutory requirements in the clinger cohen act as well as relevant sources of best practices for it investment management . in doing this , we reviewed fcc's policy for it investment management and reviewed documentation such as agency e - mail discussions about the decision to invest in esn , reports on project activities , and briefings to congressional staff . we also interviewed commission officials about the selection and oversight of the esn project . we conducted this performance audit from may 2012 to january 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the individuals named above , gary austin , nick marinos , and christopher warweg , assistant directors ; sher'rie bacon ; william cook ; saar dagani ; rebecca eyler ; krzysztof pasternak ; matthew snyder ; and michael stevens made key contributions to this report . project schedule . the success of a program depends , in part , on having an integrated and reliable schedule that defines , among other things , when work activities will occur , how long they will take , and how they relate to each other . in addition to enhancing security controls , the esn project aims to develop a sustainable cyber threat analysis and mitigation program that is to include risk management guidelines for assessing security threats and subsequent mitigation strategies . this effort is intended to provide fcc with mechanisms to analyze the criticality of commission assets , assess the likelihood that threats will endanger assets , and identify actions to reduce those risks and mitigate the consequences of an attack .