the first goal has been met . the fsm and the rmi are independent nations and are members of international organizations such as the united nations . the second goal of the compact – advancing economic development and self - sufficiency for both countries – was to be accomplished primarily through u.s. direct financial payments ( to be disbursed and monitored by the u.s. department of the interior ) to the fsm and the rmi . for 1987 through 2003 , u.s. assistance to the fsm and the rmi to support economic development is estimated , on the basis of interior data , to be about $2.1 billion . economic self - sufficiency has not been achieved . although total u.s. assistance ( compact direct funding as well as u.s. programs and services ) as a percentage of total government revenue has fallen in both countries ( particularly in the fsm ) , the two nations remain highly dependent on u.s. funds . u.s. direct assistance has maintained standards of living that are higher than could be achieved in the absence of u.s. support . further , the u.s. , fsm , and rmi governments provided little accountability over compact expenditures . the third goal of the compact – securing national security rights for all parties – has been achieved . the compact obligates the united states to defend the fsm and the rmi against an attack or the threat of attack in the same way it would defend its own citizens . the compact also provides the united states with the right of “strategic denial,” the ability to prevent access to the islands and their territorial waters by the military personnel of other countries or the use of the islands for military purposes . in addition , the compact grants the united states a “defense veto.” finally , through a compact - related agreement , the united states secured continued access to military facilities on kwajalein atoll in the rmi through 2016 . in a previous report , we identified kwajalein atoll as the key u.s. defense interest in the two countries . of these rights , only the defense veto is due to expire in 2003 if not renewed . another aspect of the special relationship between the fsm and the rmi and the united states involves the unique immigration rights that the compact grants . through the original compact , citizens of both nations are allowed to live and work in the united states as “nonimmigrants” and can stay for long periods of time , with few restrictions . further , the compact exempted fsm and rmi citizens from meeting u.s. passport , visa , and labor certification requirements when entering the united states . in recognition of the potential adverse impacts that hawaii and nearby u.s. commonwealths and territories could face as a result of an influx of fsm and rmi citizens , the congress authorized compact impact payments to address the financial impact of these nonimmigrants on guam , hawaii , and the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands ( cnmi ) . by 1998 , more than 13,000 fsm and rmi citizens had made use of the compact immigration provisions and were living in the three areas .