table 3 summarizes these rationales . contract types that shift more risk onto the government — including cost - type contracts — and exceed certain dollar thresholds have additional contractual reporting requirements . these requirements are designed to help the program office to monitor cost and schedule performance . in order to receive a cost - type or incentive contract valued at $20 million or more , a contractor must have an earned value management ( evm ) system that complies with certain guidelines . these systems integrate the scope of work with cost , schedule , and performance elements to support project planning . they also provide program offices with monthly contract performance reports that include cost and schedule status and risks . our prior work contains recommendations related to dod's use of evm . for example , in 2009 we recommended that dod modify policies governing evm to ensure they addressed a number of weaknesses we had identified . in response , dod developed and incorporated into its program management curricula a new evm training course . among the duties of two specialized government contract administration agencies — dcma and supship — are the review and approval of contractor evm systems , and ongoing surveillance of data generated by the systems . the regular reports provided to program offices by these agencies include evm data and analysis and highlight areas of concern and contract performance risk . in addition to use of evm data , contracting officials from the seven cost - type mdap contracts included in our review noted the importance of regular interactions between dod — whether the program office , dcma , or supship — and the contractor in order to proactively identify drivers of cost or schedule overruns . these interactions can range from day - to - day tracking to comprehensive quarterly reviews . several officials also noted the importance of having dcma and supship representatives on - site at contractor facilities , overseeing the contract and communicating with the contractor . our analysis of program cost and schedule outcomes for 21 mdaps did not find a clear relationship between these outcomes and the contract type used . dod's current portfolio of mdaps contains a total of 85 programs . the 21 mdaps in our review are the non - shipbuilding subset of the 85 that , as of january 2019 , had completed system development , held a critical design review , and started production . thus , these 21 programs are sufficiently far along the acquisition process that we can analyze their cost and schedule outcomes . we found that they demonstrated a range of cost and schedule performance , regardless of contract type chosen . table 4 notes the contract types used for these mdaps as well as unit cost and schedule change between each program's first full estimate and our most recent in - depth assessment of the program as of may 2019 . as reflected in the table , all but four of the mdaps used some mix of cost - type and fixed - price - type contracts .