according to the u.s . domestic working group's grant accountability project , a centralized information system can allow grant management staff to track a grant's status , tell how well a grantee is performing , and keep track of problems . an fra official stated that the agency considered integrating the two systems to provide a central system that combined grants and project management , but it was ultimately deemed too expensive and technologically challenging . it has been over 5 years since priia significantly expanded fra's grant - making role . in that time , fra has developed a new grants management framework — a large undertaking encompassing all projects funded through its grants — that involved concurrently hiring new staff , developing grants oversight policies and procedures , and awarding grants . in addition , the agency's grants management role has included overseeing the section 305 equipment procurement projects — a fundamentally new type of project for states to lead , involving technically complex new equipment that fra had limited experience overseeing . we reviewed additional documentation related to fra's oversight of these six selected grants , including 96 quarterly progress reports provided by fra for fiscal years 2013 through 2015 and 13 monitoring reports completed by fra for calendar years 2011 through 2015 to better understand how fra carries out its grants management roles and responsibilities . we focused our review on fra's grants management activities post - award , including monitoring of grant awards , project oversight , and technical assistance activities . we did not examine the agency's award issuance or grant closeout processes , as the equipment projects are ongoing at the time of this report's issuance . we reviewed additional policy and guidance documentation related to the oversight of the section 305 equipment procurement projects , including the relevant notices of funding availability issued by fra , fra's monitoring procedures describing the oversight conducted by the monitoring and technical assistance contractors ( mtac ) , and the mtac task order outlining specific tasks and technical assistance contractors may perform for the equipment projects . we also reviewed reports independent consultants provided to fra , such as reports on the bi - level car project's status and routine summaries of project - level activities and meetings between state grantees , equipment vendors , and subject matter experts . to collect additional information about how fra carried out grants management activities for the locomotive and bi - level car equipment procurements , we interviewed fra regional managers and grant managers within the office of railroad policy and development , subject matter experts within other fra offices such as the office of research , development and technology , and the office of chief counsel , and mtac contractors supporting the agency's oversight activities . we also interviewed amtrak officials , california , illinois , and washington state departments of transportation , as well as next generation equipment committee ( ngec ) participants and independent consultants involved with the section 305 equipment procurement projects .