dhs's u.s . citizenship and immigration services produces and personalizes bccs once an applicant has been determined eligible by a consular officer and delivers the cards to state for distribution by the u.s. mission in mexico . for an overview of the visa process , see figure 8 . the primary inspection process for passports and visas varies at air , sea , and land ports of entry due to differences in ports' environments and the risk each type of port faces with regard to fraudulent travel documents . in addition , the mode of travel and how travelers bearing passports and visas enter dictate the primary inspection procedures . for example , while at each port , primary officers question travelers regarding their identity and purpose of travel , and examine their passports or visas , the availability and use of equipment to conduct identity and records checks of travelers during primary inspection differ based on whether travelers arrive by plane , sea vessel , vehicle , or on foot . if the primary officer determines that further review is needed , the officer will refer the traveler to secondary inspection . in secondary inspection , an officer makes a final determination to admit the traveler or deny admission for reasons such as the presentation of a fraudulent or counterfeit passport or visa . we interviewed production and management staff at both of these facilities . we identified and reviewed past gao and inspector general reports on the internal controls and audits in place for the visas process . for bccs , we identified the internal controls and measures that differ from the normal visa process , but did not assess compliance with these controls . to examine the inspection measures and processes for travel documents issued by the state department at u.s. ports of entry , we reviewed relevant documentation and interviewed officials at dhs's u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , fdl , and u.s . visitor and immigrant status indicator technology ( us - visit ) program , and conducted site visits to ports of entry . we reviewed cbp inspections program policies , procedures , and related memorandums and relevant laws and regulations . at headquarters , we met with cbp officials responsible for field operations , information technology , training and development , intelligence , and information technology . we also interviewed officials from the federal law enforcement training center and fdl about issues relating to document examination training , and we discussed with fdl officials the types of forensic document analysis and operational support services provided to cbp . in addition , we interviewed us - visit officials and reviewed relevant documentation on the deployment and use of inspections - related technologies . to observe inspections processes and measures , we conducted site visits to nine u.s. ports of entry . due to differences in travel document inspections processes and measures among air , sea , and land ports , we selected three ports of each type . air ports of entry included chicago o'hare , dallas / fort worth , and miami . sea ports of entry included los angeles / long beach , miami , and port everglades , florida .