( dollars in millions ) . for the coast guard , the events of september 11th produced a dramatic shift in resources used for certain missions . the coast guard responded quickly to the attacks with a number of significant steps to ensure that the nation's ports remained open and operating . the coast guard relocated vessels , aircraft , and personnel from traditional missions — especially law enforcement — to enhance security activities . subsequently , the coast guard has returned some of these resources to their more traditional non - security missions , but in some areas , it faces challenges in restoring the level of activity to what it had been . after september 11th , the coast guard responded by positioning vessels , aircraft , and personnel not only to provide security , but also to increase visibility in key maritime locations . key actions taken included the following: recalling all cutters that were conducting offshore law enforcement patrols for drug , immigration , and fisheries enforcement and repositioning them at entrances to such ports as boston , los angeles , miami , new york , and san francisco . the coast guard also used smaller assets , such as patrol boats , motor lifeboats , and aircraft , to supplement increased port security activities . the smaller boats were used mainly for conducting security patrols within port facilities and in fact , became the port's “cop on the beat,” according to coast guard officials . establishing a new national vessel movement center to track the movement of all foreign - flagged vessels entering u.s. ports of call . the center is now the clearinghouse for vessel information , such as type of cargo and crew manifest . all commercial vessels over 300 gross tons are required to report this information to the center 96 hours in advance of their arrival . these missions include performing security inspections of cargo containers and port facilities , escorting or boarding high - interest commercial vessels , escorting navy ships and cruise ships , establishing and enforcing new security zones , and conducting harbor security patrols . to relieve or augment its current small boats now performing security functions , the coast guard plans to purchase 70 new homeland security response boats with supplemental funds appropriated for fiscal year 2002 and fiscal year 2003 funding . according to the coast guard , these new boats will increase the capabilities of existing stations at critical ports , while others will provide armed platforms for the agency's newly established marine safety and security teams . one program , san francisco's sea marshal program , illustrates the continued strain occurring at local ports . this program uses armed coast guard personnel to board and secure steering control locations aboard high - interest vessels . adding new deepwater cutters and aircraft , for example , is years away as are new motor lifeboats to replace the aging 41-foot boats , which have been the mainstay of harbor security patrols in recent months . also , according to officials in various coast guard units , many personnel are also working long hours even now , six months after the terrorist attacks .