we have not looked at this specific issue . however , our 2002 report noted that eic forms and instructions that irs used for similar attempts to determine qualifying child eligibility could be confusing to taxpayers and required documents that eic claimants had difficulty obtaining . when taxpayers have been disallowed the eic through an irs audit , they are required to substantiate their qualification for the eic — that is , “recertify” — before they can receive the credit again . as part of this process , irs's forms indicated that eic claimants could , for example , use medical records to prove a child's residency with them . however , eic claimants faced difficulty in providing such records . low - income working families are less likely to have stable relationships with medical service providers and their children are less likely to have routine medical care . irs officials said that they plan to pretest the proposed precertification forms both to determine whether they are clear and understandable to eic claimants but also to determine whether the claimants can provide the required information . this is a critical step in implementing the initiative . we recently reported that irs seldom tests the new and revised individual tax forms and instructions . ensuring consistent interpretation of documentation gathered in the new initiative will also be important . in our 2002 report , we noted that irs examiners did not consistently assess documentation for qualifying children . for example , we asked 21 examiners to examine five eic scenarios . the 21 examiners did not agree for any of the scenarios , and , in some cases , the examiners reached widely varying judgments about whether the evidence was sufficient to support an eic claim . i would be pleased to respond to any questions . for further information on this testimony , please contact michael brostek at ( 202 ) 512-9110 or brostekm@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include leon green , demian moore , neil pinney , and tom short . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . in order to better ensure consistent and accurate decisions based on documentation submitted , we recommended that irs provide training to its examiners . administering the eic is not an easy task for irs . irs has to balance its efforts to help ensure that all qualified persons claim the credit with its efforts to protect the integrity of tax system and guard against fraud and other forms of noncompliance associated with eic . this initiative is a substantial undertaking with a relatively aggressive implementation schedule . although it appears to be targeted to address known compliance issues , its success will depend on careful planning and close management attention . any one of many challenges could put the initiative at risk .