leadership . nnsa has not exercised management and oversight responsibilities so that lanl ensures effective implementation of the unclassified cyber security program . furthermore , laso has not exercised its oversight responsibilities for managing and accepting risks for the laboratory's unclassified cyber security program and has not provided sufficient leadership to resolve lanl performance problems and establish a clear set of management priorities . finally , lanl has not exercised sufficient leadership within the unclassified program to ensure effective implementation of management and technical processes . in a 2007 follow - up report , the office of independent oversight found that nnsa and / or the contractor , los alamos national security , llc ( lans ) , had taken steps to improve leadership , including ( 1 ) hiring a new chief information officer at lanl who reports directly to the laboratory director , ( 2 ) allocating additional funding to establish increased federal oversight activities at laso , and ( 3 ) creating cyber security advisors to assist the laboratory's directorates . certification and accreditation . lanl's c&a process is significantly deficient and cannot certify that unclassified systems and information are appropriately protected . the current process is based on security directives and guidance that are obsolete , rather than on nnsa , doe , or national policies . in addition , neither the lanl unclassified network security plan nor any other security plan addresses the accreditation of servers , workstations , firewalls , routers , and other it resources that lanl personnel use to process all levels of unclassified information . furthermore , the laboratory's cyber security program plan gives a broad range of the possible number of systems on the unclassified network ( 25,000 to 35,000 ) on a daily basis , which contributes to the perception that lanl cannot accurately identify its unclassified assets . according to the office of independent oversight's most recent assessment , lanl has made little or no progress to correct the identified deficiencies . security testing . lanl's security testing and evaluation is not robust enough to ensure the security of the unclassified network . while security tests have been prepared , there is little actual testing of the controls associated with the unclassified network . rather , individual tests are used to validate security plan statements . as a result , the security testing process does not demonstrate that the management , operational , and technical controls function as intended . policies and procedures . lanl's policies and procedures have not been updated to address changing management , operational , and technical needs in the unclassified environment . while the unclassified cyber security program had been implemented within the framework of overarching policy provided by doe , a serious weakness of lanl's unclassified cyber security program is that its policies were based on obsolete directives and had not fully implemented all nnsa and doe policies concerning cyber security . in addition , lanl has not established a comprehensive set of policies , plans , and procedures for managing cyber security within lanl organizations . according to the office of independent oversight , most aspects of weaknesses relating to formal cyber security policies , plans , and procedures have yet to be resolved , which places sensitive unclassified information at greater risk .