base was located . indirect multipliers were estimated by mapping military occupational specialties ( moses ) to economically similar civilian sectors . each of these similar economic sectors multipliers were weighted by the number of military personnel mapped to each sector divided by the total number of employees in the sector . examples of these economically similar sectors are educational services , administration and support services , scientific research and development services , aerospace product and parts manufacturing , and electronic repair and maintenance . judgment was used to place all moses into one of the industrial sectors . reduce the number of usar regional headquarters to reflect federal reserve restructuring initiative ( frri ) . source and application: army 56 . consolidate rdt&e functions on fewer installations through inter - service support 57 . establish a single inventory control point ( icp ) within each service or consolidating into joint icps . application: supply and storage 58 . expand guard and reserve force integration with the active force . examples: ( 1 ) blended organizations . ( 2 ) reserve associate , guard associate , and active associate ( 3 ) sponsored reserve . ( 4 ) blending of guard units across state lines to unify mission areas , reduce infrastructure , and improve readiness . application: mildeps 59 . consolidate national capital region ( ncr ) intelligence community activities now occupying small government facilities and privately owned leased space to fewer , secure dod - owned locations in the region . application: intel 60 . collocate guard and reserve units at active bases or consolidate the guard and reserve units that are located in close proximity to one another at one location if practical , i.e. , joint use facilities . application: mildeps 61 . consolidate the army's five separate active component recruit training sites and bens ; application: supply and storage , mildeps 63 . privatize long - haul communications in the defense information systems agency 64 . collocate joint strike fighter graduate flight training and maintenance training . collocate joint strike fighter graduate flight training . military base closures: observations on prior and current brac rounds . separate command structures but shared common operations . source and application: industrial 28 . consolidate similar commodities under centers of technical excellence . source 29 . implement concept of vertical integration by putting entire life cycle at same site to increase synergies , e.g . production of raw materials to the manufacture of finished parts , co - locating storage , maintenance and demil . source and application: industrial 30 . implement concept of horizontal integration by taking some of the most costly elements of the m&a processes and put them at the same site to increase efficiencies , e.g . put load , assemble and pack ( lap ) of all related munitions at same site . source and application: industrial 31 . maintain a multi - service distribution and deployment network consolidating on regional joint service nodes . source and application: industrial 32 .