gao - 06-758 . washington , d.c.: august 4 , 2006 . no child left behind act: assistance from education could help states better measure progress of students with limited english proficiency . gao - 06-815 . washington , d.c.: july 26 , 2006 . some districts collaborated with providers to notify parents . for example , during our site visit , illinois state officials described a provider and district sharing administrative resources to increase participation , which involved the provider printing promotional materials and the district addressing and mailing the materials to parents . in addition , we estimate that over 70 percent of districts lengthened the period of time for parents to turn in ses applications , held informational events for parents to learn about providers , and provided written information to parents in languages other than english . for example , during our site visit to woodburn , ore. , district officials reported extending the time parents had to sign up their children for ses and hosting an event where providers presented their programs to parents in english and spanish . further , newark , n.j. , district officials told us during our site visit that the district provided transportation for parents to attend informational events and worked with a local community organization to increase awareness of ses , a method we estimate was also used by about 40 percent of all districts . specifically , newark district officials collaborated with a local organization to inform parents and students living in public housing and homeless shelters about ses . also to encourage participation , an estimated 90 percent of districts offered services at locations easily accessible to students , such as on or near the school campus , and almost 80 percent of districts offered services at a variety of times , such as before and after school or on weekends . despite some districts' promising approaches to encourage participation , notifying parents in a timely manner remains a challenge for some districts . an estimated 58 percent of districts did not notify parents that their children may be eligible to receive ses before the beginning of the 2005-2006 school year , which may be due in part to delays in states reporting which schools were identified for improvement . specifically , about half of districts that did not notify parents before the beginning of the 2005-2006 school year did not receive notification from the state of the schools identified for improvement by that time . effectively notifying parents is also a challenge for some districts . for example , officials in all four districts we visited reported difficulties contacting parents to inform them about ses in part because some families frequently move and do not always update their mailing address with districts . in addition , some providers we interviewed indicated that parental notification letters do not always effectively encourage ses participation . for example , some of the providers we interviewed said some districts use confusing and poorly written letters to inform parents of ses or send letters to parents of eligible children but conduct no further outreach to encourage participation in ses . another challenge to increasing ses participation is attracting more ses providers for certain areas and groups of students .