gao - 10-816 . washington , d.c.: september 14 , 2010 . not following correct procedures . a 2007 doe review of a hanford contractor's software quality assurance program found , among other things , that not all contractor personnel fully understood software quality requirements . the report stated that , although software quality assurance training had been provided , personnel did not follow procedures in managing , maintaining , and overseeing software quality . for example , the report cited an example of a spreadsheet in which data input cells were not properly locked , in violation of procedures . in addition , the report noted that software documentation was not periodically updated , as required , because staff did not fully understand the procedures . incorrect quality assurance grading . in some cases , contractors did not always correctly determine the level of rigor needed to ensure the quality of computer models and their associated software . for example , a 2007 internal contractor review at hanford found that 23 of 138 software codes registered in a central repository were incorrectly designated as nonsafety software , when in fact they should have been considered safety software . as a result , the quality assurance procedures appropriate for a given level of risk may not have always been applied . although em has recently begun some efforts to promote consistency in the use of models across its various sites , these efforts are still in early stages and , to date , some have had limited involvement of modeling officials at the sites and federal , state , and local stakeholders who are affected by decisions made using the output of computer models . in addition , these efforts are not part of a comprehensive , coordinated effort to improve the management of computer models across em . in the absence of such a strategy , em also does not have overarching guidance promoting consistency in modeling management , development , and use across em's sites . em has begun some efforts to improve the use of computer models across its various sites . for example , em , in fiscal year 2010 , began developing a set of state - of - the - art computer models to support soil and groundwater cleanup across the nuclear weapons complex . according to em officials and documentation they provided , this initiative , called the advanced simulation capability for environmental management , will allow em to provide more sophisticated analysis of soil and groundwater contamination for cleanup decisions . although the initiative's director told us that the goal is to encourage all sites to use these models for all of their soil and groundwater analysis , he noted that there are no plans to make using these models mandatory . moreover , srs has created a forum for improving consistency in groundwater computer modeling performed at the site . according to the charter document , the forum , called the groundwater modeling consistency team , was formed in 2006 following the discovery of inconsistencies in the data used in groundwater computer modeling conducted at hanford in support of the preparation of an environmental impact statement under nepa .