each receives its own funding for it investments . the $26 billion supports three categories of it — business systems , business systems infrastructure , and national security systems ( nss ) — the first two of which comprise the 1,731 business systems . dod defines these three categories as follows: business systems — used to record the events associated with dod's functional areas . such areas include finance , logistics , personnel , and transportation . business systems infrastructure — represents the costs associated with the operations of the department's business systems . such costs would include transmission lines , network management , and information security . national security system ( nss ) — intelligence systems , cryptologic activities related to national security , military command and control systems , and equipment that is an integral part of a weapon or weapons system , or is critical to the direct fulfillment of military or intelligence mission . as shown in table 3 , approximately $18 billion — the nearly $5.2 billion for business systems and the $12.8 billion for business systems infrastructure — relates to the operation , maintenance , and modernization of dod's 1,731 business systems . as we have reported , while dod plans to invest billions of dollars in modernizing its financial management and other business support systems , it does not yet have an overall blueprint — or enterprise architecture — in place to guide and direct these investments . our review of practices at leading organizations showed they were able to provide reasonable assurance that their business systems addressed corporate — rather than individual business units — objectives by using enterprise architectures to guide and constrain investments . ddrs has two phases . the first phase — ddrs - afs ( audited financial statements ) — is intended to be a departmentwide financial reporting system . the second phase — ddrs - budgetary — is intended to establish a departmentwide budgetary reporting system . among other things , ddrs is intended to reduce the number of departmental reporting systems and standardize departmental general ledger processes . these four projects are part of the dfas corporate information infrastructure ( dcii ) program . according to dfas , dcii is intended to facilitate cross - functional , integrated processes ; promote standardized data and reporting ; facilitate standardized business practices ; reduce cost of operations ; and provide timely information for decision making . figure 1 depicts a high - level view of the interrelationships among these four system projects . dod and dfas have an established acquisition management and oversight process for acquiring , operating , and maintaining business systems . among other things , this process requires project managers to provide cost , schedule , and performance data to the dfas chief information officers / business integration executive ( cio / bie ) council — dfas's it investment board — prior to scheduled milestone reviews . these milestones are intended to be decision points for determining whether a project should continue in the current phase of the system life - cycle , proceed to the next phase , be modified , or be terminated .