we disagree . the title reflects vulnerabilities created by the gaps in the screening of practitioners that could place veterans at risk by allowing incompetent practitioners or those with the intent to harm patients into va's health care system . va provided technical comments which we incorporated , as appropriate . va's written comments are reprinted in appendix iii . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its date . we will then send copies of this report to the secretary of veterans affairs and other interested parties . we also will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge at the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7101 . another contact and key contributors are listed in appendix iv . we examined va's policies and practices that are intended to ensure that health care practitioners at its facilities have appropriate credentials and backgrounds to provide care to veterans . specifically , we ( 1 ) identified key va screening requirements for its health care practitioners , ( 2 ) determined the adequacy of these screening requirements , and ( 3 ) assessed the extent to which selected va facilities complied with these screening requirements . to identify key va screening requirements for its health care practitioners , we reviewed va's policies and va handbook 5005 , which explains how to implement the screening policies . we limited our review to 43 occupations in va that have direct patient care access or have an impact on patient care . see table 3 for a list of the occupations included in our review . to identify the 43 occupations , we consulted with va human resource officials . we interviewed human resource officials at va headquarters and at each facility we visited . we classified the practitioners who are required to have professional credentialsa state license or a national certificateinto three groups according to va's requirements for verifying these credentials . groups a and b represent practitioners who must be licensed to work in va . however , the requirements and process va uses to verify professional credentials is different for each of these groups . group c represents practitioners who must have a national certificate to work in va and may also have a state license . practitioners not included in the three groups are not required to have either a license or a national certificate to work in va facilities . to determine the adequacy of the key va screening requirements , we analyzed va's policies and procedures to identify whether there were inconsistencies in how the requirements were applied among various types of practitioners . we interviewed va headquarters and facility officials and practitioners at the facilities we visited to determine how va's policies are implemented in facilities .