we disagree . we continue to believe that , as we recommended in 2006 , a tracking system would facilitate a more systematic approach to ddmac's reviews , would allow fda to more readily group materials for review , and could enhance its monitoring and surveillance efforts by providing data on materials reviewed and the findings of those reviews . in short , a simple tracking system would provide key information for managing the program . hhs did not comment on our reiteration of our 2002 recommendation that the agency issue regulatory letters more quickly . hhs also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issuance date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of hhs , the commissioner of fda , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or crossem@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . purdue pharma l.p. hoffmann - la roche , inc. gilead sciences , inc. amgen , inc. actelion pharmaceuticals us , inc. pfizer , inc. reliant pharmaceuticals , inc. biomarin pharmaceuticals , inc. alcon research , ltd. ligand pharmaceuticals , inc . treatment of persistent or recurrent cutaneous t - cell lymphoma in particular patients ( ontak ) and treatment of cutaneous manifestations of cutaneous t - cell lymphoma in certain patients ( targretin ) treatment of t - cell lymphoma in a broader patient population ( ontak and targretin ) cephalon , inc. alcon laboratories , inc. dusa pharmaceuticals , inc. allergan , inc. pharmaceuticals , inc. santen , inc. genpharm , inc. alcon research , ltd . treatment of eye infections caused by specific microorganisms in the conditions of corneal ulcers and conjunctivitis ( ciloxan ) treatment of otitis media and otitis externa ( ciloxan ) acute treatment of migraine headaches with or without aura and the acute treatment of cluster headache episodes ( d.h.e . 45 ) treatment of status migrainosis or intractable migraine ( d.h.e . 45 ) treatment of major depressive disorder ( effexor xr ) treatment of normal periodic feelings of low interest or energy ( effexor xr ) hoffman - la roche , inc. alcon research , ltd. takeda pharmaceuticals north america , inc . treatment of actinic keratoses in combination with cryotherapy in this case , off - label promotional activities were cited for two different drugs . therefore , information on the approved condition and the off - label promotion cited for both drugs is presented . in this case , violative promotional activities were cited for two different drugs , but off - label promotion was cited for only one of these drugs .