officials ? reported to ngb ? army ? army ? officials ? reported to ngb ? tag ? army ? army ? if you have further comments in response to any of the questions in this section , you may use this space to provide them . please identify your comments by preceding them with the number of the earlier question to which they refer ( eg , 1 , 3 , 7 , etc. ) please provide a name , phone number , and email address for follow - up questions regarding the responses to this section . within the cst . other / please identify: 7 . what changes , if any , would you suggest to make the csts better able to respond to incidents ? ( field may be left blank if the unit commander is the contact point. ) section 2: coordination & communication 1 . how familiar is the unit's leadership with each of the following emergency planning documents ? ( please check only one box per row. ) national response plan ( nrp ) national incident management system ( nims ) state emergency response plan ( s ) state terrorism response plan ( s ) . ( please select the best response. ) fully integrated – cst's roles / responsibilities are specifically outlined and cst participates in emergency response training exercises . partially integrated – cst is not directly mentioned , but national guard's responsibilities are outlined . not integrated – emergency response plan has been updated since cst establishment , but neither cst nor national guard is mentioned . not applicable – state's emergency response plan has not been updated since cst establishment . state has no emergency response plan . to what extent is your cst integrated into your state's primary terrorism response plan ? please provide a name , phone number , and email address for follow - up questions regarding the responses to this section . ( field may be left blank if the unit commander is the contact point. ) other states did support the purchase of the nonstandard uniforms . while ngb , state national guard , and cst officials stated that they believed it was important to have the flexibility to make purchases that best support the csts' mission , some cst commanders however thought this subjectivity sometimes negatively affected the csts' ability to obtain material support . states have also had difficulties designing and renovating or building facilities that meet the needs of the csts . state national guard officials said the unique nature of the cst mission made it more difficult for states to understand the support requirements and expectations placed upon their csts . for example , in addition to the need for climate controlled spaces for sensitive equipment , most cst members we interviewed said that there is a need for enclosed bays for all vehicle storage because it facilitates ready - to - roll deployment , improves vehicle security , and provides an all - weather maintenance and training area . however , 78 percent of the cst commanders who responded to our data collection instrument reported that their facilities are not large enough to hold all vehicles and other cst equipment .