this test is not performed on all parts . in some cases , resurfacing material would not be used by counterfeiters to re - mark a part ; in others , the solvents would remove markings even on legitimate parts . the manufacturer confirmed this status . ycc7 ( two parts purchased ) . the two purchases made from different vendors using part number ycc7 contained samples that failed several authentication analyses , leading smt corp. to conclude that they were suspect counterfeit . the part we received from one vendor failed three of eight authentication analyses . visual inspection identified numerous issues , including different colored surfaces that suggest re - marking and unknown residues that indicate improper handling or storage . sem analysis showed that surface material had been precisely removed to allow for re - marking , similarly to a ycc7 part with legitimate date codes tested above . further , according to the manufacturer , the legitimate version of this part was last shipped in 2003 , whereas the tested part showed a manufacturing date code of 2006 . rts testing resulted in removal of the part marking . the part received from the second vendor failed three of nine authentication analyses . visual inspection detected numerous issues , including different colored surfaces that suggest re - marking . the markings were also substandard , lacking clarity and consistency in placement . rts testing removed part markings , further suggesting re - marking . sem showed evidence of lapping . delidding revealed die that were consistent with the authentic part , but the date code showed evidence of re - marking to make them appear as if they had come from a homogenous lot . finally , the manufacturer verified that it last shipped this part in 2003 , whereas our samples were marked 2007 , which according to smt corp. , could not be possible . we received offers from 40 vendors in china to supply parts using invalid part numbers , and we purchased four parts from four vendors to determine whether they would in fact supply bogus parts . ( see fig . these were different vendors than the ones that supplied us with the suspect counterfeit parts . the invalid numbers were based on actual part numbers , but certain portions that define a part's performance specifications were changed . for example , one of our invalid numbers was for an actual voltage regulator but that operated at bogus specifications . none of the invalid part numbers were listed in dla's federal logistics information system and , according to selected manufacturers , none are associated with parts that have ever been manufactured . as such , we did not send the parts to smt corp. for authentication analysis . we received the four bogus parts after requesting invalid part numbers daa5 , gdd4 , and 3mm8 . we made two orders using daa5 , one from each internet purchasing platform , which were fulfilled by different vendors . the parts we received from each vendor appeared similar , as shown in figure 4 . the similarity may be due to a number of factors .