some of these recommendations were addressed to dod . the department concurred with the recommendations on improving oversight mechanisms of high - containment laboratories . in implementing those recommendations , dod reported in 2016 that it was taking actions , such as revising existing department policies for managing hazardous biological agents in high - containment laboratories ; analyzing inspection trends and incident reports to identify recurring issues in safety , security , or administration ; requiring routine reporting results from laboratories that are not registered to handle select agents and laboratory incidents ; and developing implementation time frames for the recommendations from a july 2015 dod review of the incident at dugway proving ground . section 218 of the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2017 included a provision for us to review dod's actions to address findings and recommendations of the army's december 2015 investigation report regarding the inadvertent shipment of incompletely inactivated bacillus anthracis from dugway proving ground , utah . it also included a provision for us to review dod's efforts to implement quality control and assurance measures for the department's bsat biosafety and biosecurity program , among other things . this report discusses the extent to which ( 1 ) dod has implemented the recommendations from the army's 2015 investigation report and has developed an approach to measure the effectiveness of actions taken to address the recommendations , ( 2 ) the army has implemented the bsat biosafety and biosecurity program and developed a strategy and implementation plan , ( 3 ) the army has developed measures to ensure that its biological test and evaluation mission remains independent from its biological research and development mission , and ( 4 ) dod has carried out a study and evaluation in compliance with the requirements of section 218 , subsection ( d ) , of the ndaa for fiscal year 2017 . for objective one , we reviewed key policy , guidance , and other documents , including the recommendations from the army's 2015 investigation report , and assessed the actions that dod took from may 2015 through may 2018 to address those recommendations . in addition , we reviewed the standards for internal control in the federal government and dod instruction 5010.40 , managers' internal control program procedures , to identify criteria for communicating quality information and performing monitoring and reporting activities . for objective two , we obtained and reviewed documentation from dod officials on current policies , procedures , and directives identifying oversight and governance authorities involved in supporting dod's bsat biosafety and biosecurity program . we compared the actions of the army to leading practices for strategic planning and the recommendations from the army's 2015 investigation report . we interviewed dod officials from the military services to identify their strategies and efforts in supporting dod's plans to effectively manage dod's bsat biosafety and biosecurity program . we also interviewed cognizant officials to identify any biosafety and biosecurity improvements that have been made to dod laboratories that possess , use , or transfer biological select agents and toxins made since the 2015 incident at dugway proving ground . in addition , we conducted site visits to all six dod bsat laboratories , five of which currently are responsible for handling bsat .