accountability for results . the focus of accountability should be on the responsible objective leader's role in credibly assessing progress in achieving a strategic objective using evidence . agency leaders should hold objective leaders and other responsible managers accountable for knowing the progress being made in achieving outcomes and , if progress is insufficient , understanding why and having a plan for improvement . where progress is sufficient or exceeding expectations , are there strategies or practices that could be replicated and / or scaled to further enhance effectiveness ? have there been recent changes in the agency's operating environment that need to be addressed ? are there strengths / opportunities on which to capitalize ? are there weaknesses / threats that need to be overcome ? if the review identified evidence gaps , what steps will the agency take to develop sufficient evidence ? in addition , omb's guidance suggests additional actions that agencies should consider , which could lead to enhanced performance . these include benchmarking information from others trying to accomplish the same or similar objectives or using the same or similar key process , and identifying lessons learned from past efforts to continuously improve service delivery and resolve management challenges . education officials told us that , in addition to the department's policy development and spending plan review , they used the strategic review process to assess how recent changes to its school improvement grant ( sig ) program contributed to progress in one of the department's strategic objectives . education's sig program is designed to fund significant reforms in low - performing schools in support of the department's objective to “accelerate achievement by supporting states and districts in turning around low - performing schools and closing achievement gaps , and developing models of next - generation high schools.” according to education's fiscal year 2014 annual performance report and fiscal year 2016 performance plan , turning around the lowest - performing schools takes several years to show progress and success . education reported that since 2009 , more than 1,700 schools have received up to $2 million for 3 years through the sig program to implement intervention models intended to turn around the lowest - performing schools . while nearly two - thirds of the schools have made progress , the remaining schools have either not shown progress or had decreased performance . through their ongoing sig program monitoring , education officials told us they learned about two challenges grantees reported facing that could be hindering progress and developed new strategies intended to address them . first , officials at state and local educational agencies expressed concerns to education officials about sustaining turnaround efforts , since they are long term in nature and sig program funds were only available for 3 years.approaches to better support sustainability . using waiver authority , the department gave grantees flexibility to extend their use of existing funding into a fourth year . in addition , beginning with its fiscal year 2014 appropriations , education obtained additional authority for state educational authorities to make school improvement grants for up to 5 education officials told us they took two different years . education officials told us grantees also expressed concerns about a lack of principals with knowledge about or experience in turning around schools .