performance budgeting is difficult work . it requires taking a hard look at existing programs and carefully reconsidering the goals those programs were intended to address — and whether those goals are still valid . it involves analyzing the effectiveness of programs and seeking out the reasons for success or failure . it involves navigating through the maze of federal programs and activities , in which multiple agencies may operate many different programs , to address often common or complementary objectives . however , the task of revising and reforming current programs and activities that may no longer be needed or that do not perform well is fraught with difficulties and leads to real “winners” and “losers.” notwithstanding demonstrated weaknesses in program design and shortfalls in program results , there often seems to be little “low hanging fruit” in the federal budget . in fact , some argue that because some programs are already “in the base” in budgetary terms , they have a significant advantage over new initiatives and new demands . such mechanistic relationships cannot be sustained . simply increasing the supply of performance information is not enough . if the information is not used — that is , if there is insufficient demand — the quality of the information will deteriorate and the process either will become rote or will wither away . however , for the reasons noted , the success of performance budgeting cannot be measured merely by the number of programs “killed” or a measurement of funding changes against performance “grades.” rather , success must be measured in terms of the quality of the discussion , the transparency of the information , the meaningfulness of that information to key stakeholders , and how it is used in the decision - making process . if members of congress and the executive branch have better information about the link between resources and results , they can make the trade - offs and choices cognizant of the many and often competing claims at the federal level . a comprehensive understanding of the needs of all participants in the budget process , including what measures and performance information are required at different stages of the budget cycle , is critical . making performance budgeting a reality throughout the federal government will be facilitated by efforts to improve the structural alignment of performance planning goals with budget and cost accounting structures and presentations . however , developing credible performance measures and data on program results will be absolutely critical in determining whether the performance perspective becomes a compelling framework that decsion makers will use in allocating resources . rather than increase accountability , these approaches might instead devalue the process by favoring managers who meet expectations by aiming low . the determination of priorities is a function of competing values and interests that may be informed by performance information but also reflects such factors as equity , unmet needs , and the appropriate role of the federal government in addressing these needs . omb's part initiative illustrated that improving program design and management may be a necessary investment in some cases . for example , the department of energy's environmental management ( cleanup ) program was rated “ineffective” under part .