ii ) . to identify recent trends in contracting , we analyzed data from the federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) about pbgc's use of various contract types and methods , including performance - based contracting . we also obtained examples of recent changes to pbgc's contracting processes by reviewing a small judgmental sample of eight recent contracts: two contracts for ongoing activities within each of the four main program departments that were selected on the basis of award amount , award date , type of services , location where services are provided , and continuity of contractors between award cycles ( see app . iii ) . we conducted this performance audit between december 2009 and june 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . memorandum gave a status report on the federal contracting community's actions toward meeting the president's goal of saving $40 billion annually , reducing reliance on high - risk contracting , and achieving a more appropriate mix of in - house and contractor labor , including: agencies' fiscal year 2010 acquisition plans that identified a variety of strategies , such as new avenues for strategic sourcing ; program terminations and reductions ; use of online reverse auctions and electronic sealed bids ; and more aggressive renegotiation of contracts . agencies must use the plan to address needs for an acquisition workforce in their annual budget submissions . memorandum provided guidance for agencies in preparing their initial service contract inventory for fiscal year 2010 . initiatives were provided that intended to improve the acquisition workforce's capability to manage high - risk contracts and to ensure use of the most appropriate contract type for each procurement . the inventories should serve as a tool for assisting agencies in better understanding how their contracted services are being used to support mission and operations and ascertain whether the contractors' skills are being utilized in an appropriate manner , including insight into the extent to which contractors are being used in performing activities by analyzing how contracted resources are distributed by function and location across an agency and within its components ; and grant insight that is especially important for contracts whose performance may involve critical functions or functions closely associated with inherently governmental functions . framework for assessing the acquisition function at federal agencies , gao - 05-218g ( washington , d.c.: september 2005 ) published in response to agencies' increasing reliance on contractors and systemic contracting weaknesses we and other accountability organizations identified , the framework enables high - level assessments of an agency's contracting function . it consists of interrelated cornerstones essential to an efficient , effective , and accountable contracting process , including: organizational alignment and leadership that appropriately places the contracting function in the agency , with stakeholders having clearly defined roles and responsibilities ; aligns contracting with the agency's mission and needs ; and organizes the contracting function . policies and processes that are clear , transparent , and implemented consistently in the planning , award , administration , and oversight of contracting efforts . human capital , which involves strategically thinking about attracting , developing , and retaining talent , and creating a results - oriented culture within the contracting workforce .