this is a promising development . according to the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , “biomonitoring measurements are the most health - relevant assessments of exposure because they measure the amount of the chemical that actually gets into people from all environmental sources , such as the air , soil , water , dust , or food combined.” the cdc conducts the most comprehensive biomonitoring program in the country , and in december 2009 it published the fourth in a series of reports on the concentrations of certain chemicals or their by - products in a representative sample of the u.s. population . for example , the cdc reported that 90 percent of the people tested had detectable levels of bisphenol a ( bpa ) . bpa is an industrial chemical that has been present in many hard plastic bottles and metal - based food and beverage cans since the 1960s . on the basis of results from recent studies using novel approaches to test for subtle effects , the food and drug administration announced in january of this year that it and the national toxicology program at the national institutes of health ( nih ) have some concern about the potential effects of bpa on the brain , behavior , and prostate gland in fetuses , infants , and young children . my testimony today is based on our prior work on federal biomonitoring efforts and discusses epa's use of current biomonitoring studies , epa's biomonitoring research strategy , and epa's authorities under tsca to obtain biomonitoring data . specifically , my statement addresses ( 1 ) the extent to which epa incorporates information from biomonitoring studies into its assessments of chemicals , ( 2 ) steps that epa has taken to improve the usefulness of biomonitoring data , and ( 3 ) the extent to which epa has the authority under tsca to require chemical companies to develop and submit biomonitoring data to epa . our prior work was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . biomonitoring — one technique for assessing people's exposure to chemicals — involves measuring the concentration of chemicals or their by - products in human specimens , such as blood or urine . while , biomonitoring has been used to monitor chemical exposures for decades , more recently , advances in analytic methods have allowed scientists to measure more chemicals , in smaller concentrations , using smaller samples of blood or urine . as a result , biomonitoring has become more widely used for a variety of applications , including public health research and measuring the impact of certain environmental regulations , such as the decline in blood lead levels following declining levels of gasoline lead .