pub . 109-171 , 120 stat . gao - 10-525 and gao , temporary assistance for needy families: update on families served and work participation , gao - 11-880t ( washington , d.c.: sept. 8 , 2011 ) . numbers of families receiving tanf cash assistance over a specified time period are accounted for in each state's caseload reduction credit , which essentially then lowers the states' required work participation rate from 50 percent.for example , if a state's caseload decreases by 20 percent during the relevant time period , the state receives a caseload reduction credit equal to 20 percentage points , which results in the state work participation rate requirement being adjusted from 50 to 30 percent . because of the dramatic declines in the number of families receiving cash assistance after tanf implementation , caseload reduction credits effectively eliminated work participation rate requirements in some states . for example , we reported that in fiscal year 2006 , 18 states had caseload reductions that were at least 50 percent , which reduced their required work participation rates to 0 . we noted that state caseload declines have generally been smaller after dra changed the base year for measuring caseload reductions from fiscal year 1995 to fiscal year 2005 , among other things.however , many states are still able to use caseload declines to help them lower their required work participation rates . for example , for the most recent data available in fiscal year 2009 , 38 of the 45 states that met their required work participation rates for all tanf families did so in part because of their caseload declines ( see fig . additionally , we reported that while states' caseload reduction credits before dra were based primarily on their caseload declines , after dra , states' spending of their own funds on tanf - related services also became a factor in some states' credits . specifically , states are required to spend a certain amount of funds every year — their moe funds — in order to receive all of their federal tanf block grant . however , if states spend in excess of the required amount ( “excess moe” ) , they are allowed to functionally increase their caseload reduction credits.that , in fiscal year 2009 , 32 of the 45 states that met their required work participation rates for all families receiving cash assistance claimed excess moe toward their caseload reduction credits . in addition , 17 states would not have met their rates without claiming these expenditures ( see fig . in 2010 , we concluded that because of the various factors that affect the calculation of states' work participation rates , the rate's usefulness as a national performance measure for tanf is limited , and changes intended to improve data quality may be creating new challenges for states . in addition to the caseload reduction credits and excess moe discussed above , we reported that some states have made changes to their tanf programs that may affect which families are counted in their work participation rates , such as providing some families assistance in non - tanf programs , discussed in the next section .