this concludes our testimony . we would be happy to answer any questions you may have . gao contacts and staff acknowledgment for future questions about this testimony , please contact henry l. hinton , jr. , managing director , defense capabilities and management at ( 202 ) 512-4300 . individuals making key contributions to this statement include stephen l. caldwell , james reid , and david hancock . the following statutory provisions give gao broad authority to review agency programs and activities: 31 u.s.c . 712: gao has the responsibility and authority for investigating matters relating to the receipt , disbursement , and use of public money , and for investigating and reporting to either house of congress or appropriate congressional committees . 717: gao is authorized to evaluate the results of programs and activities of federal agencies . reviews are based upon the initiative of the comptroller general , an order from either house of congress , or a request from a committee with jurisdiction . 3523: this provision authorizes gao to audit financial transactions of each agency , except as specifically provided by law . 3524: this section authorizes gao to audit unvouchered accounts ( i.e. , those accounted for solely on the certificate of an executive branch official ) . the president may exempt sensitive foreign intelligence and counterintelligence transactions . cia expenditures on objects of a confidential , extraordinary , or emergency nature under 50 u.s.c . 403j ( b ) are also exempt . transactions in these categories may be reviewed by the intelligence committees . 716: gao has a broad right of access to agency records . subsection 716 ( a ) requires agencies to give gao information it requires about the “duties , powers , activities , organization , and financial transactions of the agency.” this provision gives gao a generally unrestricted right of access to agency records . gao in turn is required to maintain the same level of confidentiality for the information as is required of the head of the agency from which it is obtained . section 716 also gives gao the authority to enforce its requests for records by filing a civil action in federal district court . under the enforcement provisions in 31 u.s.c . 716 ( d ) ( 1 ) , gao is precluded from bringing a civil action to compel the production of a record if: 1. the record relates to activities the president designates as foreign intelligence or counterintelligence ( see executive order no . 12333 , defining these terms ) ; 2. the record is specifically exempted from disclosure to gao by statute ; 3. the president or the director of the office of management and budget certifies to the comptroller general and congress that a record could be withheld under the freedom of information act exemptions in 5 u.s.c . 552 ( b ) ( 5 ) or ( 7 ) ( relating to deliberative process and law enforcement information , respectively ) , and that disclosure of the information reasonably could be expected to impair substantially the operations of the government . although these exceptions do not restrict gao's basic rights of access under 31 u.s.c .