, no contact with the flight ) as normal . several technologies could be used to meet the recommended aircraft tracking performance standards , according to the task force and aviation stakeholders we interviewed . for instance , acars - and fans - equipped aircraft can be configured to report aircraft position information , even though acars is not specifically designed for that function and fans is designed to report to air traffic control , not to airlines . according to the task force , acars uses information derived from the aircraft's flight management system to report the aircraft's position , and acars is configurable for enhanced reporting triggered by unanticipated altitude changes or flight levels below a predetermined altitude . for aircraft that are equipped with fans , the airline ground systems can be configured to access information about the position of the aircraft , using automatic dependent surveillance - contract ( ads - c ) — an application that allows the airline or air traffic control to establish a contract with the fans system onboard the aircraft to deliver four dimensional position and other data at single , periodic , or event - based intervals . in addition , other benefits of fans include reduced separation between aircraft , more direct routings leading to reduced fuel consumption , and improved communication clarity between the pilot and air traffic control . other commercially available systems , including flyht aerospace solution's automated flight information reporting system , would also meet the proposed performance standards by providing operators with precise information about the aircraft's position in real - time , according to the manufacturer.passenger wi - fi systems , which utilize satellite connectivity , could also be used to facilitate aircraft tracking , according to representatives from one domestic airline . the level of equipage for these various technologies differs across the u.s. and global fleet . according to one of the major air transport communications service providers , almost all commercial passenger jet aircraft operators in the u.s. install and use acars , including nearly all regional airlines . three major domestic passenger airlines that we spoke to also confirmed that their entire fleets are equipped with acars . generally , airlines based outside the u.s. use acars , except some low - cost airlines that have avoided the cost of installing acars avionics and use only very high - frequency ( vhf ) voice radio or other solutions , according to one air transport communications service provider . according to some aviation stakeholders we spoke to — including faa , two domestic airlines , and one of the major air transport communications service providers — fewer airlines have equipped with fans because it is only beneficial to the airlines when flying in certain , higher density oceanic airspace . faa officials we spoke to estimated that approximately 70 — 80 percent of the aircraft operating in the busy north atlantic airspace are currently fans - equipped because it is required to access the optimal routes .