see figure 1 . ssa processes over 100,000 work reports or pay stubs annually . benefit overpayments can occur when beneficiaries do not report work or ssa does not take action on work reports in an appropriate or timely manner . when a di work - related overpayment is identified , the beneficiary is notified of the overpayment and may request reconsideration or waiver of that overpayment . ssa may grant a waiver request if the agency finds the beneficiary was not at fault and recovery or adjustment would either defeat the purpose of the program or be against equity and good conscience , as defined by ssa . ssa's di cumulative overpayment debt has almost doubled over the last decade , growing from $3.2 billion at the end of fiscal year 2004 to $6.3 billion at the end of fiscal year 2014 , according to ssa data . cumulative overpayment debt is comprised of existing debt carried forward from prior years , new debt , reestablished debts ( debts reactivated for collection due to re - entitlement or another event ) and adjustments , minus debts that are collected or written off by ssa . cumulative di overpayment debt has continued to grow because in nine of the last ten years the debt added exceeded the total debt collected and written off . specifically , over the 10 years reviewed , ssa added about $15.4 billion in debt , while collecting and writing - off $12.3 billion . according to preliminary data provided by ssa , the agency overpaid di beneficiaries a total of about $20 billion during fiscal years 2005 through 2014 , and more than half of this total ( $11 billion ) was a result of beneficiaries' work - related earnings exceeding program limits . according to these data , each fiscal year an average of about 96,000 di beneficiaries ( or 28 percent of all beneficiaries overpaid each year ) received excess benefits totaling $1.1 billion because their work activity exceeded program limits . the average work - related overpayment per beneficiary was almost $12,000 during this time period , ranging from $10,456 in fiscal year 2014 to $14,208 in fiscal year 2011 . we are continuing to assess the reliability of these data as part of our ongoing work . ssa's annual stewardship reviews provide limited insight into the causes of overpayments . stewardship reviews are based on a sample of cases , and are used by the agency to report on the accuracy of benefit payments . in its stewardship reports , ssa uses the term deficiency dollars to quantify the effect of each individual deficiency in a case which could cause an improper payment . in its last six stewardship reports , ssa reported that deficiency dollars related to beneficiaries' incomes being above di program limits were consistently a leading cause of improper overpayments in the di program . ssa also attributed some of these deficiencies to not taking appropriate or timely action to adjust payments when it was notified of beneficiaries' work activity . however , gao has not yet fully evaluated ssa's methodology for conducting these reviews .