, drivers or passengers ) . for example , tennessee sets a maximum age for school buses that applies to school districts and contractors ; specifically , type a and b buses can be used for up to 15 years , and type c and d buses can be used for up to 18 years with unlimited miles , or up to 19 years for buses with less than 200,000 miles that have passed inspections twice a year . however , even with these exemptions , federal regulations for commercial drivers' licenses and drug and alcohol testing for commercial driver's license holders apply to all school bus drivers and operators . figure 4 provides examples of federal regulations for school bus safety . in addition to these six states with specific requirements , we also found instances where states provide funding or set a school bus depreciation schedule to replace school buses . although these programs do not necessarily prohibit school bus operators from operating school buses that exceed the parameters of a state's funding program , they encourage school districts to regularly replace school buses . for example , according to a state official , washington provides replacement funding for school buses to school districts and contractors , and the state established a useful life cycle for each type of school bus , but the state does not require school districts and contractors to retire or stop using a bus at the end of the established life cycle . washington sets an 8-year life cycle for type a buses and a 13-year life cycle for type c and d buses owned by the school district . in virginia , the state has a 15-year life cycle for all school bus types , but according to state officials , a school bus older than 15 years can continue to be used as long as it passes inspections . while states do not typically set maximum school bus age requirements , local school bus operators usually make decisions on when to replace a school bus , according to stakeholders we interviewed . in particular , according to seven stakeholders we interviewed — 3 manufacturers , 3 state agencies that conduct inspections , and 1 contractor — local operators make these decisions based on a business case that includes factors such as maintenance costs and environmental conditions . see appendix i for more information on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from february 2016 to january 2017 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . school buses are used to transport students to and from home and school and extracurricular activities like field trips and athletic events . the industry defines four basic types of school buses . types a and b are comparatively small in size , while types c and d are comparatively large in size , as shown in figure 1 .