question no . 42: my supervisor supports my need to balance work and other life issues . question no . 46: my supervisor provides me with constructive suggestions to improve my job performance . question no . question no . 10: my workload is reasonable . question no . ” ) ; and question 64 ( “how satisfied are you with the information you receive from management on what is going on in your organization ? ” ) the coefficients in our analysis indicate the unique association between a given independent variable , such as a driver or employee population control , accounting for the potential effects of other variables . the r in light of these results , as well as reasons cited above , we determined that the linear specification is sufficient for identifying which independent variables appear to best predict variation in the engagement index . however , we also recognize that it may be appropriate to relax the assumption of linearity depending on the research question . finally , we tested our model on subsets of the population with response patterns that could reflect data quality issues , such as missing more than a third of the index questions or more than half of the driver variables . our results from these analyses were consistent with the overall government - wide estimates . the potential drivers we considered in our models were selected based on an extensive review of academic , government , and policy - related literature and a logical assessment of the particular concepts with which they related . however , researchers may disagree over which fevs questions provide the best and most actionable proxies for the drivers we identified . had we selected different questions as proxies for drivers found in the literature , our results may have been different . fevs was not initially designed with the express purpose of measuring engagement or of identifying factors related to engagement . to the extent policymakers seek to use data to assess drivers of engagement , best practices suggest designing a survey or questions to align expressly with the concepts of interest . although we believe that fevs as designed and currently implemented is sufficient for an analysis such as that presented above , our sensitivity tests suggest that alternative measures of engagement or drivers might provide different insights as to which factors most strongly predict engagement . our analysis does not provide insight into the validity of the eei for measuring conditions conducive to engagement or employee engagement directly . although we found that the 15 questions comprising the eei had strong internal cohesion , we did not conduct factor analysis or additional research to determine whether an alternative scale or questions better captured the concept of engagement . 38: prohibited personnel practices are not tolerated . question no . 41: i believe the results of this survey will be used to make my agency a better place to work . question no . 70: considering everything , how satisfied are you with your pay ? imputation flags by question question 1 0.62 ref . ref . education level less than high school high school diploma / ged or equivalent some college ( no degree ) associate's degree ( e.g .