messrs . chairmen and members of the subcommittees: i am pleased to be here today to discuss the status of private - sector information sharing and analysis centers ( isacs ) and their efforts to help protect our nation's critical infrastructures . critical infrastructure protection ( cip ) activities called for in federal policy and law are intended to enhance the security of cyber and physical , public and private infrastructures that are essential to national security , national economic security , or national public health and safety . beginning with presidential decision directive 63 ( pdd 63 ) , issued in may 1998 , federal policy has encouraged the voluntary creation of isacs to facilitate private - sector participation and serve as mechanisms for gathering , analyzing , and appropriately sanitizing and disseminating information to and from infrastructure sectors and the federal government . subsequent federal cip policy , including several national strategies , has continued to emphasize the importance of the isacs and their information - sharing functions.further , cip policy has established specific responsibilities for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and other federal agencies with respect to public / private collaboration to help protect private infrastructure sectors . in my testimony today , i will discuss the management and operational structures used by the isacs , including their estimated sector participation , business and funding models , and information sharing and analysis mechanisms . research & education network february 2003 www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 04-699t . to view the full product , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . for more information , contact robert f. dacey at 202-512-3317 or daceyr@gao.gov . i will then discuss activities by dhs and other federal agencies with responsibilities for specific infrastructure sectors to interact and support the isacs . lastly , i will discuss some of the isac - identified challenges to and successful practices for their establishment , operation , and partnership with the federal government . as agreed , this testimony includes initial results of our ongoing analysis of private - sector isacs , which was requested by your subcommittees . in conducting this work , we contacted officials from the 15 different isac organizations that had been established at the time of our review: chemical , electricity , energy , emergency management and response , financial services , food , information technology , multi - state , public transit , real estate , research and education networking , surface transportation , telecommunications , highway , and water . through structured interviews with these officials , we obtained and analyzed information to describe the isacs' current organization and operational models , funding mechanisms , sector representation and membership criteria , as well as their challenges and successful practices in establishing effective information - sharing relationships within their sectors and with the federal government . we also contacted officials of the healthcare sector coordinating council to discuss their efforts to establish an isac for the healthcare sector .