gao - 10-844t . washington , d.c.: june 15 , 2010 . cms agreed with our recommendation . for the cbp round 1 rebid , cms sent notification letters to winning suppliers beginning in july 2010 . cms officials informed us that after the cbp round 1 rebid contracting process is completed , cms plans to send letters to all disqualified suppliers with the reasons why their bids were disqualified . cms officials said the letters will explain the process by which suppliers may ask questions and express concerns . cms officials also stated that in the course of responding to such questions or concerns , if cms determines an error was made , it is possible that a cbp contract may be offered to the supplier . as required by mippa , we will study the cbp round 1 rebid , including , for example , the program's impact on medicare beneficiary access to items and services and on dme small business suppliers . our study is to be completed no later than one year after the cbp round 1 rebid's medicare competitively determined payments are first made , which become effective for covered items and services on january 1 , 2011 . in commenting on the information presented in this testimony , cms officials stated they appreciated gao noting the administrative improvements to the competitive bidding process the agency made for the round 1 rebid . the officials further stated that they believe that cms made many improvements to the cbp . cms also provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate . there were 6,374 bids submitted by 1,010 suppliers . in march 2008 , cms began offering contracts to winning suppliers to provide dme to medicare beneficiaries . the contracts between cms and suppliers became effective on july 1 , 2008 . these payments will replace the applicable fee schedule amounts for the selected dme items in the competitive bidding areas . under the round 1 rebid , cms estimated that compared to the 2009 medicare fee schedule , the volume - weighted reduction in cbp's single payment amounts for items averaged 32 percent . under round 1 , the estimated payment reductions compared to the 2008 medicare fee schedule averaged 26 percent . cms also announced on july 1 , 2010 , that it would begin mailing contract offers to winning suppliers . cms officials informed us that 1,287 bids are included in the initial wave of contract offers . cms officials also stated that they plan to announce the winning suppliers that accepted contracts in september 2010 . in my testimony today , i will discuss problems we identified in the round 1 competitive bidding process and how cms has or plans to address the problems in the ongoing rebid bidding process regarding ( 1 ) providing suppliers with bid submission information , ( 2 ) use of an electronic bid submission system , and ( 3 ) the bid disqualification notification process .