cambridge , mass . : program on education policy and governance , harvard university , august 2001 . peterson , paul e. , jay p. greene , william g. howell and william mccready . west , martin r. , paul e. peterson and david e. campbell . school choice in dayton , ohio after two years: an evaluation of the parents advancing choice in education scholarship program . what is known about the academic performance of students participating in these programs and the degree of parental satisfaction with the programs ? to report on the characteristics of the programs and long - term challenges , we focused on the 78 privately funded voucher programs that were open to all low - income applicants and allowed recipients a wide choice in deciding what schools their children would attend . we developed our list in consultation with officials from two major national organizations with which many programs are affiliated and summarized information on these programs collected by the organizations . in addition , we searched the literature , reviewed reports and other documents , and corroborated information through on - site and telephone interviews with local programs and national organization officials . to determine what is known about student academic performance and parent satisfaction associated with privately funded school voucher programs , we relied on existing studies . we identified 11 studies , but for our review only included those that: ( 1 ) analyzed student academic achievement and / or parental satisfaction , ( 2 ) compared voucher students or their parents with an appropriate control or comparison group of students or parents , and ( 3 ) gathered data on student achievement or parental satisfaction both before and after the vouchers were awarded . for our analysis , we included findings from those studies that reached the 95 percent confidence level as statistically significant effects . ( there is a 95 percent certainty that these results would not occur by chance alone. ) see appendix i for detailed information about these studies . two social scientists examined each study to assess the adequacy of the samples and measures employed , the reasonableness and rigor of the statistical techniques used to analyze them , and the validity of the results and conclusions that were drawn from the analyses . we conducted our work between october 2001 and april 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . privately funded school voucher programs got their start in 1991 when an indianapolis businessman founded a local program that provided tuition assistance to about 750 low - income students in grades kindergarten through 8 ( k - 8 ) . after the initiation of the indianapolis program , a number of other communities also established privately funded voucher programs based on the indianapolis model and used funding from local donors . in 1994 , a local voucher program that had been founded in san antonio obtained a grant to establish a national clearinghouse organization — now called children first america ( cfa ) — to assist new and existing local programs with funding and technical assistance . by 1997 , there were 31 local programs offering over 12,000 privately funded vouchers to k - 12 students in 18 states plus the district of columbia .