connect ! 420 s. pastoria avenue dedicating specialized staff to establish relationships with employers - connect ! has dedicated staff to providing a variety of services ( both free and fee - based ) to meet business needs , including staffing services , such as prescreening of job applicants and on - site recruiting ; transition / outplacement services to help downsizing businesses assist displaced workers ; educational resources ; and training , such as technical training for small business it workers . tailoring services to meet employers' specific workforce needs - the one - stop is co - located with a patent and trademark library that is electronically linked to the national trademark office to assist customers seeking entrepreneurial opportunities . gathering labor market information on local industries - connect ! conducted labor market information plus ( lmi+ ) studies of local industries to gather information on current workforce issues and challenges and predict future labor market trends . raising additional funds to expand services - one - stop managers raised $20,000 through fee - based downsizing and training services for employers and used this money to expand the one - stop's business services . improving one - stop operations - in order to improve its operations , connect ! conducted an assessment ( voice of the customer initiative ) to better understand customer expectations and needs . as a result , the one - stop reorganized its operations , redefined relationships with partners , developed a new outcome budget structure , and created specialized one - stop centers for businesses , job seekers , and youth . cumberland county one - stop 415 landis avenue ensuring job seekers' access to services - by addressing customers' transportation challenges , the cumberland county one - stop enhanced access to training and employment opportunities for rural customers . the one - stop now provides transportation to employment sites that are difficult for customers to access , such as the atlantic city casino industry . ensuring partner staff understand the range of services - program staff attend monthly meetings to educate one another about various program rules , which improves referrals and eligibility determination for customers . for example , all program staff attended training on how to assess customers' eligibility for the tanf program . tailoring services to meet employers' specific workforce needs - when employer services staff realized the application process for tax credits was cumbersome for employers , they completed the required paperwork themselves so that employers could receive the tax credit incentives . working with intermediaries to engage and serve employers - the cumberland county one - stop negotiated an agreement with the local empowerment zone office , requiring that new businesses use the one - stop center for recruitment before using their own private resources . this arrangement allows the one - stop to stay informed of employer needs and potential opportunities for job seekers . working with intermediaries to engage and serve employers - the vineland one - stop belongs to the three chambers of commerce in the area and attends many of their events . business services staff make presentations about the one - stop's services at professional conferences , chamber meetings , and other local events .