ii ) . the 81 areas span a range of federal government missions such as agriculture , defense , economic development , energy , general government , health , homeland security , international affairs , and social services . within and across these missions , the report touches on hundreds of federal programs , affecting virtually all major federal departments and agencies . my testimony today highlights ( 1 ) some examples from our march report ; ( 2 ) needed improvements in the federal government's management and investment in information technology ( it ) ; and ( 3 ) opportunities for achieving significant cost savings through improvements in government contracting . the issues raised in the report were drawn from our prior and ongoing work . omb also is discussing options for creating a clearinghouse of existing interagency and agencywide contracts . requiring business case analyses for new multiagency and agencywide contracts and ensuring agencies have access to up - to - date and accurate data on the available contracts will promote the efficient use of interagency and agencywide contracting . until such controls to address the issue of duplication are fully implemented , the government will continue to miss opportunities to take advantage of the government's buying power through more efficient and more strategic contracting . competition is a cornerstone of the federal acquisition system and a critical tool for achieving the best possible return on contract spending . competitive contracts can save money , improve contractor performance , and promote accountability for results . federal agencies generally are required to award contracts competitively , but a substantial amount of federal money is being obligated on noncompetitive contracts annually . federal agencies obligated approximately $170 billion on noncompetitive contracts in fiscal year 2009 alone . while there has been some fluctuation over the years , the percentage of obligations under noncompetitive contracts recently has been in the range of 31 percent to over 35 percent . although some agency decisions to forego competition may be justified , we found that when federal agencies decide to open their contracts to competition , they frequently realize savings . for example , we found in 2006 that the army had awarded noncompetitive contracts for security guards , but later spent 25 percent less for the same services when the contracts were competed . our work also shows that agencies do not always use a competitive process when establishing or using blanket purchase agreements under the general services administration's schedules program . agencies have frequently entered into blanket purchase agreements with just one vendor , even though multiple vendors could satisfy agency needs . and even when agencies entered into blanket purchase agreements with multiple vendors , we found that agencies have not always held subsequent competitions among those vendors for orders under the blanket purchase agreements , even though such competitions at the ordering level are required . omb has provided guidance for agencies to promote competition in contracting , and improve the effectiveness of their competition practices . in july 2009 , omb called for agencies to reduce obligations under new contract actions that are awarded using high - risk contracting authorities by 10 percent in fiscal year 2010 .