we disagree . that the work may be in its early stages does not diminish the need for independent engineering expertise . in fact , the atvm program's procedures state that engineering integration and construction activities require heightened technical monitoring , and , as doe officials have previously told us , independent engineering expertise is an important aspect of such monitoring — particularly since atvm staff expertise is largely financial , rather than technical . moreover , three of the four loans have one or more projects that have been in the engineering integration phase for at least 10 months , and the other loan has at least one project that has begun construction — suggesting that doe's assessment of the projects' status may not be up to date . by not engaging engineering expertise to aid atvm staff in monitoring the projects , doe has not taken appropriate steps to become adequately informed about the technical progress of the projects . thus , doe cannot be assured that the projects are on track to deliver the vehicles as agreed nor be in a position to require the borrowers to make any corrections in a timely and efficient manner . we maintain that doe should accelerate its efforts to engage sufficient engineering expertise for monitoring technical aspects of the projects as soon as possible . doe also disagreed with our recommendation to develop sufficient and quantifiable performance measures for its three atvm program goals . in his comments , the executive director stated that the performance measures suggested by gao would greatly expand the scope of the atvm program and do not appear to be consistent with the intent of congress in authorizing the program . however , he did not explain how measuring the performance of the program would expand its scope or be inconsistent with congress' intent beyond pointing out that measuring performance as we recommended would require research efforts by program staff and that congress did not specify the performance measures . principles of good government , as specified in the government performance and results act , require agencies to establish goals for their programs and performance measures that provide a basis for comparing program goals with the results . doe rightly established performance goals for the program , which are to ( 1 ) increase the fuel economy of u.s. passenger vehicles as a whole , ( 2 ) advance automotive technology in the united states , and ( 3 ) protect taxpayers' financial interests . furthermore , as we reported , doe established two performance measures for its first goal — the extent to which the average fuel economy of atvm - funded vehicles has increased over that of similar vehicles from model year 2005 and the extent to which the vehicles have consumed petroleum in comparison to similar vehicles from model year 2005 . these performance measures fall short , in part , because they address only improvements at the program level and do not put those improvements into the broader context of total u.s. passenger vehicle fuel economy , which is necessary for assessing progress toward the national - level goal .