sec . 720 requires the head of a federal agency to submit a written statement of the actions taken on our recommendations to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs and to the house committee on oversight and government reform not later than 60 days from the date of the report and to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of this report . because agency personnel serve as the primary source of information on the status of recommendations , gao requests that the agency also provide us with a copy of your agency's statement of action to serve as preliminary information on the status of open recommendations . we are sending copies of this report to the chairman and ranking member of the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs ; the chairman and ranking member of the house committee on financial services ; the chairman of the federal housing finance oversight board ; the secretary of the treasury ; the secretary of housing and urban development ; the chairman of the securities and exchange commission ; the director of the office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions about this report or need assistance in addressing these issues , please contact gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512- 6244 or dr. nabajyoti barkakati at ( 202 ) 512-4499 or by e - mail at wilshuseng@gao.gov or barkakatin@gao.gov . contacts for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . the objective of our review was to determine whether controls over key financial systems were effective in ensuring the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of financial information . this review was performed in connection with our audit of the federal housing finance agency's ( fhfa ) financial statements for the purpose of supporting our opinion on internal controls over the preparation of those statements . to determine whether controls over key financial systems were effective , we tested information security controls at fhfa . we concentrated our evaluation primarily on threats focused on critical applications and their general support systems that directly or indirectly support the processing of material transactions that are reflected in the agency's financial statements . our evaluation was based on our federal information system controls audit manual , which contains guidance for reviewing information systems .