sec . 3612 ( b ) ( 2 ) requires the clerk's office to transmit a certified copy of the jcc to the attorney general ( i.e. , usao ) within 10 days after the judgment or order . however , according to flu officials , this copy is typically sent to the prosecuting attorney within the usao's criminal division and not to the flu within the usao's civil division . the prosecuting attorney is to then forward a copy to the flu . since the flus we visited were not required to , and did not typically , stamp the date they received a copy of the jcc , we were unable to determine when they received the copy and how long they had the copy before entering the criminal debt information into their systems . the average length of time for entering the 44 high - dollar cases was 288 days ; for the sampled population , we estimate that the length of time was 289 days . for most cases , flu officials could not provide us with explanations as to why these cases were not entered into their tracking systems within 30 days of the jcc date . unless the flus promptly receive a copy of the jcc and promptly enter the data into the tracking systems , time - sensitive collection actions , such as filing liens and performing asset discovery work , are delayed and opportunities to maximize collections may be missed . flus are required to file notices of liens on offenders' properties , pursuant to 18 u.s.c . sec . 3613 , to establish the government's claims on these assets and to prevent the sale or transfer of such property . the first liens filed by the flu are typically filed according to the offender's home address ; additional liens should be filed if the flu identifies assets in other locations . the u.s. attorneys' manual specifies that liens are required to be filed in all cases over $650 but does not establish a specific time frame for filing . only one of the flus in the four districts we visited — the southern district of florida — had established a time frame for filing a lien ; this district requires liens to be filed within 45 days of the judgment date . instead of specifying a time frame , the other three districts require that liens be filed to “guarantee enforcement to the fullest extent of the law.” however , during our reviews we found that liens often were not filed or not filed promptly . specifically , we found that required liens had not been filed in 10 percent of the high - dollar cases and in an estimated 30 percent of the sampled population . in another 27 high - dollar cases and 68 random cases , we found that over 60 days elapsed between the judgment date and when the lien was filed . the filing of liens is further delayed if judgments are not promptly received and entered into the collection tracking system .