gao - 11-179r . washington , d.c.: december 21 , 2010 . naval forces europe . however , mda reported to us and a senior dod official testified to congress that aegis ashore site construction will take approximately 1 year . according to officials from the navy and u.s. army corps of engineers , aegis ashore infrastructure costs remain unknown because the designs have not yet been finalized for the system itself or the supporting infrastructure . u.s. army corps of engineers officials said that they are working closely with the navy and mda to reach basic agreement on the design of the infrastructure in march 2011 , which is in time for mda to budget for the needed facilities in fiscal year 2013 . however , army corps of engineers officials said that the romania aegis ashore site design and construction estimate will not be as mature as those of typical military construction projects , which may expose the aegis ashore construction site to increased risk of design modifications , increased costs , and possible delays . as we have previously reported , dod underestimated its bmd support infrastructure requirements and military construction costs for the prior plan for bmd in europe when it did not follow the traditional military construction requirements . army corps of engineers officials noted that dod is accepting this extra risk with aegis ashore , because waiting for a more complete design for aegis ashore in romania would result in missing the 2015 deadline . according to dod , it is longstanding dod policy to make best efforts to conclude a binding international agreement documenting the host nation's permission for the presence of dod personnel and equipment in its territory as well as adequate status protections for such personnel . according to the state department , an agreement enters into force when the parties consent to be bound by the agreement , at which point the parties are legally obligated to comply with the agreement's provisions . depending on the form of the agreement and the parties' domestic requirements , entry into force may require any number of events , including signature , ratification , exchange of notes , or some combination of these . ratification process for the aegis ashore facilities in romania and poland — to be completed as part of phases 2 and 3 respectively — are in progress and , though they do not anticipate any significant delays , they also cannot predict when negotiations and ratification will be complete or when agreements will enter into force . for example , the u.s. government ran into unexpected delays in host nation agreement ratification when it was attempting to implement the previous approach to bmd in europe . according to dod , its schedule assumption in 2007 was that both poland and the czech republic would complete the necessary ratification of host nation agreements by the end of fiscal year 2008 . however , as we previously reported , delays in the ratification of key host nation agreements presented challenges to dod's planning and implementation of its prior approach to bmd in europe .