( see fig . all decisions regarding the removal of mwds from service are made by a review board , which includes the commander of the air force's 341st training squadron , a representative of the 341st training squadron or designee , a veterinary corps officer ( army veterinarian ) , and a veterinary corps officer behavioral representative ( an army veterinarian who is trained in animal behavior ) . air force officials told us that the review board may also consult with the kennel master , who manages the kennel at the military installation where the mwd is located , as well as the veterinary staff at joint base san antonio , texas , when making decisions about removing an mwd from service . air force officials told us that handlers who are interested in adopting an mwd must communicate their interest to the kennel master where the mwd is located . the kennel master is responsible for annotating wdms to show the handler's interest in adoption , including adding the handler's name and contact information . the handler is responsible for maintaining contact with the kennel master and updating this contact information , if needed . in the event that multiple handlers are interested in adopting the mwd , the unit commander of the entity that owns the mwd is responsible for determining which handler is in the best interest of the mwd . air force officials told us that in these cases , the most recent handler would typically adopt the mwd . air force officials told us that they are in the process of updating their adoption policy . for example , the new policy outlines a method for recording whether or not the mwd was adopted by a former handler . they also told us they plan to update the mwd service record to include a checkbox to indicate whether the mwd was adopted by a handler , and that these service records will be scanned into wdms . officials have told us that these procedures will be implemented when the updated air force instruction becomes effective , likely in the spring of 2017 . the army veterinary service has the lead responsibility for the medical care of all dod - owned animals , including mwds . an army veterinarian told us that “skin conditions or ear infections” and “dental disease or injury” — the two most prevalent medical conditions we identified — are unlikely to result in removal from service as these conditions generally can be treated or resolved . specifically , the army provides medical care for mwds through its public health command regions and activities and the dod mwd veterinary service at joint base san antonio , texas . during the mwd disposition process , army veterinary corps officers are responsible for providing a recommendation letter and a consultation / referral form that describes each mwd's medical condition and suitability for adoption . the army also maintains a veterinary care system that provides medical care to privately owned animals of individuals with access to medical services at a military installation , including adopted mwds . the army charges individuals with privately owned animals for the medical care of their pets .