, build ) . in september 2008 , we reported on a number of sbinet program management weaknesses and associated risks related to establishing program commitments , developing an integrated master schedule , defining and implementing a life cycle management approach , developing and managing requirements , and testing . ( see fig . 1 for the potential long - term sbinet concept of operations. ) surveillance technologies are to include a variety of sensor systems . specifically , unattended ground sensors are to be used to detect heat and vibrations associated with foot traffic and metal associated with vehicles . radar mounted on fixed and mobile towers is to detect movement , and cameras on fixed and mobile towers are to be used by operators to identify and classify items of interest detected and tracked by ground sensors and radar . aerial assets are also to be used to provide video and infrared imaging to enhance tracking targets . these technologies are generally to be acquired through the purchase of commercial off - the - shelf ( cots ) products . c3i technologies ( software and hardware ) are to produce a common operating picture ( cop ) — a uniform presentation of activities within specific areas along the border . together , the sensors , radar , and cameras are to gather information along the border and transmit this informatio cop terminals located in command centers and agents' vehicles , which in turn are to assemble it to provide cbp agents with border situational awareness . among other things , cop hardware and software are to allow agents to ( 1 ) view data from radar and sensors that detect and track movement in the border areas , ( 2 ) control cameras to help identify and classify illegal entries , ( 3 ) correlate entries wit h the positions of nearby agents , and ( 4 ) enhance tactical decision making regarding the appropriate r esponse to apprehend an entry , if necessary . to increase border security and decrease illegal immigration , dhs launched sbi more than 4 years ago after canceling its america's shield initiative program . since fiscal year 2006 , dhs has received about $4.4 billion in appropriations for sbi , including about $2.5 billion for physical fencing and related infrastructure , about $1.5 billion for virtual fencing ( surveillance systems ) and related technical infrastructure ( towers ) , and about $300 million for program management . the sbi program ex office , which is organizationally within cbp , is responsible for managing key acquisition functions associated with sbinet , including prime contractor tracking and oversight . it is organized into four components: sbinet system program office ( referred to as the spo in this report ) , systems engineering , business management , and operational integration as of dece mber 31 , 2009 , the sbi program executive office was staffed with 188 people — 87 government employees , 78 contractor staff , and 13 detailees . in september 2006 , cbp awarded a 3-year prime contract to the boeing company , with three additional 1-year options for designing , producing , testing , deploying , and sustaining sbi . in 2009 , cbp exercised the first option year .