contextual information . the secretariat also uses additional information relevant to interpreting grant progress , such as news of civil unrest , political disturbance , allegations of corruption , conflict , major currency crisis , change of principal recipient , and natural disasters . a secretariat official said that the secretariat did not document requirements for such information for phase - 1 decisions but did allow grant managers to consider any information that would adversely affect grant implementation in their decisions to disburse . this information is typically obtained through informal communications with grant recipients , bilateral and multilateral donors , or other development partners , according to secretariat officials . the principal recipient is to provide the ccm with copies of its disbursement requests and progress reports , and ccm members may comment on the progress of implementation based on their local knowledge and experience , either through the local fund agent or directly to the secretariat . if the secretariat decides to approve the disbursement request , it may specify the level of disbursement and actions that the principal recipient must take . the secretariat then instructs the world bank to make the disbursement . the secretariat may also decide not to approve the disbursement request . when a grant reaches its sixteenth month , the global fund invites the ccm to submit a request for continued funding for the period following the initial 2 years . the global fund refers to this period as phase 2 of the grant ( see fig . the ccm is to submit its request to the global fund by month 18 , and the secretariat is to evaluate the ccm's request using the four sources of information described earlier . based on its assessment of this information , as informed by its professional judgment , the secretariat gives the grant one of four scores , as shown in figure 3 . it then provides its assessment and recommendation — called a grant scorecard — to the board regarding approval of the request , and the board decides on the request by month 20 . if the board approves the request , the principal recipient and the global fund negotiate and sign a grant agreement extension over the next 2 months . at month 22 , the global fund instructs the world bank to make the first phase - 2 disbursement . the secretariat sends its recommended scores to the board members , who vote on the recommendations via e - mail . a “go” decision means that the global fund approves proceeding to phase 2 . “conditional go” means that the global fund approves proceeding to phase 2 after the principal recipient undertakes specific actions within the time frame specified . “revised go” means that the principal recipient must reprogram the grant and substantially revise the targets and budgets for phase 2 . “no go” means that the global fund does not approve the grant's proceeding to phase 2 . currently , recipients denied further funding ( “no go” ) cannot formally appeal the board's decision . however , a board subcommittee may consider a formal appeal process .