i will be happy to answer any questions you may have . twelve countries are projected to be debt sustainable with no further assistance . in addition , 13 countries would achieve sustainability by switching between 2 percent ( benin ) and 96 percent ( são tomé and príncipe ) of new loans to grants . a total of 25 countries could be debt sustainable by 2020 , although only 2 countries would achieve the 5-percent debt service - to - revenue target over the entire period . the second strategy is aimed at reducing each country's debt - service burden . under this strategy , donors would provide assistance to cover annual debt service above 5 percent of government revenue . we estimate that this strategy would cost an additional $12.6 billion to achieve the goal of 5-percent debt service to revenue for all countries throughout the projection period . under this strategy , no additional countries become debt sustainable other than the 12 that are already projected to be debt sustainable with no further assistance . while this strategy would free significant resources for poverty reduction expenditures , it could provide an incentive for countries to pursue irresponsible borrowing policies . i will highlight the key financing challenges in these two areas . our analysis of the funding shortfall focused on the three key mdbs — the world bank / international development association ( ida ) , the african development bank ( afdb ) / african development fund ( afdf ) , and the inter - american development bank ( iadb ) / fund for special operations ( fso ) — because they account for about 70 percent of multilateral creditors' debt relief costs . to determine the amount and timing of funding shortfalls , we analyzed the banks' total and annual cost estimates and funding sources for 34 countries . to determine the amount of funding needed to achieve economic growth and debt relief targets , we analyzed world bank and imf projections through 2020 for the 27 countries that have qualified for debt relief thus far , focusing on estimates of key economic variables including debt stock , debt service , donor assistance , government revenue , and exports . in addition , we analyzed the impact of fluctuations in export growth on the likelihood of these countries achieving debt sustainability . we performed our work from june 2003 to february 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the world bank and imf have classified 42 countries as heavily indebted and poor ; three quarters of these are in africa . in 1996 , creditors agreed to create the hipc initiative to address concerns that some poor countries would have debt burdens greater than their ability to pay , despite debt relief from bilateral creditors . in 1999 , in response to concerns about the continuing vulnerability of these countries , the world bank and the imf agreed to enhance the hipc initiative by more than doubling the estimated amount of debt relief and increasing the number of potentially eligible countries . a major goal of the hipc initiative is to provide recipient countries with a permanent exit from unsustainable debt burdens .