( fig . 2 highlights information about the two local governments we reviewed. ) for example , a los angeles official told us that , for the remainder of fiscal year 2010 , they are trying to close a deficit of $212 million and have a projected $485 million deficit for fiscal year 2011 . sacramento county officials reported that the county is facing a nearly $14 million general fund budget shortfall for the remainder of fiscal year 2009-2010 , and faces cuts of around $149 million for next fiscal year . according to government officials in both localities , recovery act funds are helping to preserve the delivery of essential services and repair infrastructure but have generally not helped stabilize their base budgets . overall , as of february 18 , 2010 , a los angeles official reported that the city had been awarded about $597 million in recovery act grants , and sacramento county officials reported the county had been awarded about $88 million in recovery act formula grants as of january 15 . this program helps low - income families reduce their utility bills by making long - term energy efficiency improvements to their homes by , for example , installing insulation or modernizing heating or air conditioning equipment . doe has limited states' access to 50 percent of these funds and plans to provide access to the remaining funds once a state meets certain performance milestones , including weatherizing 30 percent of all the homes in its state plan that it estimates it will weatherize with recovery act funds . in addition , the recovery act requires all laborers employed by contractors and subcontractors on recovery act projects to be paid at least the prevailing wage , as determined under the davis - bacon act . the department of labor ( labor ) first established prevailing wage rates for weatherization in all of the 50 states and the district by september 3 , 2009 . doe allocated approximately $186 million in recovery act funds for weatherization in california . this represents a large increase in funding over california's annually appropriated weatherization program , which received about $14 million for fiscal year 2009 . by june 2009 , doe had provided 50 percent — about $93 million — of the recovery act funds to the california department of community services and development ( csd ) , the state agency responsible for administering the state's weatherization program . in late july , the state legislature approved csd's use of these funds . of the funds received , csd retained about $16 million to support oversight , training , and other state activities . csd has begun distributing the remaining $77 million throughout its existing network of local weatherization service providers , including nonprofit organizations and local governments . according to csd , as of january 25 , 2010 , csd had awarded about $66 million of the $77 million to 35 local service providers throughout the state for planning , purchasing equipment , hiring and training , and weatherizing homes . this amount includes $14.3 million to two service providers for three of the four service areas in the county of los angeles .