there are three reasons why this will be difficult . first , to ensure its independence , nrc cannot promote nuclear power , and it must walk a fine line when communicating with the public . second , nrc has not defined the “public” that it wants to target in achieving this goal . third , nrc has not established a baseline to measure the “increase” in its performance goal . and ( 3 ) what should nrc's role be in the future ? later this month , a nrc / state working group expects to provide the commission with its recommended options for the materials program of the future . nrc wants to be in a position to plan for needed changes because in 2003 , it anticipates that 35 states will have agreements with nrc and that the states will oversee more than 85 percent of all material licensees . another challenge nrc faces is to demonstrate that it is meeting one of its performance goals under the government performance and results act — increasing public confidence in nrc as an effective regulator . in march 2000 , the commission rejected a staff proposal to conduct a survey to establish a baseline . instead , in october 2000 , nrc began an 18-month pilot effort to use feedback forms at the conclusion of public meetings . twice a year , nrc expects to evaluate the information received on the forms to enhance its public outreach efforts . the feedback forms that nrc currently plans to use will provide information on the extent to which the public was aware of the meeting and the clarity , completeness , and thoroughness of the information provided by nrc at the meetings . over time , the information from the forms may show that the public better understands the issues of concern or interest for a particular plant . it is not clear , however , how this information will show that public confidence in nrc as a regulator has increased . this performance measure is particularly important to bolster public confidence as the industry decides whether to submit a license application for one or more new nuclear power plants . the public has a long history with the traditional regulatory approach and may not fully understand the reasons for implementing a risk - informed approach and the relationship of that approach to maintaining plant safety . in a highly technical and complex industry , nrc is facing the loss of a significant percentage of its senior managers and technical staff . for example , in fiscal year 2001 , about 16 percent of nrc staff are eligible to retire , and by the end of fiscal year 2005 , about 33 percent will be eligible . the problem is more acute at the individual office level . for example , within the office of nuclear reactor regulation , about 42 percent of the technical staff and 77 percent of senior executive service staff are eligible for retirement . during this period of potentially very high attrition , nrc will need to rely on that staff to address the nuclear industry's increasing demands to extend the operating licenses of existing plants and transfer the ownership of others .