pub . 111-148 , § 4002 ( b ) , 124 stat . when appropriations are made available , an agency may obligate funds through such actions as awarding discretionary grants , cooperative agreements , or contracts , or through entering into interagency agreements . for discretionary grants,availability of funds through a publicly available notice called a funding agencies announce the opportunity announcement.guidance on how to apply for available funding and often identify restrictions on eligibility , such as limiting applicants to states , local governments , tribal organizations , or academic institutions . funding opportunity announcements also indicate the type of grant award , such as new , continuation , or supplemental . a new grant provides funding for a project that is currently not receiving financial support , a continuation grant provides additional funding for one or more budget periods to a project that would otherwise end , and a supplemental grant increases funding for an approved project during a current budget period . an agency may also provide federal funding pursuant to a contract , a legal instrument that establishes a binding relationship between the agency and another entity for acquisition of property or services.agencies can also enter into interagency agreements to carry out projects when , for example , another agency has expertise in an area or has additional capacity to do the work . the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 required hhs to establish a website that provides information on the use of pphf funds . specifically , it required hhs to post on a website specific information relating to use of fiscal year 2012 pphf funds . hhs allocated pphf funds for 43 activities in five hhs agencies — ahrq , cdc , hrsa , os , and samhsa — in the first 2 years of the fund.the majority of the $500 million in pphf funding available for fiscal year 2010 was allocated for activities administered by hrsa , while the majority of the $750 million in pphf funding available for fiscal year 2011 was allocated for activities administered by cdc ( see fig . according to information provided by hhs , of the 43 activities for which pphf allocations were made for fiscal years 2010 and 2011 , about half ( 23 activities accounting for 72 percent of total fiscal year 2010 and 2011 allocations ) received funding from regular ( that is , non - pphf ) appropriations ; the remainder ( 20 activities accounting for 28 percent of total fiscal year 2010 and 2011 allocations ) were funded solely from the pphf during those 2 fiscal years . in fiscal year 2010 , the three activities for which the largest pphf allocations were made were: hrsa's primary care training and enhancement ( $198.1 million ) , cdc's national public health improvement initiative ( $50.0 million ) , cdc's arra: communities putting prevention to work ( $36.4 million ) . in fiscal year 2011 , the three activities for which the largest pphf allocations were made were funded by cdc: community transformation grants program ( $146.3 million ) , section 317 immunization program ( $100.0 million ) , and coordinated chronic disease prevention program ( $51.7 million ) .