serial no . 106-49 we also contacted mr. james m. littlejohn of jim littlejohn consulting , the sea ranch , california . mr. littlejohn worked for ocr for 27 years . from 1981 to 1993 , he was policy director of ocr in washington and , according to the director of the denver regional office , during the years covered by our study , mr. littlejohn trained most of the ocr investigators in how to properly conduct a lau investigation ( those title vi investigations related to children with limited english proficiency ) . he retired from ocr in 1996 and now works as a consultant to school systems around the country and on several federal court cases involving bilingual education . mr. littlejohn was a key information source for the committee , testifying and providing key analyses . what approaches are used to teach children with limited english proficiency , and how long do students remain in language assistance programs ? what are the requirements for children with limited english proficiency that ocr expects school districts to meet , how are they set forth , and what has been the nature of the interactions between ocr and school districts in those instances in which ocr has entered into an agreement with the school district concerning language assistance programs ? to answer the first question , we reviewed available studies on second - language learning and talked to experts in the field . to answer the second question , we reviewed the literature , spoke to experts , and reviewed education's survey data . in addition , we contacted 12 states with substantial concentrations of students with limited english proficiency , 6 of which — arizona , florida , illinois , new jersey , texas , and washington — had information on the length of time students spent in language assistance programs . we also conducted site visits in 10 school districts ( 2 in each state ) in arizona , florida , illinois , north carolina , and texas to obtain information on teaching approaches used . these states have large or growing populations of children with limited english proficiency . to answer the third question , we interviewed ocr officials ; reviewed case law and ocr memos regarding students with limited english proficiency ; reviewed one case related to students with limited english proficiency in each of five states: colorado , california , massachusetts , michigan , and texas ; and surveyed all 293 school districts that had entered into corrective action agreements with ocr from 1992 through 1998 to provide services to students with limited english proficiency . of these , 245 ( 84 percent ) responded . appendix i provides additional information about our methodology . we conducted our work between september 1999 and january 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as a result of your long - standing concerns and issues raised at these hearings , you asked us to answer the following questions: how long do children with limited english proficiency need to become proficient in english ? states and localities play the principal role in educating all students , including those with limited english proficiency , with most states providing supplemental aid specifically to address the special needs of these students .