design review . we found that mcc consultants' reviews of designs before award of contract were insufficient . for example , one of mcc's consultants characterized its design review as “big picture in nature” and “not to be considered a detailed review,” stating specifically that “building drawings were not completed and not reviewed,” and that “the cost estimate was not reviewed.” in contrast , our review of industry leading practices indicates that a well - organized , detailed review can ensure that design plans and specifications are sufficient for construction and will provide the contractor with sufficient information to prepare a competitive and cost - effective bid . investment funds . mca - georgia established a fund that made investments in businesses that met certain criteria to further their development . the grdf management agreement describes processes , such as board authorizations , investment fund goals , and documentation requirements , that should be met before investment payments are requested and approved . our review of 5 investment transfers , totaling $3.7 million , showed that 2 transactions were processed without adequate documentation of the required board approvals . also , 3 of the 5 investments did not have fully completed investment proposals before approval by the grdf board of directors . furthermore , two of the five payment requests made to the mca fiscal agent lacked supporting documentation and required follow - up to ensure that grdf personnel had provided the required documentation . in its semiannual audit covering the last 6 months of 2008 , the mca - georgia auditor also reported that transactions related to the grdf investment fund lacked adequate documentation . other operating expenses . grant expenses . during our testing of grants made by the mcas , we observed payments to beneficiaries that lacked adequate evidence that certain prerequisites were met . we also identified inconsistencies in the documentation provided as support for the transactions . during our testing in honduras , we identified 20 instances from a random sample of 53 grant disbursements where the forms provided to the mca as evidence of receipt by the beneficiary of the agricultural equipment items were not signed by the beneficiary or were signed by the contractor responsible for delivering the goods to the beneficiary . thus , we could not determine whether the beneficiary had received the goods . in georgia , our testing identified 7 instances from a random sample of 54 grant disbursements in which beneficiaries did not certify , as required by the grant agreements , that certain milestones were met before they received funds . furthermore , several of the samples we tested had different beneficiary signatures on the payment request form and the grant agreement documents . the most recent audit of mca - georgia , performed by their independent audit firm , also identified significant shortcomings in the supporting documentation for grant disbursements . resettlement expenses . resettlement payments compensate landowners for property used for the mca projects , such as road and pipeline construction . during our testing of resettlement disbursements in honduras , we identified transactions that lacked the documentation required to support the disbursement amount and the recipient's eligibility to receive the funds .