unpublished dissertation . likely to exhaust benefits ? to what extent do states provide reemployment services as recommended by labor ? what is known about the effectiveness of the worker - profiling initiative in accelerating the reemployment of unemployment insurance claimants ? to answer these questions , we used a combination of national data , in - depth site visits , existing studies , and interviews with subject matter experts . we analyzed national data collected by the department of labor ( labor ) from states on the worker - profiling initiative , including data on the 50 states , as well as the district of columbia , puerto rico , and the virgin islands from a 2006 labor - sponsored survey on models states use to profile . we also analyzed data on profiling , reemployment services , and outcomes that states report to labor using the reemployment service activity and outcomes reports maintained by labor's employment and training administration . in addition , we interviewed state officials in seven states: california , delaware , illinois , kentucky , texas , washington , and wisconsin . we selected the seven states to include the range of approaches states take to identify and serve those likely to exhaust benefits . we visited local service providers in four of these states . our site visit states were selected to provide a range of state experiences with the worker - profiling initiative and to ensure variation in geography and population size . we identified six studies examining the impact of the worker - profiling programs and , after evaluating the methodological soundness and the validity of the results and conclusions , determined that five of the six studies were sufficiently rigorous to use in this report . further , we interviewed labor officials and other experts on worker profiling and ui and reviewed other reports , including academic and labor research on profiling systems , best practices , and the outcomes of profiled ui claimants . we performed our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards between august 2006 and april 2007 . beginning in the mid - 1970s , major structural changes took place in the american economy , as advances in technology , international competition , plant closings , and corporate streamlining resulted in the dislocation of thousands of workers from their jobs . some of these individuals possessed skills that were no longer in demand ; others suffered from a lack of job search skills . in the 1980s and early 1990s , demonstration projects were conducted in new jersey , nevada , minnesota , and washington . the new jersey and minnesota projects showed the efficacy of using statistical methods and administrative data to identify those who are likely to experience long periods of joblessness . for example , the new jersey demonstration project screened claimants with various eligibility requirements and found that the screening allowed the state to direct services to those who generally faced reemployment difficulties . further , results from all four states showed that providing more intensive job search assistance to this population reduced the duration of insured unemployment and ui expenditures . in response to these events , the clinton administration proposed legislation to implement worker profiling in 1993 .