an 20 percent . we believe that both our analysis and state's 4 . we acknowledge obo's intention to revise the growth factor formula which would provide additional space in necs . however , this does n address our concern that obo has not provided any analytical basi demonstrate that a growth factor of 10 percent , applied uniformly across all projects , is appropriate . we support state's initial effort in taking action to identify and prioritize its maintenance needs as d the lromp . establishing a timeline concurrent with availability of funds would provide greater transparency for projects to be initiated during a specific funding period . however , we also believe state should consider outlining notional implementation time frames for requirements identified over each of the future budget years covered ocumented in its first edition of by the lromp , including those years for which future funding is not certain . by identifying notional time frames , based on forecasted budget scenarios and not solely on available funds , we believe state will be better able to demonstrate whether the plan can effectively be resourced by future anticipated budget scenarios or whether maintenance requirements potentially exceed likely funding scenarios . we believe such an approach would strengthen state's efforts to show how timely investments in maintenance can protect the multibillion dollar investment state is making in constructing necs . we support obo's efforts in developing first - year stimates for necs when they open . however , we still maintain state e needs to develop an assessment of future operating costs that is included in the lromp . a plan that outlines future operating costs is particularly important since , as our analysis shows , the operating co at nec posts have clearly increased relative to the facilities they replaced . by developing estimates of future years' operating costs and combining those with estimates of future maintenance costs that state has already outlined in its lromp , we believe state will have a more complete assessment of the financial resources that state and other contributing agencies will need in future budget years to operate and maintain overseas facilities . we maintain that state needs a human resources plan for nec facilities maintenance staff , regardless of the funding mechanism . such a plan , that addresses cost implications for hiring and training necessary staff , could assist state in better identifying the necessary financial resources and planning to address resource limitations . jess t. ford , director , international affairs and trade , ( 202 ) 512-4268 or fordj@gao.gov terrell g. dorn , director , physical infrastructure , ( 202 ) 512-6923 or dornt@gao.gov . in addition to the individuals named above , leslie holen , assistant director ; michael armes , assistant director ; john bauckman ; sam bernet ; raj chitikila ; kalvin jenhung lo ; kara marshall ; christina werth ; and richard winsor made key contributions to this report . in addition , joe carney , martin de alteriis , mark dowling , and faye morrison provided technical or legal assistance . these alarms can cause disruptions .