approach . gao - 19-106 . washington , d.c.: december 12 , 2018 . illicit opioids: office of national drug control policy and other agencies need to better assess strategic efforts . gao - 18-569t . washington , d.c.: may 17 , 2018 . illicit opioids: while greater attention given to combating synthetic opioids , agencies need to better assess their efforts . gao - 18-205 . washington , d.c.: march 29 , 2018 . counternarcotics: overview of u.s. efforts in the western hemisphere . gao - 18-10 . washington , d.c.: october 13 , 2017 . border security: additional actions could strengthen dhs efforts to address subterranean , aerial , and maritime smuggling . gao - 17-474 . washington , d.c.: may 1 , 2017 . coast guard: resources provided for drug interdiction operations in the transit zone , puerto rico , and the u.s. virgin islands . gao - 14-527 . washington , d.c.: june 16 , 2014 . combatting illicit drugs: dea and ice interagency agreement has helped to ensure better coordination of drug investigations . gao - 11-763 . washington , d.c.: july 28 , 2011 . ( recommendation 3 ) . in may 2019 , we provided a copy of this report to dod , dhs , doj , and the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) for review and comment . in written comments , which are included in appendix ii , dod stated that it concurred with the two recommendations directed to jiatf - west and noted that jiatf - west plans to conduct an internal evaluation to establish a vital few performance measures to allow it to measure performance over time . additionally , jiatf - west has identified several areas where it can establish specific targets that set a minimal level of performance to support dod priorities . in its written comments , which are included in appendix iii , dhs stated that it concurred with its recommendation and plans to implement new performance measures in a phased approach . dhs also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated into the report , as appropriate . these areas of overlap are called joint operating areas . in addition to the contact named above , christopher conrad ( assistant director ) , kelsey hawley ( analyst - in - charge ) , and julia vieweg made key contributions to this report . according to our review of task force documents and discussions with task force officials , within these joint operating areas , the task forces share intelligence information , coordinate missions and activities with one another , and sometimes conduct joint operations . for example , in 2018 , jtf - east led and coordinated with jiatf - south on an operation to increase intelligence and targeting capabilities to disrupt illicit drug trafficking organizations operating within their joint operating area in the caribbean . jtf - east personnel deployed to jiatf - south's headquarters to facilitate coordination and information sharing . as a result of this joint operation , the law enforcement agencies involved seized over 3,700 pounds of cocaine and apprehended 69 migrants , one smuggler , and the smuggling vessel , according to jtf - east documentation .