of each alert . we also reviewed data from finra's system for tracking activities for regulatory policy and oversight ( star ) , which tracks the life cycle of finra's regulatory matters , on the number of municipal - related broker - dealer examinations finra conducted from 2006 to 2010 , the number of those examinations that identified violations of msrb rules g - 14 and g - 30 , and the resolution of each examination . we conducted a reliability assessment of the finra data and determined they were reliable for our purpose . specifically , we reviewed information on the star system and finra's policies and procedures for ensuring the data entered into the star system were accurate and complete . we reviewed a purposeful sample of 45 examinations finra conducted from 2006 to 2010 in which it identified violations of msrb rules g - 14 and g - 30 . we reviewed these examinations to inform our understanding of how finra examiners applied their policies and procedures for assessing compliance with rules g - 14 and g - 30 . first , we selected all 11 examinations that had both g - 14 and g - 30 violations . next , we selected an additional 6 examinations with g - 30 violations that were forwarded to other agencies ( such as sec ) for further review or initiated for a specific cause , as opposed to routine examinations . third , 8 examinations with g - 30 violations were selected systematically by selecting every 4th examination after ordering the remaining examinations with g - 30 violations by the completion date . finally , we similarly selected 20 additional examinations with g - 14 violations by selecting every 20th examination from an ordered listing of remaining examinations with g - 14 violations.extrapolate the information in the sample examinations to the universe of municipal broker - dealer examinations . rather , we drew examples from some of the examinations to illustrate concepts in the report . with respect to federal banking regulators' enforcement of rules g - 14 and g - 30 , we reviewed data on the number of bank dealer examinations each regulator conducted from 2006 to 2010 and the number of those examinations that identified violations of rules g - 14 and g - 30 , among other msrb rules . we conducted a reliability assessment of the federal banking regulator data and determined they were reliable for our purpose . specifically , we reviewed information from federal banking regulators on the systems from which they generated the data provided to us and their policies and procedures for ensuring the data were accurate and complete . from the examination data , we selected and reviewed examinations or their relevant excerpts to observe examples of cases in which the federal banking regulators identified violations of rule g - 14 or as with the finra examinations , we reviewed these other msrb rules . examinations to inform our understanding of how federal banking examiners applied their policies and procedures for assessing compliance with rules g - 14 and g - 30 . we did not extrapolate the information to the universe of bank dealer examinations .