begin typing . the box will expand to accommodate your answer . you are not limited to the amount of space you see on the screen . , never , rarely , or sometimes performs medical forensic exams ) on follow - up with san carlos hospital , we found that it does not typically perform medical forensic exams for adults , although its survey response said it did perform such exams . therefore , the number of hospitals typically performing exams changed from a reported value of 27 to an actual value of 26 in our report . in addition to the individual contact named above , jeffery d. malcolm ( assistant director ) , ellen w. chu , katherine killebrew , ruben montes de oca , kim raheb , kelly rubin , jeanette m. soares , kyle stetler , shana b. wallace , and tama r. weinberg made key contributions to this report . legend: ■ = typically performs ; ○ = does not typically perform ( i.e. if you have additional clarifications or comments on any of the questions , please include those in the comment box at the end of this document or in a separate document . title: facility / program name: section a . are there any ( other ) ihs or tribal clinics in your service area offering medical forensic examinations to child or adult victims of sexual assault or domestic violence ? don't know...…………… . î please skip to question 38 î please skip to question 38 37 . if there are other ihs or tribal clinics in your service area to whom you may refer medical forensic examinations for child or adult victims of sexual assault or domestic violence , what are the names of the clinics and their contact information , to the extent it is available ( please provide for up to 3 clinics ) : 38 . what are the current days and hours of operation for your medical forensic examiner staff or program that treats adult or child victims of sexual assault and / or domestic violence ? please describe in the box below if the hours are different for children or adults . please indicate time in 24-hour clock format . if you are not open / available during one or more time slots , please type n / a in that time slot . please describe , if applicable , other provider / staff availability for children or adults . is there any additional information that you would like to provide in regards to medical forensic examinations ? thank you very much for your participation ! please save your responses before exiting and return the questionnaire by attaching the document to an e - mail message to stetlerk@gao.gov . typically or always conducts ………. sometimes conducts ………………… rarely conducts …………………...… never conducts ……………………… 26 . if the frequency with which your facility conducts these medical forensic examinations has substantially changed in the last five years , please describe below . sometimes conducts ………………… rarely conducts …………………...… never conducts ……………………… 10 . if the frequency with which your facility conducts these medical forensic examinations has substantially changed in the last five years , please describe below . the box will expand to fit your answer .