market . the most common form is a single life pension with a minimum guarantee of 5 or 10 years of payments . a plan administrator must purchase an annuity for a participant of a dc plan if the member does not elect to exercise of their options . according to regulators , the take - up rate for annuities is relatively low . providers programmed withdrawal products are generally offered by financial institutions , such as banks and trustee companies . private insurance companies offer annuities . what approaches have other countries used to regulate and oversee spend - down options ? to answer these questions , we selected six countries with extensive or growing dc systems in which to conduct in - depth reviews of retirement spend - down phase strategies: australia , canada , chile , singapore , switzerland , and the united kingdom ( u.k. ) . we selected these countries from an initial review of countries with well - developed account based retirement systems . in selecting these six countries , we considered if the country had ( 1 ) developed innovative spend - down phase policies or options ; ( 2 ) a clearly defined and well - established oversight structure for the dc plan spend - down phase and providers , such as insurance companies , that offer spend - down products ; and ( 3 ) an approach to the spend - down phase that was different from the other countries we selected . as part of our initial review , we interviewed and obtained comparative studies of dc systems published by academics , the organisation for economic co - operation and development , the world bank , and other industry experts , such as international benefits consulting firms , as well as our prior work . we then examined the characteristics of each country's dc system for policies , practices , and requirements related to retirement spend - down options . on the basis of this initial review , we determined that the six countries selected could potentially provide lessons for the united states given their experience and unique approach to the spend - down phase . for each of the six countries selected , we reviewed publicly available research and reports about each country's spend - down options , oversight framework , and initiatives to educate participants about options . we also interviewed pension experts , service providers , regulatory agencies and other government officials from the countries selected . we did not conduct an independent legal analysis to verify the information provided about the laws , regulations , or policies of the foreign countries selected for this study . instead , we relied on appropriate secondary sources , interviews with relevant officials , and other sources to support our work . we submitted key report excerpts to agency officials in each country for their review and verification , and we incorporated their technical corrections as necessary . to provide context for various spend - down options and illustrate some of the factors that can affect retirement income we designed a retirement model and hypothetical scenarios .