i , sec . dates vary by state . the canvassing process varies widely , as illustrated by several examples from our site visits . for example , the capacity of the 2 central - count units used in the estimate for small jurisdictions would exceed the needs of jurisdictions with fewer than 5,000 registered voters . similarly , the capacity of the 2 central - count units used in the estimate for large election jurisdictions would probably exceed the needs of jurisdictions with 100,000 registered voters . however , for the largest jurisdictions , these same two central - count units would probably have insufficient capacity to count votes in 1 or 2 days . we have assumed that each election jurisdiction with more than 25,000 voters would have one of the $24,000 units in reserve , should either of the other 2 units break down . the estimate in table 12 included the 36 election jurisdictions in oregon . we assumed that oregon would use a central - count system because oregon used mail ballots for all ballots cast in the november 2000 general election . purchasing optical scan equipment that is placed in each voting precinct is more expensive than purchasing central - count optical scan equipment because each election jurisdiction usually has multiple precincts . we estimated that it would cost about $1.3 billion to purchase an optical scan unit for each of 185,622 precincts in the country , excluding oregon . although the cost per unit is much less , the number of units is much higher . according to vendor - provided data , optical scan units for precincts range from $4,500 to $7,500 each . none of the prices included software . for our estimate , we assumed that each precinct would have a $6,500 optical scan unit — neither the least nor most expensive available . each unit could be programmed to alert voters to errors ( overvotes and undervotes ) on their ballots . each unit would also record and total the votes cast for each candidate and each issue on the ballot at the precinct at which it was placed . with this option , we also assumed that each election jurisdiction would have a central - count optical scan unit for counting absentee ballots within the jurisdiction . placing a central - count optical scan unit within each subcounty election jurisdiction — more than 7,500 — would increase the cost estimates shown in table 13 . the unit costs used for the estimates do not include software , which ranges from $15,000 to $300,000 per jurisdiction , depending upon the number of registered voters in the jurisdiction . the estimated costs also do not include training , supplies ( such as ballots ) , or other costs associated with operating and maintaining the units . finally , although we could determine the types of voting methods used within 36 election jurisdictions that used mixed methods , we could not make this determination at the precinct level for 3,472 precincts in these jurisdictions . therefore , the cost estimates for any specific type of voting method , such as punch cards , may not include all precincts that used that method .