preannouncing inspections . as we reported in 2008 , the amount of notice fda generally gives to foreign drug establishments in advance of an inspection is different than for domestic establishments . drug establishment inspections performed in the united states are almost always unannounced , whereas foreign establishments generally receive advance notice of an fda inspection . according to fda officials , fda is not required to preannounce foreign inspections . however , they said the agency generally does so to avoid wasting agency resources , obtain the establishment's assistance to make travel arrangements , and ensure the safety of investigators when traveling in country . in our december 2019 testimony , we found that fda does conduct some unannounced foreign inspections , particularly if the investigators conducting the inspection are based in fda's foreign offices . however , fda officials told us that fda does not have data on the frequency with which foreign drug inspections are unannounced , nor the extent to which the amount of notice provided to foreign establishments varies . according to fda officials , this is because fda does not have a data field in its database to systematically track this information . however , the officials estimated that the agency generally gives 12 weeks of notice to establishments that investigators are coming when investigators are traveling from the united states . while investigators in fda's china and india offices do conduct unannounced or short - notice inspections , these staff do not perform most of the inspections in these countries . ( see table 3. ) in addition , the firm representative providing the translation may be someone who does not have the technical language needed , which can make it harder to communicate with firm staff and facilitate the inspection . one investigator told us that the independent translators hired by firms were sometimes consultants and , in those instances , it can seem like the consultants are coaching the firm during the inspection . fda officials told us that when they conduct unannounced for - cause inspections in china , investigators bring locally employed staff who work in fda's china office to act as translators . the investigators we interviewed said that in such instances , they valued knowing that the translation they were getting was accurate . however , fda does not have the resources to provide locally employed staff on every inspection , according to an fda official . lack of flexibility . work for our december 2019 testimony indicated that , as we first reported in 2008 , the overseas travel schedule can present unique challenges for fda's domestically based investigators — including both ora investigators and members of the dedicated foreign dug cadre — who conduct the majority of foreign inspections . eight of the 12 dedicated foreign drug cadre investigators that we interviewed for our december 2019 testimony told us that there is little flexibility to extend foreign inspections conducted by domestically based investigators , because the inspections they conduct on an overseas trip are scheduled back - to - back in 3-week trips that may involve three different countries . this raises questions about their equivalence to domestic inspections .