pt . 1046 , physical protection of security interests ) . doe issued the current protective force program manual in june 2000 . although protective forces are expected to comply with the duties and requirements established in doe policies , deviations from these policies are allowed as long as certain approval and notification criteria are met . in addition to complying with these security requirements , doe protective systems , including protective forces , also must meet performance standards . for example , doe sites are required to demonstrate that their protective systems are capable of defending special nuclear material against terrorist forces identified in the dbt . the performance of protective systems is formally and regularly examined through vulnerability assessments . a vulnerability assessment is a systematic evaluation process in which qualitative and quantitative techniques are applied to detect vulnerabilities and arrive at effective protection of specific assets , such as special nuclear material . to conduct such assessments , doe uses , among other things , subject matter experts , such as u.s. special forces ; computer modeling to simulate attacks ; and force - on - force exercises , in which the site's protective forces undergo simulated attacks by a group of mock terrorists . in addition to their use in evaluating the effectiveness of physical protection strategies , doe believes force - on - force exercises are the most realistic representation of adversary attacks that can be used to train protective forces . protective forces at the five ese sites containing category i special nuclear material generally meet existing key doe readiness requirements . specifically , we determined that ese protective forces generally comply with doe standards for firearms proficiency , physical fitness levels , and equipment standardization and that the five ese sites had the required training programs , facilities , and equipment . in addition , we found that the majority of the 105 protective force members we interviewed at ese sites generally believe that they currently are ready to perform their mission of protecting the site's special nuclear material . however , we did find some weaknesses at ese sites that could impair the ability of ese protective forces to defend their sites . a ready force should possess a sufficient number of experienced , trained , and properly equipped personnel . through realistic and comprehensive training , these personnel are forged into a cohesive unit that can perform its tasks even under extreme conditions . doe orders and federal regulations establish the framework for ensuring that doe protective forces are ready to perform their mission . we found that ese protective force officers generally believe that they are ready to perform their mission . specifically , 102 of the 105 officers we interviewed stated that they believed that they , and their fellow officers , understood what was expected of them should the site be attacked by a terrorist group . moreover , 65 of the 105 officers rated the readiness of their site's protective force as high , while 20 officers rated their protective force as somewhat or moderately ready to defend the site . only a minority of the officers ( 16 of 105 ) we interviewed rated the readiness of their force to defend their sites as low .