resolution . fdic noted that doj does not opine on a matter when a matter is deferred to the depository institution regulator for administrative enforcement . specifically , doj does not make its own determination of whether there was discrimination or whether there was a pattern or practice warranting the referral . the deferral of a matter is simply an agreement that the depository institution regulator is in a better position to resolve the violation through administrative measures . other key areas ( see table 5 ) . specifically , in the 110 outlier examinations that we reviewed that were conducted by these three depository institution regulators , the regulators identified potential pattern or practice violations based on statistically significant pricing disparities in 11 cases , or 10 percent of the examinations , and referred the cases to doj . doj indicated that several of these referrals had been returned to the depository institution regulators for administrative enforcement , while the remaining referrals are still in doj's investigative process . while it is difficult to fully assess the reasons for the differences in referrals and outlier examination findings across the depository institution regulators without additional analysis , they raise important questions about the consistency of fair lending oversight . in particular , depository institutions under the jurisdiction of ots , fdic , and the federal reserve appear to be far more likely to be the subject of fair lending referrals to doj and potential investigations and litigation than those under the jurisdiction of occ and ncua . under the fragmented regulatory structure , differences across the depository institution regulators in terms of their determination of what constitutes an appropriate referral as well as fair lending examination findings are likely to persist . enforcement agency litigation involving the fair lending laws has been limited in comparison with the number of lenders identified through analyses of hmda data and other information . for example , since 2005 , doj and ftc have reached settlements in eight cases involving alleged fair lending violations while hud has not yet reached any settlements . among other factors , resource considerations may account for the limited amount of litigation involving potential fair lending violations . federal officials also identified other challenges to fair lending oversight and enforcement , including a complex and time - consuming investigative process , difficulties in recruiting legal and economic staff with fair lending expertise , and ecoa's 2-year statute of limitations for civil actions initiated by doj under its own authority or on the basis of referrals from depository institution regulators . according to hud officials , the department has filed two secretary - initiated complaints against lenders alleging discrimination in their lending practices . the officials said that hud is currently considering whether , pursuant to fha , to issue charges of discrimination in administrative court in these two matters . if hud decides to issue such charges in administrative court , any party may elect to litigate the case instead in federal district court , in which case doj assumes responsibility from hud for pursuing litigation .