i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . further details on our scope and methodology are included in our report . the work on which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , we found that cbp seizes a variety of inbound items , including drugs and merchandise , through inspections of express cargo and mail as it arrives in the united states . however , cbp and usps have not established measureable goals for pilot programs to use ead for targeting mail for inspection , nor have they identified the potential costs and benefits of using ead . given the challenges associated with collecting and using ead , cbp should , in coordination with usps , establish measureable goals for pilot programs and evaluate the costs and benefits of using ead to target mail for inspection compared with other targeting methods . cbp and usps agreed with these recommendations and cbp plans to implement them by february 28 , 2018 . in our report , we found that , according to data from cbp's seized asset and case tracking system ( seacats ) , during fiscal years 2012 through 2016 cbp conducted about 308,000 seizures of inbound international items that may pose a threat to u.s. security , health and safety , business , and ecology . of those , cbp seized about 70 percent from mail and 30 percent from express cargo . seized items are categorized in seacats as either drugs or merchandise . among the approximately 308,000 seizures , illegal or inadmissible drugs accounted for about 47 percent of total seizures and merchandise accounted for about 53 percent . according to testimony by a u.s. immigration and customs enforcement official , a recent increase in deaths related to the synthetic opioid fentanyl has resulted in an increased focus on identifying methods by which traffickers bring fentanyl into the united states . in fiscal years 2012 through 2015 , cbp's seizure data reflect zero seizures of fentanyl , but according to cbp , fentanyl seizures would have been captured under other categories in seacats . according to cbp , a specific category code for fentanyl was added to seacats in fiscal year 2016 . seacats reflects 53 seizures of fentanyl in fiscal year 2016 via both mail and express cargo . at the time of our review , cbp did not use ead to target mail for inspection outside of these pilots . according to usps documents , the goal of these pilots is to test the effectiveness of placing holds on mail that has been targeted by cbp based on ead . under the pilots , cbp uses ead to target a small number of pieces of mail each day . according to usps officials , when usps employees scan either individual targeted pieces or larger sacks containing this targeted mail , they are alerted that cbp has targeted the item and set the item or sack aside for inspection .