visns . officials in network offices we reviewed told us that their medical facilities primarily report serious incidents to their offices through two mechanisms — issue briefs and “heads up” messages . issue briefs document specific factual information and are forwarded from the medical facility to the visn . heads up messages are early notifications designed to allow medical facility and visn leadership to provide a brief synopsis of the issue while facts are being gathered for documentation in an issue brief . currently , vha delegates the responsibility for developing specific admission policies and procedures to the va medical facility residential program managers , who may in turn delegate this responsibility to appropriate staff members . we found that medical facility level policies and procedures for the medical facilities we visited generally mirrored vha's broad guidance in this area , although some medical facilities had procedures that outlined the specific information that clinicians should collect related to veterans' legal backgrounds — such as the type and date of convictions , description of pending legal charges or warrants , and time spent in jail or prison . inpatient mental health units . vha officials responsible for inpatient mental health units reported that broad vha guidance requires inpatient mental health clinicians to conduct biopsychosocial assessments for patients admitted to these units . however , unlike residential programs , there is currently no vha policy that specifically defines how inpatient mental health units should collect this legal history information . the broad guidance vha officials cited , such as the va / dod clinical practice guidelines for post - traumatic stress and the joint commission standards , requires the collection of legal history information as part of the initial assessment , but does not fully specify the type of legal history information that must be included in veterans' medical records . a vha official responsible for inpatient mental health units throughout va confirmed that guidance has not been issued regarding the legal history information that may or may not be collected by clinicians in inpatient mental health units or how information obtained from veterans should be documented . without clear guidance on what legal history information should be collected and how this information should be documented in veterans' medical records , there is no assurance that clinicians are comprehensively identifying and analyzing sexual assault - related risks or that legal history information is collected and documented consistently during biopsychosocial assessments . the residential programs and inpatient mental health units at the five va medical facilities we visited reported using several types of patient - oriented and physical precautions to prevent safety incidents , such as sexual assaults , from occurring in their programs . visn offices are typically responsible for direct reporting to the vha central office . vha central office . an official in the vha office of the deputy under secretary for health for operations and management said that visns typically report all serious incidents to this office . this office then communicates relevant incidents to other vha offices , including the office of the principal deputy under secretary for health , through an e - mail distribution list . law enforcement reporting stream .