assessments were not consistent . fisma requires agencies to assess the risks that could result from the unauthorized access , use , disclosure , disruption , modification , or destruction of information or information systems . although the bureau performed risk assessments for some of the it components used in the 2004 census test , the documentation was not consistent . for example , documentation of information sensitivity risks ( high , medium , and low ) for confidentiality , integrity , and availability of information were not consistent and did not always follow bureau policy . in addition , documents showed different numbers of file servers , firewalls , and even different names of devices . without complete and consistent risk assessment documentation , the bureau had limited assurance that it properly understood the security risks associated with the test . the bureau did not always follow its own risk policies . fisma requires the implementation of policies and procedures to prevent and / or mitigate security risks . although bureau policies allowed for the waiver of security policies , if appropriate , we noted that such policies were not always followed . for example , a waiver for the test of certain password policies was not properly documented and other system documents were not properly updated to reflect the waiver . as a result , the risk assessment for the 2004 census test did not properly identify the related risks and did not identify any compensating controls to reduce the risk to an acceptable level . as the bureau plans future tests and the census itself , it will be important for it to strengthen its it security risk management practices , ensuring they fully adhere to fisma requirements and its own it security policies . the 2004 test suggests that while certain census initiatives have potential , formidable challenges remain . for example , the hhcs show promise in that enumerators were successful in using them to collect data from nonrespondents and remove late mail returns . still , they were not street ready as they experienced transmission and memory overload problems . likewise , automated maps were difficult to use , certain questionnaire items confused respondents , and enumerators did not always follow interview protocols . these problems shed light on issues in need of the bureau's attention as it develops solutions and incorporates refinements for additional testing in the years ahead . the bureau purchased 1,212 hhcs for the test at a total cost of about $1.5 million . the devices were sent directly to the two test sites packaged in kits that included a battery , ac adaptor , and modem card for transmitting data via the telephone . the hhcs were also equipped with a global positioning system ( gps ) , a satellite - based navigational system to help enumerators locate street addresses . the bureau anticipates the hhcs will allow it to eliminate the millions of paper questionnaires and maps that enumerators need when following up with nonrespondents , thereby improving their efficiency and reducing overall costs . because the bureau had never used hhcs in the decennial census , an important goal of the test was to see whether enumerators could use them for interviewing nonrespondents ( see fig .