this finding was the basis for our recommendation . we acknowledge defense's position that investing resources into optimizing data centers that are already planned for closure would not be the best use of taxpayer dollars . most agencies agreed with our recommendations or had no comments . however , as of december 2018 , only 4 of the 22 agencies had fully addressed them . the continuing shortcomings in data center optimization can also be attributed , in part , to agencies viewing omb's optimization metric targets as unrealistic . for example , transportation stated in its dcoi strategic plan that it could not meet multiple optimization metrics due to funds not being available and competing priorities . in addition , treasury indicated in its dcoi strategic plan that it struggles to report on automated monitoring because many of its data centers do not have the ability to centrally aggregate and report on central processing unit data . as a result , the agency experienced minimal staff resistance to change and a commitment to reach a consensus on moving forward with the agency's consolidation efforts . the aforementioned practices included elements of sound management techniques , such as gathering leadership support for a project and developing a communications plan to foster adoption of organizational changes . the practices also included activities that aligned with the core tenets of dcoi to consolidate inefficient infrastructure , optimize existing facilities , and achieve cost savings . further , these practices each proved effective for multiple agencies and , while they were not the only practices that could be effective , they represent concepts that could provide the foundation for an effective data center consolidation and optimization program . federal data center consolidation efforts have been underway since 2010 and omb's fiscal year 2018 targets provided clear and transparent goals that helped define the tangible benefits that dcoi was expected to provide . however , most agencies continue to report mixed progress against those targets . although agencies have taken action to close about half of the data centers in their combined inventories , 11 agencies did not plan to meet all of their closure targets . further , the data center closures were expected to drive cost savings and avoidances and , to the agencies' credit , the closures have led to more than $2.37 billion in planned and achieved cost savings and avoidances from fiscal years 2016 through 2018 . however , five agencies did not plan to meet their cost savings targets . until agencies consolidate the data centers required to meet their targets , as well as identify and report the associated cost savings , they will be challenged to realize expected efficiencies and the full benefits of dcoi will not be fully realized . similarly , although omb first established optimization metrics in may 2014 , agencies continue to report only limited progress against the current performance targets . while two agencies do not have a basis to report any progress as they do not own any data centers , only two agencies reported that they planned to achieve all of dcoi's fiscal year 2018 optimization targets .