we disagree . the revisions to the idaho statistics were not the result of a change to our methodology , but resulted from including additional data provided by the laboratory during the report's comment period . the other laboratories had provided this data earlier . instead of undermining the validity of our analyses , our actions reflect our commitment to reporting complete and accurate information . lastly , doe restated its position that its role in fostering contractors' workforce diversity does not conflict with ofccp's role in enforcing contractors' equal employment obligations . in its written comments , the department of labor pointed out that ofccp's methods of statistical analysis differ from the analysis methods we used in this report and that ofccp's methods are designed to determine if a contractor is engaged in unlawful employment discrimination . our report recognizes this role for ofccp and clearly states that our analyses are not designed to prove or disprove discrimination in a court of law like ofccp's analyses . our report clearly states that our analyses are designed to provide information at an aggregate level about differences in personnel actions that may need further investigation . because our analyses identified statistically significant differences in salaries , merit pay increases , and separation patterns , and substantial differences in promotion rates for women and minorities at the six laboratories , we have recommended that ofccp work with the laboratories to determine the causes of these differences and take the necessary corrective steps , if appropriate , to address any eeo problems identified . in response to our recommendations , the department of labor stated that ofccp will continue to work with doe with regard to contract oversight . doe's and the department of labor's written comments are presented in appendixes iii and iv , respectively . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of energy ; the secretary of labor ; the chair , equal employment opportunity commission ; the director , office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix v .