part 106 . for example , the deepwater horizon did not meet the threshold criteria subjecting it to regulation under part 106 , and therefore , msram was not used to assess its security risks ( see fig . 2 for a photo of the deepwater horizon explosion ) . according to coast guard officials , mobile offshore drilling units ( modus ) , such as the deepwater horizon , do not generally pose a risk of a terrorist attack since there is little chance of an oil spill when these units are drilling and have not struck oil . however , the officials noted that there is a brief period of time when a drilling unit strikes a well , but the well has yet to be sealed prior to connecting it to a production facility . the deepwater horizon was in this stage when it resulted in such a large oil spill . during that period of time , modus could be at risk of a terrorist attack that could have significant consequences despite a facility not meeting the production or personnel thresholds . for example , such risks could involve the reliability of blowout preventer valves — specialized valves that prevent a well from spewing oil in the case of a blowout . gaining a fuller understanding of the security risks associated with modus , such as the deepwater horizon , could improve the quality of program decisions made by coast guard managers on whether actions may be needed to ensure the security of this type of facility . according to coast guard officials , they are studying the “lessons learned” from the deepwater horizon incident and part of the study involves examining whether analysts should use msram to assess modus in the future .  challenges in assessing systemic or network risks: msram does not assess systemic or network risks because , according to coast guard officials , these types of assessments are beyond the intended use of msram . the 2009 national infrastructure protection plan , 2010 dhs quadrennial review , and a national research council evaluation of dhs risk assessment efforts have determined that gaining a better understanding of network risks would help to understand multiplying consequences of a terrorist attack or simultaneous attacks on key facilities . understanding “network” risks involves gaining a greater understanding of how a network is vulnerable to a diverse range of threats . examining how such vulnerabilities create strategic opportunities for intelligent adversaries with malevolent intent is central to this understanding . for example , knowing what damage a malicious adversary could achieve by exploiting weaknesses in an oil - distribution network offers opportunities for improving the resiliency of the network within a given budget . how the coast guard assesses offshore infrastructure within the broader set of networks is important . the findings of the national commission on the bp deepwater horizon oil spill incident illustrate how examining networks or systems from a safety or engineering perspective can bring greater knowledge of how single facilities intersect with broader systems . the report noted that “complex systems almost always fail in complex ways” and cautioned that attempting to identify a single cause for the deepwater horizon incident would provide a dangerously incomplete picture of what happened .