dod has made some progress in developing the ors concept . this plan was submitted to congress in april 2007 . we also reviewed dod's development of a higher - level strategy to guide the ors concept , as well as other future space efforts , and issued a report regarding the need for the secretary of defense and the director of national intelligence to identify and resolve any remaining differences of opinion and issue a national security space strategy . moreover , we recently reported on the status of dod's progress to date in implementing the ors concept and assessing associated challenges . in that report , we recommended that the secretary of the air force develop an investment plan to guide the joint ors office as it works to meet urgent needs and develops a technological foundation to meet future needs . dod has taken several steps to develop the ors concept to meet warfighter needs ; however , the concept is still in the early stages of its development and not commonly understood by all members of the warfighter and national security space communities . dod has developed a process for converting warfighter needs into formal requirements and identifying potential ors solutions . in april 2008 , dod issued an implementation plan and continues to draft instructions and guidance to further clarify ors and how it can meet warfighter needs . in spite of this progress , common understanding of the ors concept is lacking because dod has not clearly defined key elements of the ors concept and has not effectively communicated the concept to key stakeholders . since the joint ors office was established in may 2007 , it has developed a process that converts warfighter needs into formal requirements and potential ors solutions . dod also issued an implementation plan in april 2008 and continues to develop further ors guidance . dod has established a process that converts a warfighter need into formal requirements and identifies potential ors solutions for those requirements . as shown in figure 2 , the ors requirements and solutions generation process begins when a joint force commander or other user submits a capability need to u.s. strategic command . during the requirements development phase and the solutions development phase , teams are assembled from across the warfighter and national security space communities by the designated lead for the respective phases . at this time , the joint ors office has asked air force space command to facilitate the requirements development phase and has asked the air force space and missile systems center to facilitate the solutions development phase . the solutions development phase can begin before the formal capability requirements document is delivered . the joint force commander or other user who submitted the need has multiple opportunities to provide input throughout the ors requirements and solutions generation process to ensure that the solutions being considered will actually fit the need . at the time of this report , one warfighter need has completed the ors requirements and solutions generation process and two other warfighter needs are in process . the need that has completed the process was a request to augment global ultra - high - frequency communications .