in addition , not all tribes are eligible for the regulatory process . in conclusion , the bia's recognition process was never intended to be the only way groups could receive federal recognition . nevertheless , it was intended to provide the department of the interior with an objective and uniform approach by establishing specific criteria and a process for evaluating groups seeking federal recognition . it is also the only avenue to federal recognition that has established criteria and a public process for determining whether groups meet the criteria . however , weaknesses in the process have created uncertainty about the basis for recognition decisions , calling into question the objectivity of the process . additionally , the amount of time it takes to make those decisions continues to frustrate petitioners and third parties , who have a great deal at stake in resolving tribal recognition cases . without improvements that focus on fixing these problems , parties involved in tribal recognition may look outside of the regulatory process to the congress or courts to resolve recognition issues , preventing the process from achieving its potential to provide a more uniform approach to tribal recognition . the result could be that the resolution of tribal recognition cases will have less to do with the attributes and qualities of a group as an independent political entity deserving a government - to - government relationship with the united states , and more to do with the resources that petitioners and third parties can marshal to develop successful political and legal strategies . mr. chairman , this completes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have at this time . for further information , please contact barry hill on ( 202 ) 512-3841 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony and the report on which it was based are robert crystal , charles egan , mark gaffigan , jeffery malcolm , and john yakaitis . there are currently 562 recognized tribes with a total membership of about 1.7 million . in addition , several hundred groups are currently seeking recognition . federally recognized tribes are eligible to participate in federal assistance programs . in fiscal year 2000 , about $4 billion was appropriated for programs and funding almost exclusively for recognized tribes . additionally , recognition establishes a formal government - to - government relationship between the united states and a tribe . the quasi - sovereign status created by this relationship exempts certain tribal lands from most state and local laws and regulations . such exemptions generally apply to lands that the federal government has taken in trust for a tribe or its members . currently , about 54 million acres of land are being held in trust . the exemptions also include , where applicable , laws regulating gambling . the indian gaming regulatory act of 1988 , which regulates indian gambling operations , permits a tribe to operate casinos on land in trust if the state in which it lies allows casino - like gambling and the tribe has entered into a compact with the state regulating its gambling businesses .