the reasons vary . for example , officials in one state said that they mistakenly assessed some waters against higher standards than necessary , which resulted in a number of waters being placed inappropriately on their 303 ( d ) list . in some cases , waters were listed initially on the basis of little or no data . for example , officials from one state told us that about half the waters on its 303 ( d ) list were listed on the basis of evaluated data . upon additional monitoring of these waters , the state found that many meet standards and should therefore be removed from the 303 ( d ) list . epa regulations require states to demonstrate “good cause” before an impaired water can be removed from a 303 ( d ) list . specifically , once a water body is listed as impaired , it must remain on the list until a tmdl is developed unless good cause is shown to remove it . according to the regulations , good cause includes ( 1 ) new data showing improvement in the water ; ( 2 ) new information showing a flaw in the original impairment decision ; or ( 3 ) changes in technological conditions , such as the use of new control equipment . nonetheless , based on our analysis of the 50 states' methodologies , states vary in their methods and justifications for delisting waters . these findings were corroborated by our interviews with officials in the 15 states we contacted , which demonstrated a widely diverse experience in the delisting process . for example , officials in 11 of the 15 states represented in our interviews cited a variety of reasons for delisting waters , including their belief that some waters were incorrectly listed in the first place ; that the quality of some waters had improved ; or that a tmdl was established for the water , eliminating the need to keep it on the 303 ( d ) list . we found that epa regions play a key role in advising states on delisting matters . some state officials told us that they had received guidance from their epa regional counterparts on how to remove waters from their lists , while others reported receiving no such guidance . moreover , the states that did receive guidance from their regional epa office were provided with different “burdens of proof” before a body of water could be delisted . for example , state officials in one region said that their region's policy allowed them the flexibility to delist a water using the same method that was used to list the water in the first place without new data . state officials in another region , however , said that regardless of how a body of water was originally listed , they could remove it only if they had new data showing that the body of water was now meeting water quality standards . similarly , one region will allow states to remove waters that are not meeting water quality standards but that have an epa - approved tmdl in place . another region , however , will not support a delisting based only on an approved tmdl .