inefficiency . some stakeholders said that the current approach is less efficient because currently insurance coverage has to be negotiated for every launch or set of launches , whereas if insurance were required by law or regulation , such negotiations would be unnecessary . on the other hand , some stakeholders said that negotiating contracts could be more efficient and that the contracts could be adjusted more quickly than creating new regulations or amending existing regulations . however , stakeholders also identified reasons why the current insurance approach should be continued , including greater flexibility , enhanced competition , and assured consistency , although here again views were not always uniform . greater flexibility . several stakeholders we interviewed , including at least one from each of our three stakeholder groups , said that using contractual agreements for insurance coverage allows involved parties to individually assess their assets and risks and to make decisions on how best to protect them given the varying characteristics of the launch vehicles and sites . for example , a spaceport may have expensive equipment to protect , or it may be interested in only hosting experimental activity , some of which is designed to fail for testing purposes . in either of these cases , the involved parties can determine the desired level of protection . enhanced competition . some stakeholders we interviewed , including at least one from each of our three stakeholder groups , said that the flexibility to make their own business decisions regarding what type and how much insurance coverage to obtain allows for competitive pricing to attract businesses . specifically , spaceport operators might keep their launch prices low by purchasing less coverage , which might allow them to attract new launch companies to their spaceports . in contrast , some stakeholders , including at least one from each of our three stakeholder groups , said they would like to remove the temptation for spaceport operators to forego insurance in order to attract new customers with lower prices , as it puts those operators at risk of not being able to recover from a mishap . assured consistency . an insurance industry stakeholder said that because commercial space launch activities require significant advanced planning , changing regulatory conditions after such activities have begun can create an additional expense that they did not consider in their initial plans . one launch company we spoke with added that continuing the current insurance approach is important , as changes to the insurance rules may complicate the business environment for launch companies in the early stages of operations . based on interviews with faa , spaceport operators , launch companies , and insurance industry stakeholders , we identified two primary options for implementing a revised insurance approach as it relates to state and municipal spaceports: require launch companies to purchase insurance to cover spaceport property against damage resulting from launch accidents . this option would likely be implemented through faa's launch licensing process by including an insurance requirement for potential damage to spaceport property . require the spaceport operators to purchase insurance to cover their own property against damage resulting from launch accidents . this option would likely be implemented through the spaceport operator licensing process .