gao - 10-411t . washington , d.c.: february 25 , 2010 . the results of the analysis have not been released . as a result of discussions with dhs , the coast guard intends to conduct a second , cost - constrained fleet mix analysis phase ii , limited to surface assets . this analysis is being conducted to further validate mission needs , roles , and responsibilities and will produce recommendations on the numbers and types of surface assets the coast guard should procure . it is intended to be complete in february 2011 . in the meantime , the coast guard continues to pursue quantities of planned procurements that , to a large extent , reflect the 2007 baseline . the coast guard also completed a study in august 2008 on the appropriate number and type of hc - 130 aircraft to procure to meet needs , but no decision has been made yet . the coast guard currently operates two models of the hc - 130 aircraft: the hc - 130h , which entered operations in the 1970s , and the hc - 130j , which entered operations in the last few years . both models were upgraded as part of the deepwater program but , given the advanced age and deteriorating state of many of the older hc - 130h aircraft , the coast guard decided to revalidate how many of each aircraft should be upgraded and maintained . the study concluded that while the hc - 130j offered more capability than the hc - 130h , and a longer expected life cycle , budgetary concerns prevent retiring all the older aircraft in favor of hc - 130js . instead , a hybrid plan was proposed to maintain 11 , instead of the currently planned 16 , hc - 130hs and to increase the numbers of hc - 130js from the currently planned 6 to 11 . however , the coast guard has not yet taken the additional actions needed to purchase additional hc - 130js . officials stated that any additional acquisitions would necessitate a revalidation of hc - 130j requirements and resubmission of much of the asset's documentation , including baselines and test plans . the coast guard sought a systems integrator at the outset of the deepwater program in part because its workforce lacked the experience and depth to manage the acquisition internally . as the coast guard assumes the role of system integrator it is important that it understand its needs and builds an acquisition workforce to manage the deepwater program . one key method the coast guard uses is a workforce planning model , modified from a model developed by the air force , to improve its estimates of workforce needs . according to coast guard officials , input from project managers is used in the model to estimate current and future needs for key personnel such as project managers , contracting officials , and business and financial managers . officials stated that the output of the model is then discussed in a forum of all the project managers , and requests for additional personnel are then developed and forwarded for inclusion in the budget .