funding is also a concern . va states that gcpr's “success and rate of progression will depend to some extent on the ability to add partners and available funding.” similarly , dod states that gcpr program requirements will be funded in accordance with overarching dod mission priorities . ihs also noted that it faces competing demands for scarce resources . we recognize that each agency has multiple priorities . however , securing adequate and stable funding and determining whether additional partners are needed depends on reliable cost estimates — which can only be determined with well - defined goals and detailed plans for achieving those goals . parts 160-164 ) . over the past several months , we have provided briefings on our findings to agency and project officials , including the cios of vha and mhs whom we initially briefed in september 2000 . concerned about the lack of progress and the significant weaknesses that we found , the cios have begun to exert much needed oversight . they told us that they are now focusing on “early deliverables” for va and dod . to ensure more immediate applicability of gcpr to their missions , va and dod's current priority is to allow va health care providers to view dod health data by the end of september 2001 . once this interim effort is completed , the cios told us that they plan to resume the broader gcpr project — establishing a link among all three partner agencies' health information systems . under the interim effort , as described by the cios , certain trigger events , such as a new veteran enrolling for va medical treatment , will prompt vista to contact a central server , which would search the hundreds of chcs i sites and collect any data on that patient . to help ensure efficient development of the interim effort , va and dod now plan to evaluate their existing it products — such as va's remote view capability , which could have the potential to facilitate the retrieval of dod health data — as well as commercial products to determine if these technologies can be used to electronically transmit data among the agencies' systems . while we did not conduct an in - depth review of these initiatives , we agree that such an evaluation may allow va and dod to reduce or eliminate redundancies because these products have a common aim of sharing patient data . however , it is unclear to what extent the interim effort will be using the gcpr technology — which , according to litton / prc , has demonstrated that data can be moved among va facilities . however , our concerns regarding the usefulness of the information — and the implications for gcpr's expected benefits — still remain . for example , under the interim effort , the requested information is expected to take as long as 48 hours to be received . in addition , only authorized vha personnel will have the ability to see chcs i data from mtfs ; health care providers at mtfs will not be able to view health information from vha — or information from other mtfs .