poor and insufficient workforce planning . unclear job vacancy announcements . time - consuming and paperwork - intensive manual processes . imprecise candidate assessment tools . ineffective use of existing hiring flexibilities . these problems put the federal government at a serious competitive disadvantage in acquiring talent . for example , passive recruitment strategies , such as infrequent or no outreach to college campuses , miss opportunities to expose potential employees to information about federal jobs . unclear and unfriendly vacancy announcements can cause confusion for applicants , delay hiring , and serve as poor recruiting tools . weak candidate assessment tools can inadequately predict future job performance and result in the hiring of individuals who do not fully possess the appropriate skills for the job . as evidence of these and other problems , mspb's most recently published merit principles survey results found that only 5 percent of federal managers and supervisors said that they faced no significant barriers to hiring employees for their agencies . for example , congress has provided agencies with hiring flexibilities that could help agencies streamline their hiring processes and give agency managers more latitude in selecting among qualified job candidates . congress has also provided several agencies with exemptions from the pay and classification restrictions of the general schedule . other examples of congressional action related to recruitment and hiring follow . dual compensation waivers to rehire federal retirees . opm may grant waivers allowing agencies to fill positions with rehired federal annuitants without offsetting the salaries by the amount of the annuities . agencies can request waivers on a case - by - case basis for positions that are extremely difficult to fill or for emergencies or other unusual circumstances . agencies can also request from opm a delegation of authority to grant waivers for emergencies or other unusual circumstances . special authority to hire for positions in contracting . agencies can rehire federal annuitants to fill positions in contracting without being required to offset the salaries . agencies are required only to notify and submit their hiring plans to opm . enhanced annual leave computation . agencies may credit relevant private sector experience when computing annual leave amounts . as the federal government's central personnel management agency , opm has a key role in helping agencies acquire , develop , retain , and manage their human capital . in the areas of recruiting and hiring , opm has , for example , done the following . sponsored job fairs across the country and produced television commercials to make the public more aware of the work that federal employees do . developed a 45-day hiring model to help agencies identify the steps in their processes that tend to bog them down , and created a detailed checklist to assist agencies in undertaking a full - scale makeover of their hiring process from beginning to end . developed a hiring tool kit on its web site that is to aid agencies in improving and refining their hiring processes and that includes a tool to assist agency officials in determining the appropriate hiring flexibilities to use given their specific situations .