the voter then voted . according to election officials in the jurisdictions we visited , the design of provisional ballots varied for the november 2004 election . this is not surprising . larger , diverse jurisdictions may face challenges smaller jurisdictions do not , such as recruiting poll workers with non - english language skills . larger jurisdictions are also likely to need to rely to a greater degree on technology to manage their elections administration process , and this brings its own set of challenges . the complexity of administering an election and the potential for challenges increase with the number of people and places involved , the ethnic diversity and language skills of the voting population , and the scope of activities and processes that must be conducted . many of the election officials in large jurisdictions we visited told us that being well prepared , having established policies and procedures in place , and having qualified election staff were factors that contributed to a smooth election day . one problem that occurred on election day in some jurisdictions that election officials reported encountering was the actions of poll watchers and other third parties that election officials considered disruptive . this presents another issue that election officials may need to include in their election day preparations and training . a goal of the election process is to ensure that every eligible voter is able to cast a vote and have that vote counted . in the november 2000 general election , reports of some voters showing up at the polls and not being able to vote raised concerns about eligible voters' names not appearing on the voter registration list at the polling place or poll workers not otherwise being able to determine voters' eligibility . while many jurisdictions reported in 2001 having at least one procedure in place to help resolve eligibility questions for voters whose names did not appear on a polling place registration list , only 20 states plus the district of columbia reported using some form of provisional ballot for the 2000 general election . one of the major changes since the 2000 general election has been the implementation of a hava provision requiring , in general , that states permit individuals , under certain circumstances , to cast provisional ballots in elections for federal office . in general , under hava , voters who claim to be eligible to vote and registered in the jurisdiction they desire to vote in but whose names do not appear on the polling place registration list are to be allowed to cast provisional ballots in a federal election . these ballots are called provisional because they are counted only if an election official determines that the voter is eligible under state law to vote . in terms of ballot access , provisional ballots benefit voters by allowing an individual to cast a vote , in general , when there is some question as to the individual's eligibility such as when the individual's name is not on the registration list or the individual's eligibility has been questioned by an election official . in terms of ballot integrity , provisional ballots benefit election officials by allowing them to determine voter eligibility prior to counting such ballots ( i.e.