the information in this appendix is summarized in table 3 in the report . to facilitate the comparison of military findings to those for the civilian government entities , we rank ordered the total lump sum and total recurring payments for each of the 62 entities on each hypothetical situation . the ranks appear in parentheses , with “1” indicating the highest lump sum or recurring payment for the situation and “62” indicating the lowest amount . this appendix describes the cash benefits available to eligible survivors of civilian government employees who die in the line of duty while performing in the high - risk occupations of law enforcement or firefighting . we obtained information on the survivor benefits plans for these occupations from the federal government , 50 states and the district of columbia , and the 9 u.s. cities with a population of at least 1 million . types of cash benefits are listed along with descriptions of how the lump sum payments , recurring payments , or both are computed for each entity if these benefits are above those provided to the survivors of general government employees . we obtained the information through structured interviews with benefits personnel for the 61 civilian government entities and verified the reliability of that data through a review of statutes , benefits plans , and other information that the benefits personnel supplied . deceased servicemembers' survivors are entitled to a wide range of benefits . in our september 2002 report , we noted that a survivor might be entitled to a death gratuity payment , a life insurance settlement , burial benefits , monthly payments , and various other benefits that include the use of commissaries and exchanges . in contrast , the recurring payments for deceased servicemembers' survivors in the same three situations are lower than those that at least one - half of the cities provide . further details of our scope and methodology are presented in appendix i . general descriptions of the military's and 61 civilian government entities' survivor benefit plans and payments for the four different hypothetical situations are available in appendixes ii and iii , respectively . supplemental survivor benefits for employees in high - risk occupations are described in appendix iv . we performed our work from october 2003 through may 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . servicemembers are entitled to social security benefits , just like the vast majority of u.s. workers . we reported that social security covers about 96 percent of all u.s. employees and about three - fourths of federal , state , and local government employees pay social security taxes on their earnings . social security's primary source of revenue is the old age , survivors , and disability insurance portion of the payroll tax paid by employers and employees . that payroll tax amounts to 6.2 percent of earnings for both employers and employees , up to an established maximum . also some states or cities limit the duration ( eg , workers' compensation benefits in indiana and maine are limited to 500 weeks ) or total value ( eg , workers' compensation benefits in maryland are limited to $45,000 ) for some types of their recurring payments .