contract types . we used the product and service classifications that each database used to group contracts by type . different databases used different classification schemes , and we did not independently reclassify any contracts to a uniform classification system , since such a system does not exist and a concordance among all schemes is not possible . in fpds - ng , we used the u.s. product and service codes to classify federal government contracts in product groups and categorized reported procurement as either goods , services , or construction services . contract valuation . we established comparable fields across databases that represented the estimated maximum total value of a procurement awarded in 2015 over its entire duration . for fpds - ng , we developed a methodology that is consistent with the methodology laid out in the revised gpa and avoids the inconsistencies of the revised u.s. methodology , which we previously reported . country of firm location . as found in the procurement databases , suppliers can be located , for example , domestically in the united states or abroad . however , the economic effects related to the country of firm location depend on what is produced in the country relative to what is produced elsewhere . for example , the supplier may be an end product manufacturer doing less skill - intensive assembly and packaging , a high technology and skill - intensive manufacturing firm that substantially transforms a product that is subsequently used as an input in the production process , or a broker providing unskilled labor for product distribution . in each of these examples , the country of firm location could experience different economic effects from the awarded contract . country of firm ownership . some countries' procurement practices include contracts awarded for multiple years , and we accounted for the valuation of those contracts by estimating their total cumulative value over multiple years at the time of award in 2015 . in fpds - ng , we accounted for the value of multiple - award contracts by using the base and all options value of task orders awarded in fiscal years 2015 through 2018 for idvs initially awarded in fiscal year 2015 . in ted , available documents noted that member states can use alternative multiple - year tools such as framework agreements and dynamic purchasing systems for a certain time period or for repeat purchases , respectively . while the indicator field for these data in ted was not sufficiently populated for further analysis of those types of contracts , the contract valuation field we used had already accounted for the total value of the contract , and thus no further adjustment was warranted . officials in canada provided data on multiple - year contracts , including call - ups and standing offers . however , since the contract value field we used accounted for the total value of the contract , no further adjustment was needed . for mexico , compranet contains information on framework agreements and multiple - year contracts , but since the contract value field indicated the total value of the contract award , no adjustment was needed .