the formal procedures will supersede the interim procedures . the cfats act of 2014 prohibits retaliation against whistleblowers , but dhs lacks a process and procedures to address whistleblower retaliation reports , according to dhs officials . specifically , an owner or operator of a chemical facility of interest or agent may not discharge an employee or otherwise discriminate against an employee with respect to the compensation provided to , or terms , conditions , or privileges of the employment of , the employee , for reporting a potential cfats violation to dhs . however , our analysis is intended to provide perspective on the extent to which the calls were cfats related and some examples of the types of issues that were reported to dhs prior to the implementation of the whistleblower process in response to the mandate in the cfats act of 2014 . we assessed the reliability of the data for the calls by , for example , reviewing iscd's standard operating procedures for receiving and documenting cfats tip line calls and interviewing knowledgeable officials and reviewing guidance to understand how the calls are received and transcribed . we determined the data to be sufficiently reliable for purposes of determining the number of calls received by iscd and the types of issues reported . we conducted this performance audit from september 2015 to july 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . dhs's nppd leads the national effort to protect and enhance the resilience of the nation's physical and cyber infrastructure . the directorate includes the office of infrastructure protection , which leads the coordinated national effort to reduce risk to u.s. critical infrastructure posed by acts of terrorism . within the office of infrastructure protection , iscd leads the nation's effort to secure high - risk chemical facilities and prevent the use of certain chemicals in a terrorist act on the homeland , as well as implementing cfats and managing the cfats program , including its whistleblower process and procedures . the cfats program is intended to ensure the security of the nation's chemical infrastructure by identifying , assessing the risk posed by , and requiring the implementation of measures to protect high - risk chemical facilities . section 550 of the dhs appropriations act , 2007 , required dhs to issue regulations establishing risk - based performance standards for chemical facilities that , as determined by dhs , present high levels of risk ; the act also required vulnerability assessments and development and implementation of site security plans for such facilities . dhs published the cfats interim final rule in april 2007 and appendix a to the rule , published in november 2007 , lists 322 coi and the screening threshold quantities for each . according to dhs , subject to certain statutory exclusions , all facilities that manufacture coi as well as facilities that store or use such chemicals as part of their daily operations may be subject to cfats .