tly . inally , we again note that while isolating the effect of tarp's activities f continues to be difficult , developments in the credit markets have generally been mixed since our january 2009 report . some indicato demonstrate that the cost of credit has increased in interbank and corporate bond markets and decreased in mortgage markets , while perceptions of risk ( as measured by premiums over treasury securit ies ) have declined in interbank and mortgage markets and risen in corporate debt markets . in addition , although federal reserve survey data suggest that lending standards remained tight , the largest cpp recipients extende over $240 billion in new loans to consumers and business in both december 2008 and january 2009 , according to the treasury's new survey . attributing any of these changes directly to tarp continues to beproblematic because of the range of actions that have been and are being taken to address the current crisis . while these indicators may be suggestive of tarp's ongoing impact , no single indicator or set of indicators will provide a definitive determination of the program's impact . while treasury continues to take action to address our recommendations and has begun to make progress in many areas , we identified new areas that warrant ongoing attention and focus . therefore , we recommend that treasury take the following actions as it continues to improve the integrity , accountability , and transparency of the program . we recommend that treasury take the following six actions: develop a communication strategy that includes building an understanding and support for the various components of the program . specific actions could include hiring a communications officer , integrating communications into tarp operations , scheduling regular and ongoing contact with congressional committees and members , holding town hall meetings with the public across the country , establishing a counsel of advisors , and leveraging available technology . require that aig seek concessions from stakeholders , such as management , employees , and counterparties , including seeking to renegotiate existing contracts , as appropriate , as it finalizes the agreement for additional assistance . update ofs documentation of certain internal control procedures and the guidance available to the public on determining warrant exercise prices to be consistent with actual practices applied by ofs . improve transparency pertaining to tarp program activities by reporting publicly the monies , such as dividends , paid to treasury by tarp participants . complete the review of , and as necessary renegotiate , the four existing vendor conflicts - of - interest mitigation plans to enhance specificity and conformity with the new interim conflicts - of - interest rule . issue guidance requiring that key communications and decisions concerning potential or actual vendor - related conflicts of interest be documented . we provided a draft of this report to treasury for review and comment . we received written comments from treasury that are reprinted in appendix i . we also received technical comments from treasury , that we incorporated , as appropriate . in its comments , treasury described steps it had taken in the last 60 days to address extraordinary economic challenges and noted that recommendations in our latest report presented a thoughtful way forward .