we concur with that determination . however , kpmg identified six weaknesses in the red cross's internal controls related to the reimbursement for the four 2004 hurricanes that it considered to be reportable conditions . kpmg also considered one of these , related to debit cards for client assistance , to be a material weakness . in its report , kpmg made recommendations to the red cross to strengthen internal controls related to these six reportable conditions , with which the red cross concurred . the report also identified about $712,000 of known questioned costs related to the federal share of the 2004 hurricane program identified through audit sampling that were caused by ( 1 ) a bank reporting error of $657,000 on client assistance debit cards and ( 2 ) missing or incomplete documentation of $55,000 to support incurred expenses . the red cross reported $88.6 million of incurred expenses related to the four 2004 hurricanes for the period august 11 , 2004 , through june 30 , 2005 . these expenses , less other federal funds and private donations received , were submitted to fema for reimbursement from federal appropriated funds provided under public law 108-324 , as indicated in table 2 . as indicated in table 2 , the reported $88.6 million of red cross incurred expenses were reduced by $0.3 million of other federal funds and $60.2 million of private donations that resulted in a net reimbursement amount of $28.1 million . we reviewed kpmg's single audit act audit work on the red cross's internal controls and tests of transactions , and we retested 10 percent of its 741 sample transactions of red cross expenses related to the four 2004 hurricanes . we found that we could rely upon the kpmg audit work . in conducting its audit , kpmg identified six reportable conditions in internal controls , the first of which kpmg also determined to be a material weakness . these conditions are discussed in more detail below . one method used by the red cross to provide financial assistance to disaster victims is the client assistance card , which is a mastercard® branded debit card with client assistance amounts determined by on - site caseworkers . the cards were introduced on a large scale basis for the first time during the 2004 hurricane response in florida . the cards are preferred by the red cross in part because of their acceptance by merchants , reduced paperwork , and the flexibility afforded to disaster clients . an internal authorizing approval document ( red cross form 1030 ) is used to issue a card to individual clients following initial casework . individual card spending limits are determined by the caseworker's assessment of the client's immediate needs for housing , food , transportation , and other personal expenses , with a current maximum card balance of $5,000 . card spending limits can be restored after they are consumed if the caseworker determines additional client need exists . most cards were “cash - enabled,” meaning they could be used to withdraw cash from any atm .