gao - 11-318sp . washington , d.c.: march 1 , 2011 . consumer finance: factors affecting the financial literacy of individuals with limited english proficiency . gao - 10-518 . washington , d.c.: may 21 , 2010 . financial literacy and education commission: progress made in fostering partnerships , but national strategy remains largely descriptive rather than strategic . i am pleased to be here today to testify on this important topic during financial literacy month . senator akaka , you first sponsored financial literacy month in 2004 and have long sought to raise awareness of this important issue . i , too , believe that giving americans the information they need to make effective financial decisions is key to their well - being , as well as to the economic health of our nation . as i stated during my confirmation hearing , i hope to use the unique position of the comptroller general to promote greater awareness of the importance of financial literacy in the united states . financial literacy plays an important role in ensuring the financial health and stability of individuals and families , and economic changes in recent years have further highlighted the need to empower all americans to make informed financial decisions . for example , the recent financial crisis revealed that many borrowers likely did not fully understand the risks associated with alternative mortgage products , resulting in substantial increases in defaults and foreclosures that continue to expose borrowers to financial risk and be a drag on the economy today . in a 2010 survey of u.s. consumers prepared for the national foundation for credit counseling , a majority of consumers reported they did not have a budget and about one - third were not saving for retirement . in a 2009 survey of u.s. consumers by the finra investor education foundation , a majority believed themselves to be good at dealing with day - to - day financial matters , but the survey also revealed that many had difficulty with basic financial concepts . further , about 25 percent of u.s. households either have no checking or savings account or rely on alternative financial products or services that are likely to have less favorable terms or conditions , such as nonbank money orders , nonbank check - cashing services , or payday loans . as a result of this situation , many americans may not be planning their finances in the most effective manner for maintaining or improving their financial well - being . in addition , individuals today have more responsibility for their own retirement savings because traditional defined - benefit pension plans have declined substantially over the past two decades . as a result , financial skills are increasingly important for those individuals in or planning for retirement to help ensure that retirees can enjoy a comfortable standard of living . federal financial literacy programs and resources are spread widely among many different federal agencies , raising concerns about fragmentation and potential duplication of effort .