department of education grant award . gao / hrd - 93-8r . washington , d.c.: december 9 , 1992 . all eight were approved and funded . ( see app . iii for a list of grants awarded in 2004 based on unsolicited proposals ) . the department of education has the responsibility to ensure that when it makes discretionary grant awards it follows a transparent and fair process that results in awards to deserving eligible applicants . in the case of unsolicited applications , oii's process is designed to meet statutory and regulatory requirements . however , education based its decisions about the likely national significance and quality of proposals on information that varied greatly in detail and , as a result , sent applications forward for peer review that sometimes required extensive revisions . without requiring a more uniform format for unsolicited proposals , oii may not have adequate information on which to base its screening decisions . regarding its competitive awards process , the department has put in place management controls that , if followed , provide a reasonable assurance that awards are made appropriately . these controls protect the integrity and transparency of the departmental grant award process by requiring , among other things , that competition plans are finalized prior to the competition , that any changes to such plans are documented and approved , that grantees are screened for competency and eligibility , and that departmental officials determine that proposed activities are allowable under the law . when the department does not consistently follow these procedures , as we found to be the case , the integrity of its competitive grant award process may be undermined . furthermore , in the absence of such diligence , actions taken that benefit specific grantees , such as those we found in 2001 and 2002 , could happen again . we are making four recommendations to the secretary of education to address certain shortcomings in the department's grant - making policies through a variety of executive actions designed to promote fairness , enhance transparency , and provide greater access to funding opportunities . specifically , to improve the process for selecting and awarding grants based on unsolicited proposals , we are recommending that the secretary develop a more systematic format to select unsolicited proposals for further consideration by peer reviewers . in addition , to ensure fairness and improve transparency in the competitive grants process , we recommend that the secretary take the following steps: ensure that all competition plans are finalized before competitions begin and if a plan needs to be amended during a competition , the secretary should provide assurances that any such amendment is justified in writing and has been approved by a senior department official . implement departmental policy to screen all applicants for compliance with audit requirements before the award , and ensure that outstanding audit issues — if there are any — are addressed before making an award . take appropriate steps to ensure that program officers better document required checks such as budget analyses and eligibility screening . education provided us with comments on a draft of this report ; these comments appear in appendix iii . education also provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate .