coin goals . although dod , state , and usaid have long used contractors and implementing partners to conduct their work , the agencies' current reliance on contractors to support u.s. efforts to stabilize and rebuild afghanistan is unprecedented . we have previously reported on the contracting challenges agencies face in contingency environments . for example , the contracting environment in afghanistan poses unique challenges , including the complexity of transporting supplies and equipment , the limited availability of staff for the needed level of oversight , the often limited capacity of local vendors , a lack of robust accounting and record keeping in the country , and a high volume of complex contracts and large - scale construction projects . further , according to dod officials and officials from other u.s. government agencies , and as suggested in congressional reports , u.s. contracting efforts take place in an environment characterized by actual and perceived widespread corruption in afghan government and business and face the risk that some u.s. funds may be used to finance terrorist or insurgent groups . the u.s. government has taken a number of steps to prevent resources from being used to support terrorist activities or organizations — for example , executive order 13,224 was aimed at blocking the financing of terrorism . as the use of contractors and spending has grown in afghanistan , u.s. government agencies and congressional committees have paid increasing attention to the risks of u.s. contracting and reconstruction funds being diverted to criminal or insurgent groups . for example , congressional legislation to address this issue has recently been proposed , and there have been congressional hearings and recent reports detailing examples of corruption and financing of insurgents in afghanistan . in september 2010 coin contracting guidance , the commander of usfor - a / isaf directed contracting officials to establish systems and standard databases to ensure that contracts are not awarded to malign actors and funds are not diverted . additionally , in 2010 dod and other agencies spearheaded the creation of interagency efforts in afghanistan intended to encourage transparency , prevent corruption , and identify malign actors . for example , in june 2010 dod created task force 2010 , which works to develop greater visibility over contracting networks , money flows , and the linkages to malign actors to better employ contracting to support coin goals . earlier , in 2009 , the drug enforcement agency , dod , the department of the treasury , and other u.s. agencies established the afghan threat finance cell , which aims to identify and disrupt the funding of criminal and insurgent organizations . in light of these concerns , under the authority of the comptroller general of the united states , we initiated a review to identify dod , state , and usaid efforts to vet vendors and assistance recipients in afghanistan .