the perspectives of these officials are not generalizable . we also interviewed officials from two private health care systems , selected because of their efforts to address health care disparities . we asked them about the methods they use to collect race and ethnicity data , and how they have used these data to assess and address disparities in health care outcomes and patient experience . we interviewed both va and department of defense officials regarding their collaborative efforts and respective plans to implement new electronic health record ( ehr ) systems and how these systems will capture race and ethnicity data . to describe what feedback va collects from minority veterans on their patient experiences , we reviewed how patient feedback survey results are collected and reported . we also interviewed officials from va's office of reporting , analytics , performance , improvement , and deployment , the veterans experience office , and ohe to obtain information on how the surveys are administered , the type of information they capture , and how results are reported . to obtain information on the types and nature of patient feedback received by patient advocates at va medical centers , we interviewed va officials with the office of patient advocacy and conducted interviews with four patient advocate coordinators across four visns , and small group interviews with 21 va medical center patient advocates located in 12 medical centers within the four visns . we selected these medical centers to provide diversity in geographic regions , number of enrollees' by race per visn , facility complexity , and racial and ethnic demographics of the veteran population . the perspectives obtained from staff located within the 12 va medical centers and four visns cannot be generalized . in addition , we also interviewed representatives from five veterans service organizations , and received written responses from another to obtain information about the mechanisms minority veterans may use to provide feedback to va on patient experiences . we conducted this performance audit from august 2018 to december 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . va has taken several steps in recent years to reduce health care disparities for minority veterans and advance health equity , but lacks mechanisms to ensure accountability for advancing health equity using these or other actions . in particular , va established a program office and a dedicated steering committee to draft va's first action plan designed to achieve health equity . however , this initial action plan lacked performance measures and clear lines of accountability ; as such , the extent to which it has been implemented and the progress made in achieving its goals is unknown . in 2012 , va established ohe to lead the department's efforts to advance health equity and reduce health disparities throughout va's health care system .