prototype . should be form , fit and function integrated with other key supporting elements / subsystems to demonstrate full functionality of subsystem . flight demonstration in representative operational environment such as flying test bed or demonstrator aircraft . technology is well substantiated with test data . technology has been proven to work in its final form and under expected conditions . in almost all cases , this trl represents the end of true system development . examples include developmental test and evaluation of the system in its intended weapon system to determine if it meets design specifications . actual application of the technology in its final form and under mission conditions , such as those encountered in operational test and evaluation . in almost all cases , this is the end of the last “bug fixing” aspects of true system development . examples include using the system under operational mission conditions . the nuclear reactor is the key element of the prometheus 1 spacecraft . without the power levels supplied by the reactor , the proposed propulsion , science , and communication systems are not feasible . designing , constructing , and utilizing highly reliable , safe , portable nuclear reactors is not new — nuclear reactors have been used in submarines for almost 50 years . however , the united states has very little experience operating nuclear reactors in a space environment and tackling space unique nuclear application issues . the office of naval reactors , the organizational unit in the department of energy responsible for developing nuclear reactors for the navy , will be responsible for all portions of the prometheus 1 reactor development effort . the space environment places significant weight constraints on the reactor design and requires semi - autonomous control . unlike submarines and aircraft carriers , all spacecraft have serious weight constraints driven by the cost of launching payloads into orbit . consequently , spacecraft designers put great effort into eliminating weight . further , where conventional reactors have hands on operators , the prometheus 1 reactor must be remotely controlled . nasa estimates that control communications will take about 40 minutes to travel one way between earth and the jovian system . a power conversion system accepts the thermal energy from the reactor and converts it to useful electrical power for the spacecraft . power conversion is an integral part of any power generation system taking the form of steam turbine generators in terrestrial utility plants and nuclear submarines . nasa is considering two types of power conversion systems — dynamic and static . according to nasa , the dynamic systems under consideration offer the benefits of increased efficiency , reduced weight and mass , and decreased nuclear fuel requirements . the static systems , however , have a technology heritage in prior spacecraft and could offer increased reliability because they have no moving parts . since the conversion process in a fission reactor is never 100 percent efficient , heat rejection is required to dissipate waste energy . this is usually accomplished with large pumped - water cooling systems on earth . space based power conversion would require a large radiator system to dissipate the waste heat in the vacuum of space .