state . state agencies implement and enforce many of the federal environmental regulations and may also have their own set of state laws covering shale oil and gas development . additional requirements regarding shale oil and gas operations may be imposed by various levels of government for specific locations . entities such as cities , counties , tribes , and regional water authorities may set additional requirements that affect the location and operation of wells . federal . a number of federal agencies administer laws and regulations that apply to various phases of shale oil and gas development . for example , blm manages federal lands and approximately 700 million acres of federal subsurface minerals , also known as the federal mineral estate . epa administers and enforces key federal laws , such as the safe drinking water act , to protect human health and the environment . other federal land management agencies , such as the u.s. department of agriculture's forest service and the department of the interior's fish and wildlife service , also manage federal lands , including shale oil and gas development on those lands . gao is conducting a separate and more detailed review of the federal and state laws and regulations that apply to unconventional oil and gas development , including shale oil and gas . shale oil and gas are found in shale plays — a set of discovered or undiscovered oil and natural gas accumulations or prospects that exhibit similar geological characteristics — on private , state - owned , and federal lands across the united states . shale plays are located within basins , which are large - scale geological depressions , often hundreds of miles across , that also may contain other oil and gas resources . figure 4 shows the location of shale plays and basins in the contiguous 48 states . a shale play can be developed for oil , natural gas , or both . in addition , a shale gas play may contain “dry” or “wet” natural gas . among the studies and publications we reviewed that discuss the potential contamination of drinking water from the hydraulic fracturing process in shale formations are the following: in 2011 , the center for rural pennsylvania analyzed water samples taken from 48 private water wells located within about 2,500 feet of a shale gas well in the marcellus shale . the analysis compared predrilling samples to postdrilling samples to identify any changes to water quality . the analysis showed that there were no statistically significant increases in pollutants prominent in drilling waste fluids — such as total dissolved solids , chloride , sodium , sulfate , barium , and strontium — and no statistically significant increases in methane . the study concluded that gas well drilling had not had a significant effect on the water quality of nearby drinking water wells . in 2011 , researchers from duke university studied shale gas drilling and hydraulic fracturing and the potential effects on shallow groundwater systems near the marcellus shale in pennsylvania and the utica shale in new york .