accurate: substantially met . the estimate was properly adjusted for inflation , and we did not find any mathematical errors in the estimate calculations we inspected . officials stated that labor and material cost data from recent , analogous programs were used in the estimate . while the documentation does not discuss the reliability , age , or relevance of the cost data , navy officials provided us with additional information regarding those data characteristics . credible: partially met . the navy only modeled cost variation in the detail design and construction portion of the program and excluded from its analyses any risk impacts related to the remainder of the acquisition , operating and support , and disposal phases , which altogether comprise about 75 percent of the lifecycle cost . without performing a sensitivity analysis on the entire life cycle cost of the three ships , it is not possible for the navy to identify key elements affecting the overall cost estimate . further , without performing a risk and uncertainty analysis on the entire life cycle cost of the three ships , it is not possible for the navy to determine a level of confidence associated with the overall cost estimate . by not quantifying important risks , the navy may have underestimated the range of possible costs for about three - quarters of the entire program . the estimate provides an overly optimistic assessment of the program's vulnerability to cost growth should risks be realized or current assumptions change . this , in turn , may underestimate the lifecycle cost of the program . the coast guard's planned delivery dates of 2023 , 2025 , and 2026 for the three ships were not informed by a realistic assessment of shipbuilding activities , but rather were primarily driven by the potential gap in icebreaking capabilities once the polar star reaches the end of its service life ( see figure 3 ) . the polar star's service life is estimated to end between fiscal years 2020 and 2023 . this creates a potential heavy polar icebreaker capability gap of about 3 years , if the polar star's service life were to end in 2020 and the lead polar icebreaker were to be delivered by the end of fiscal year 2023 as planned . if the lead ship is delivered later than planned in this scenario , the potential gap could be more than 3 years . the coast guard is planning to recapitalize the polar star's key systems starting in 2020 to extend the service life of the ship until the planned delivery of the second polar icebreaker ( see figure 4 ) . further , we compared the program's planned construction schedule to the construction schedules of delivered lead ships for major coast guard and navy shipbuilding programs active in the last 10 years as well as the healy , the coast guard's only medium polar icebreaker . we found that the polar icebreaker's lead ship construction cycle time of 2.5 to 3 years is optimistic , as only 3 of the 10 ships in our analysis were constructed in 3 years or less . further , as another point of comparison , the healy was constructed in just under 4.5 years .