account management . the account management function , led by three account managers , is to be responsible for managing the it needs of oi&t's business partners — the va's major components . account managers are to interface directly with the va administrations and staff offices to understand their needs , help identify and define the solutions to meet those needs , and represent their customers' interests by reporting directly to the cio . in this regard , account managers are to submit their customers' it requirements to the epmo , ensure that their business needs are understood by oi&t , and ensure that business solutions are designed to meet their customers' specifications . this function is also tasked with advocating for their customers in the budget process . oi&t intends this new function to address the challenge of effectively collaborating with business units . as of may 2016 , the three account managers were in place . quality and compliance . this function is to be responsible for establishing effective policy governance and standards and ensuring adherence to the policies and standards . in addition , the quality and compliance function is expected to be charged with identifying , monitoring , and measuring risks across the oi&t organization . data management organization . the organization is being established to improve both service delivery and the veteran experience by engaging with data stewards to ensure the accuracy and security of the information collected by va . the organization is intended to institute a data governance strategy ; engage with business owners to ensure accuracy and security of collected data ; analyze data sources to form an enterprise data architecture ; and establish metrics for data efficiency , access , and value . key to an agency's success in effectively managing its it systems is sustaining a workforce with the necessary knowledge , skills , and abilities to execute a range of management functions that support the agency's mission and goals . achieving such a workforce depends on effective human capital management , which includes developing a human capital strategic plan ; analyzing the workforce ; analyzing the gaps between current skills and future needs , and developing strategies for filling the gaps ; and training and developing the workforce . taking such steps is consistent with activities outlined in human capital management practices that we and the office of personnel management have developed . oi&t took steps toward implementing effective it human capital practices by documenting an it human capital strategic plan and initiating an update based on changed priorities , regularly analyzing workforce data , identifying skill gaps for the current fiscal year , and implementing an it training program . however , oi&t did not implement other human capital practices that are essential for analyzing the workforce and identifying it skill gaps . specifically , the office had not ( 1 ) tracked and reviewed historical and projected leadership retirements , and ( 2 ) identified the gaps in future skill areas . strategic human capital planning that is linked to an agency's strategic goals can be used as a tool to identify the workforce needed for the future and to develop strategies for shaping the workforce .