, usability ) . this analysis included the following steps: qualitatively analyzing the information architecture literature and interviewing information architecture practitioners to identify overarching principles ; reviewing federal requirements for the usability of websites and digital services as summarized at digitalgov.gov to identify those guidelines that relate directly to one or more characteristics of a useful federal program inventory ( i.e. this report is part of our response to that mandate . our objective for this report was to examine how the principles and practices of information architecture can be applied for the development of a useful federal program inventory . we reviewed several resources in the field of information architecture and discussed its applicability to developing a federal program inventory with practitioners in the field . we also examined how these principles and practices align with guidance and other good practices for the development of federal websites , which include practices related to quality and usefulness , among other areas , as described in our methodology in appendix i . our methodology involved describing the general steps that could guide the development of a federal program inventory using an information architecture approach , as well as assessing how the principles and practices of information architecture could be used to identify programs and to identify , compile , and organize information within an inventory . this report is not meant to suggest requirements or best practices for developing the federal program inventory , but rather to illustrate how a particular approach could be applied to develop a useful federal program inventory . other approaches might also be used — or could be incorporated into this framework — to develop an inventory that best addresses limitations identified in the past . as part of our effort to apply relevant principles and practices to program identification , we examined efforts to develop program inventories at both the federal and state levels , including the initial federal effort to develop a federal program inventory and our assessment of that effort ; examined prior omb and gao guidance for developing lists of federal developed a set of observations on using budget - related information sources — primarily budget justifications and program activity data — to identify programs in selected agencies: the departments of education ( education ) and homeland security ( dhs ) , and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) . these three agencies were drawn from those included in the initial effort to develop a federal program inventory and selected based on how they approached that effort , including whether they specifically connected their inventory to their programs included in the catalog of federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) . we used budget documentation as a starting point to identify programs , because most agencies followed a similar approach for their initial inventories and because gprama requires inventories to include budget information .