all entries and review should be documented . establish milestones for preparing and reviewing the financial statements by setting dates for critical phases such as closing the general ledger ; preparing financial statements , footnotes , and the performance and accountability report ; and performing specific quality control review procedures . use established tools ( i.e. , checklists and implementation guides ) available for assistance in compiling and reviewing financial statements . maintain documentation supporting all information included in the financial statements and footnotes . this documentation should be more self - explanatory than what has been retained in the past . the documentation should be at a level of detail to enable a third party , such as an auditor , to use the documentation for substantiating reported data without extensive explanation or re - creation by the original preparer . take advantage of in - house resources and expertise in establishing financial reporting policies , internal controls , and business practices , as well as in review of financial statement and footnote presentation . develop or acquire an integrated financial management system to provide timely and accurate recording of financial data for financial reporting and management decision making . in response to our audit findings , sec plans to increase its financial reporting staff this fiscal year , formalize its policies and procedures , and solicit advice from corporate financial reporting experts within sec . sec senior management has reviewed and endorsed certain initial policies applied in the first year of financial reporting , and has modified or recommended others for further review . not all of these systems are integrated with the accounting system . sec is undertaking a multiyear project to replace the existing case - tracking system with a system that is better designed for financial reporting purposes . now i would like to shift to the second material internal control weakness . as part of its enforcement responsibilities , sec issues and administers judgments that order disgorgements and civil penalties against violators of federal securities laws . the resulting transactions for fiscal year 2004 involved collections of about $945 million , and recording and reporting of fiduciary and custodial balances on the financial statements . sec records and tracks information on over 12,000 parties in sec enforcement cases involving disgorgements and penalties through a case - tracking system . however , the case - tracking system is not designed for financial reporting and is not integrated with sec's general ledger accounting system , which accumulates , tracks , and summarizes sec's financial transactions . to compensate for limitations in the system , sec staff compiles quarterly subsidiary ledgers using extensive and time - consuming procedures . after downloading financial information on disgorgements and penalties from the case - tracking system to a spreadsheet with thousands of cases and defendants with a magnitude of approximately 1 million data elements , sec staff performs numerous calculations using the data in the spreadsheet to compile the disgorgement and penalty balances as of the end of each quarter . such a process is inherently inefficient and prone to error .