these are discussed below . in response to our first and second recommendations on operational and materiel availability requirements , dod stated that the navy and joint staff would revisit requirements definitions for shipbuilding programs to better ensure that they are traceable to a ship's mission and can be used across ship development and fielding . dod also agreed that it will align the sustainment definitions with how the navy defines critical failures for ship programs . while these are important steps , they do not fully address our recommendations . specifically , dod officials told us that the department plans to continue defining operational availability with a single metric for an entire ship or ship class . while this approach is appropriate for materiel availability , as we state in the report , it is misaligned with navy guidance for operational availability , which states that such an approach is not mathematically feasible for ships . until dod ensures that its sustainment requirements for ships are well - defined and usable during acquisition and sustainment , shipbuilding programs will continue to implement requirements that do not result in reliable and available ships . in response to our third and fourth recommendations , dod agreed to incorporate changes to its requirements - setting policy into new shipbuilding programs . however , dod and the navy may miss key opportunities to improve the navy's sustainment requirements for existing programs , including at least four ship classes that have plans for a new flight , block , and / or major modification . this approach also excludes existing programs that have established requirements but have yet to start design or construction . changing these requirements , in line with our recommendation , would help ensure that more rigorous sustainment requirements inform navy ship designs . for example , as we discuss in the report , the current ffg ( x ) operational availability requirement would allow the ships to be out of service for extraordinary lengths of time . until the ffg ( x ) requirement and those for other existing ships ( such as ddg 51 flight iii ) are remedied , the sustainment requirements will continue to be poorly defined and unable to influence design decisions in a manner that results in more reliable ships . in response to our fifth recommendation , dod concurred with the recommendation because it stated that it already reports the status of both sustainment requirements in its selected acquisition reports . however , as we state in our report , implementing this recommendation is dependent on the navy changing the definition of its sustainment requirements to improve the accuracy of its reporting to congress . since dod only agreed to modify material availability requirements for existing ship programs as it deemed appropriate , its selected acquisition reports could continue to be misleading for many of its ship programs because they may not reflect all of the failures and factors that reduce operational and materiel availability once ships are in the fleet .