( see app . regarding the second recommendation that cbp determine the mission benefits to be derived from implementation of the plan and develop and apply key attributes for metrics to assess the program's implementation , dhs concurred and stated that cbp plans to develop a set of measures by april 30 , 2012 , that will assess the effectiveness and mission benefits of future technology investments . such action should address the intent of the recommendation . with regard to the third recommendation that cbp conduct a post - implementation review and operational assessment of sblnet , dhs concurred and stated that cbp's office of border patrol ( obp ) is working with johns hopkins university applied physics laboratory on a block i after - action review ( aar ) , which will address the operational test and evaluation results and offer recommendations on tactics , techniques , and procedures . dhs also said that otla and the border patrol will conduct a post - implementation review and operational assessment required in light of the obp aar , consistent with departmental policy and procedures for recurring reporting of fielded systems . dhs states that cbp plans to complete these actions by june 30 , 2012 . such actions should address the intent of the recommendation . regarding the three recommendations related to cbp's life - cycle cost estimate — that cbp fully document data used in the cost model ; conduct a sensitivity analysis and risk and uncertainty analysis to determine a level of confidence in the estimate so that contingency funding can be established relative to quantified risk ; and independently verify the new life - cycle cost estimate with an independent cost estimate and reconcile any differences — dhs concurred . dhs stated that otia is preparing individual rvss and ift project cost estimates consistent with the gao's guidelines and is fully documenting all assumptions , data structures and sources , methods and calculations , as well as risks and sensitivities for the two largest elements of the plan that will enable cbp to refine contingency funding as needed . officials plan to submit the appropriate project documentation , including the projects' cost estimating baseline document and the updated life - cycle cost estimate , to the department for independent review and verification of the respective projects' methodology and data sources . the department commented that it plans to determine the need for an independent cost estimate at a later time but will complete these actions by april 30 , 2012 . while these actions are positive steps , they do not fully address the recommendation that dhs implement best practices for cost estimates for the entire plan . instead , dhs's response indicates that it plans to implement these best practices for the two largest projects within the plan . to fully understand the impacts of integrating these separate projects , dhs should update the life - cycle cost estimate for the entire plan . dhs also noted that there were three issues in the draft that it did not feel , at present , it could address .