construction standards . contingency construction projects may be identified by the construction standard used , such as those construction standards specified for contingency locations in centcom guidance . the lead service component command for a contingency location is to ensure that the location's construction projects support the mission and tenants , which are driven by the plan centcom provides . according to army central command and air force central command officials , in developing the needed footprint for a contingency location , the service component commands identify construction projects and define level - of - construction requirements to provide the shelter and space needed to conduct planned operations . once developed , according to army corps of engineers officials , the lead service submits those projects to centcom for review and validation . after centcom and its component commands have validated a construction project , the service component command conveys project details , including the level of construction needed , to the army corps of engineers for projects exceeding $1 million . the army and air force have delegated approval for unspecified minor military construction projects below that level to the service component commanders and subordinate commands , including the installation commander in the case of the air force . once appropriations are received , the military departments provide funds to dod construction agents to be used for approved construction projects . the guidance notes that recording , analyzing , and developing improved processes , procedures , and methods based on lessons learned are primary tools in developing improvements in joint force readiness , capabilities , and overall performance . in addition , chairman of the joint chiefs of staff instruction 3150.25f notes that program stakeholders — including the joint staff , the services , the combatant commands , and combat support agencies — when appropriate , will contribute information , data , and lessons learned that are germane to improving joint capabilities and readiness . the guidance further indicates that combatant commands will provide and maintain joint lessons learned program support for theater - and function - specific joint and interoperability lessons learned activities . it notes that lessons are derived from the full range of joint activities and operations , which could include construction during contingency operations . however , centcom guidance does not reinforce the dod guidance regarding the joint lessons learned program . specifically , the centcom regulation governing construction , including contingency construction , does not discuss lessons learned or establish who within the command and its service component commands should be responsible for recording and sharing construction - related lessons learned in the centcom area of responsibility through the joint lessons learned program . further , the regulation does not contain the terms “lesson” or “learned” in combination or separately , illustrating that recording and sharing lessons learned is not a focal point of the guidance and may not carry adequate leadership emphasis on the importance of recording and sharing lessons learned . another factor affecting the recording and sharing of lessons learned is leadership emphasis . according to dod's joint lessons learned program officials , increasing the recording and sharing of lessons learned in the dod joint lesson learned information system can be improved with leadership emphasis at a combatant command .