we made a number of recommendations to address these issues . while interior's reorganization of mms includes plans to hire additional staff with expertise in oil and gas inspections and engineering , these plans have not been fully implemented , and it remains unclear whether interior will be fully successful in hiring , training , and retaining these additional staff . moreover , the human capital issues we identified with blm's management of onshore oil and gas continue , and these issues have not yet been addressed in interior's reorganization plans . federal oil and gas resources generate billions of dollars annually in revenues that are shared among federal , state , and tribal governments ; however , we found interior may not be properly assessing and collecting these revenues . interior generally agreed with our recommendations and is taking initial steps to implement these recommendations . furthermore , we reported in july 2009 on numerous problems with interior's efforts to collect data on oil and gas produced on federal lands , including missing data , errors in company - reported data on oil and gas production , and sales data that did not reflect prevailing market prices for oil and gas . as a result of interior's lack of consistent and reliable data on the production and sale of oil and gas from federal lands , interior could not provide reasonable assurance that it was assessing and collecting the appropriate amount of royalties on this production . we made a number of recommendations to interior to improve controls on the accuracy and reliability of royalty data . interior generally agreed with our recommendations and is working to implement many of them , but these efforts are not complete , and it is uncertain at this time if the efforts will fully address our concerns . in september 2008 , we reported that interior collected lower levels of revenues for oil and gas production in the deep water of the u.s. gulf of mexico than all but 11 of 104 oil and gas resource owners whose revenue collection systems were evaluated in a comprehensive industry study — these resource owners included other countries as well as some states . however , despite significant changes in the oil and gas industry over the past several decades , we found that interior had not systematically re - examined how the u.s. government is compensated for extraction of oil and gas for over 25 years . interior is now in the midst of a major reorganization , which makes balancing delivery of services with transformational activities challenging for an organization . managing this change in a fiscally constrained environment only exacerbates the challenge . if steps are not taken to improve interior's oversight of oil and gas leasing , we are concerned about the department's ability to manage the nation's oil and gas resources , ensure the safe operation of onshore and offshore leases , provide adequate environmental protection , and provide reasonable assurance that the u.s. government is collecting the revenue to which it is entitled . chairman hastings , ranking member markey , and members of the committee , this concludes our prepared statement .