you requested that we examine ses performance awards . this report ( 1 ) describes key characteristics of the awards , such as rating and award distributions , award amounts , and percentage of executives receiving awards , from fiscal years 2010 through 2013 , and ( 2 ) describes and assesses the extent to which selected departments' ses performance appraisal systems factored in organizational and individual performance and made meaningful distinctions in their fiscal year 2013 performance awards . for an additional perspective , the second objective provides an in - depth view of five selected departments' ses ratings and performance awards' processes for the last fiscal year of rating and awards data . to address our first objective , we reviewed agency data provided to opm on the number of ses performance awards within the 24 chief financial officers ( cfo ) act agencies and other variables from fiscal year 2010 — the year prior to the implementation of policies that limited awards — through fiscal year 2013 . only career members of the ses who received a performance rating for a given fiscal year are eligible for performance awards , so we limited our analysis to those executives . we reviewed opm's ses data for the presence of any obvious or potential errors in accuracy and completeness and interviewed opm officials about the accuracy of the data . on the basis of these procedures , we believe the data are sufficiently reliable for use in the analyses presented in this report . although opm has emphasized that an “outstanding” rating represents a level of rare , high - quality performance , it appears from examining fiscal year 2013 ses ratings data that some agencies are not appropriately applying these performance standards to their ses ratings . this undercuts one of the primary purposes for establishing the new ses appraisal system , which includes increasing equity in ratings across agencies and their link to compensation . certifying agencies that are not adhering to the agreed - upon performance standards provides little incentive to those agencies that are adhering to the standards and could lead to ratings that are more skewed toward “outstanding.” as recently as 2008 , opm agreed on the importance of communicating to agencies the value of using a range of rating levels and transforming their cultures to those in which a “fully successful” rating is valued and rewarded . opm also did not support the second part of our recommendation regarding three suggestions for increasing transparency for those agencies that are certified with a modal rating of “outstanding.” although we suggested that opm report high rating justifications to congress through its annual performance report , we understand that this may not be the most appropriate vehicle to use ; another avenue of reporting to congress would certainly be acceptable , and we have adjusted the text accordingly . in addition , by suggesting that the chief human capital officers council have input on agencies' justifications for high ratings , we were in no way suggesting that this council role impact opm's ultimate authority over the regulation and oversight of the ses performance appraisal system ( including certification of agencies' systems ) .