reg . the result of a peer review is a report , which agencies must consider making available to potential commenters in the rulemaking process . “if an agency relies on influential scientific information or a highly influential scientific assessment . the agency shall include in the administrative record for that action a certification that explains how the agency has complied with the requirements of this bulletin.” 70 fed . how long do agencies take to issue rules ? what requirements must an agency comply with to issue a major rule ? we chose a case - study approach because agency officials informed us during initial meetings that little systematic information existed within agencies on the time , staffing , and contracting costs associated with the development of individual rules or the required analyses that support rulemakings . to identify the rules for our case studies , we relied on our federal rules database . the database includes information such as the type of rule ( major or nonmajor ) , priority of the rule ( for example , whether it is a significant rule ) , and the publication date of the rule . what effect do agency interactions with omb have on rulemaking ? to address the first and second questions , we primarily relied on reviews of 16 case studies and interviews with officials from regulatory agencies and omb . we drew a sample from final rules issued from january 2006 through may 2008 , to increase the likelihood that the rules chosen were affected by changes in regulatory requirements since 2003 and for which the staff who were involved would be available to discuss the rulemaking process . we randomly selected 16 major or other significant final rules from executive branch agencies responsible for health , safety , and environmental regulations and an independent regulatory agency for purposes of comparison . we examined two case - study rules each from the department of transportation's ( dot ) federal aviation administration ( faa ) and national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) , the environmental protection agency's ( epa ) office of air a nd radiation ( oar ) and office of water ( ow ) , the food and drug administration's ( fda ) center for drug evaluation and research ( cder and center for food safety and applied nutrition ( cfsan ) , and the securities and exchange commission's ( sec ) division of corporation finance ( cf ) and division of investment management ( im ) . although these agencies and offices are not equivalent organizationally , we treate ) d them as such for purposes of this report to obtain comparable volum major and significant final rules in our selection process . the agencies , offices , and sample of rules that we assessed are not representative of all regulatory agencies and all rules . we reviewed the agencies' regulatory dockets for each rule selected using a standardized data collection instrument and discussed what we found with knowledgeable agency officials and omb . we defined “changes in requirements” as changes that omb identified as significant in its september 2003 revision of omb circular no .