perform research on outstanding accrued expenditures . the first accrued expenditure data file was produced as of the end of fiscal year 2005 . the two tests were performed in fiscal year 2006 . key elements of this guidance include the following . the aircraft division issued additional carryover guidance in september 2006 to reiterate several requirements cited in fiscal year 2005 . furthermore , an aircraft division official noted that the increased focus resulting from the prior gao report recommending that the research and development subactivity groups report their carryover balances separately in the navy's annual budget encouraged nawc management to more closely monitor and manage its carryover . the weapons division issued carryover guidance in august 2006 , which continued to stress the reviews of customers' orders that are financed with appropriations that are canceling or expiring . the guidance states that such reviews would ( 1 ) improve the quality of the year - end carryover and ( 2 ) validate the records , which is an essential task for accomplishing a smooth financial conversion to the new navy erp system planned for october 2007 . the guidance further provided that funds accepted during the remainder of the fourth quarter should not negatively impact the division's carryover position . otherwise , the division should notify the customer that the order cannot be accepted and renegotiate , if possible , the amount of the order that can be accomplished using the dod carryover guidance on outlay rates . furthermore , starting primarily in fiscal year 2005 , the aircraft and weapons divisions began reviewing certain types of orders to validate old financial records and reduce carryover . according to nawc aircraft and weapons division officials , most of these reviews were not done in fiscal years 2003 and 2004 because of nawc's conversion to sigma and the problems , mentioned earlier , it encountered with implementing the system and the reliability of the data in the system . some of the reviews performed by the aircraft or weapons divisions include ( 1 ) reviews of funding documents ( orders ) citing appropriations that are canceling at the end of each fiscal year ( such reviews have been done since the 1990s ) , ( 2 ) reviews of funding documents citing accounts that were to expire at the end of the fiscal year ( these reviews started in fiscal year 2005 ) , and ( 3 ) a fiscal year 2006 review of unused funds with work completion dates of september 30 , 2005 , and before . according to nawc officials , these reviews resulted in correcting millions of dollars in unsupported or unneeded funds on orders , and greatly improved the reliability of the financial data . for example , according to a nawc aircraft division official , as of august 2005 , this division had 14,353 orders that were still open on its books when it converted to sigma in fiscal year 2003 . as a result of the aircraft division's review of these orders from august 2005 through november 2006 , this number was reduced to 7,053 open orders — a reduction of about 50 percent — and $10 million of unneeded funds were removed from its books .