see app . ii for a description of the other ftf - related food security programs implemented by usaid , treasury , and usda . for those countries in which the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) regional representative is based in another country , usda covers these countries as follows: bangladesh and nepal are covered from india ; cambodia is covered from thailand ; ghana and liberia are covered from nigeria ; haiti is covered from the dominican republic ; honduras is covered from guatemala ; malawi , rwanda , tanzania , uganda , and zambia are covered from kenya ; mali is covered from senegal ; mozambique is covered from south africa ; and tajikistan is covered from turkey . usaid has made progress in applying ftf's whole - of - government approach by coordinating and integrating u.s. ftf partner agencies' knowledge and expertise at three levels: at headquarters in washington , d.c. ; in each of the 19 ftf focus countries ; and between the countries and headquarters . at the headquarters level , we found usaid has made significant progress in addressing vulnerabilities we previously reported on by coordinating with u.s. ftf partner agencies to , among other things , develop a global food security strategy and monitor interagency performance . in addition , usaid and u.s. ftf partner agency representatives reported coordinating with each other at the country level and between the countries and headquarters . for example , our survey of u.s. ftf representatives in 19 ftf focus countries shows that 93 percent of the u.s. ftf partner agency representatives reported coordinating with usaid and approximately 80 percent of all u.s. ftf representatives reported coordinating with their headquarters office . figure 2 illustrates usaid's whole - of - government coordination efforts in headquarters , at the country level , and between the country level and headquarters . since 2010 , usaid has made significant progress in addressing fragmentation in global food security efforts by coordinating with ftf partner agencies in headquarters through ftf's whole - of - government approach . in reports issued in 2008 and 2010 , we found that vulnerabilities in u.s. food security efforts included the lack of government - wide efforts such as an integrated strategy for food security , data management systems , and leveraging knowledge and expertise through coordination efforts such as food security working groups . most of these vulnerabilities were related to a lack of coordination among u.s. agencies at the headquarters level . we concluded that , given this fragmentation in food security , the u.s. government was likely missing opportunities to leverage each agency's expertise and to minimize duplication . we made several recommendations on improving coordination efforts in food security programs . u.s. agencies agreed with our recommendations and said they would take actions to develop an interagency food security strategy and establish a common reporting system to monitor progress in food security programs .