gao - 06-819 . washington , d.c.: august 30 , 2006 . public transportation: preliminary information on fta's implementation of safetea - lu changes . gao - 06-910t . washington , d.c.: june 27 , 2006 . fta officials agree that the small starts program can be further streamlined . gao - 05-674 . washington , d.c.: june 28 , 2005 . our survey results confirm some of the reasons offered by project sponsors . among the project sponsors we surveyed with completed transit projects , the most common reasons given for not applying to the new starts program was that the process is too lengthy or that the sponsor wanted to move the project along faster than could be done in the new starts process . about two - thirds of these project sponsors reported that their most recent project was eligible for the new starts program , yet more than one - fourth of them did not apply to the program . the lengthy nature of the new starts process is due , at least in part , to the rigorous and systematic evaluation and rating process established by law — which we have previously noted could serve as a model for other transportation programs . fta has recognized that the process can be lengthy and in 2006 , fta commissioned a study to examine , among other issues , opportunities for accelerating and simplifying the process for implementing the new starts program . fta is currently reviewing the study's findings and recommendations . despite these concerns , our survey of project sponsors indicates that there will be a future demand for new starts , small starts , and very small starts funding . the project sponsors we surveyed reported having 137 planned projects — that is , projects currently undergoing an alternative analysis or other corridor - based planning study . according to the project sponsors , they plan to seek new starts , small starts , or very small starts funding for almost three - fourths ( 73 percent ) of these 137 projects . project sponsors we surveyed also indicated that they were considering a range of project type alternatives in their planning . the most commonly cited alternatives were bus rapid transit and light rail . our survey results also indicate that , through its small starts and very small starts programs , fta is attracting project sponsors that would not otherwise apply for the new starts program or have not previously applied to the new starts program . for example , of 28 project sponsors that intend to seek small starts or very small starts funding for their planned projects , 13 have not previously applied for new starts , small starts , or very small starts funding . safetea - lu authorized over $45 billion for federal transit programs , including $8 billion for the new starts program , from fiscal year 2005 through fiscal year 2009 . under new starts , fta identifies and recommends fixed - guideway transit projects for funding — including heavy , light , and commuter rail ; ferry ; and certain bus projects ( such as bus rapid transit ) .