phmsa concurred with our recommendation . however , officials told us that as of july 2019 , the agency had not yet fully addressed this recommendation to use workforce data to inform and revise its goals . in december 2018 , phmsa issued a strategic workforce plan that indicates it represents a thorough analysis of the agency's current workforce composition as of 2018 and the collective viewpoints of employees and senior leadership regarding the future . scientific studies are important for establishing the association between chemicals in stored natural gas and symptoms community members may experience during leaks to determine health effects . epa , through its integrated risk information system ( iris ) program , identifies and characterizes the health hazards of chemicals found in the environment and has produced assessments on several chemicals that may be present in natural gas . epa established the iris program in 1985 to help develop consensus opinions within the agency about the health effects from lifetime exposure to chemicals . the iris database of chemical assessments contains epa's scientific positions on the potential human health effects that may result from exposure to various chemicals in the environment . as of november 2018 , the database included information on 510 chemicals . to conduct an assessment of a chemical , the agency follows a multi - step process that includes identifying credible health hazards associated with exposures to a chemical and characterizing the quantitative relationship between chemical exposure and each credible health hazard . the program derives toxicity values through this quantitative relationship . epa has completed assessments on several chemicals that may be in stored natural gas , including hydrogen sulfide , benzene , toluene , ethylbenzene , and xylene . in its iris assessment on benzene , epa found that , as is the case with many other organic solvents , benzene has been shown to produce neurotoxic effects in test animals and humans after short - term exposures to relatively high concentrations . atsdr develops toxicological profiles — summaries of its evaluations concerning whether , and at what levels of exposure , adverse health effects occur and levels at which no adverse effects occur — for several chemicals that may be present in natural gas , including hydrogen sulfide , benzene , toluene , ethylbenzene , and xylene . for example , atsdr has found that inhaling benzene can cause drowsiness , dizziness , and unconsciousness and that long - term benzene exposure affects the bone marrow and can cause anemia and leukemia . also , atsdr found that toluene may affect the nervous system and at low to moderate levels can cause tiredness , confusion , weakness , memory loss , nausea , and loss of appetite . however , these symptoms usually disappear when the exposure stops . niosh researches the safe use of chemicals in the workplace and provides information on how to measure chemicals in the work environment , engineering controls and personal protective equipment , risk assessments , and communication tools for understanding and safely managing chemicals at work . niosh publishes information on chemical hazards in the workplace to inform workers , employers , and occupational health professionals . for example , niosh reports on occupational exposure limits for ethylbenzene .