some of the smaller delegations share office space . centcom pays for the furniture , shredders , copiers , telephones , and part of the custodial expense . macdill air force base , which is host to centcom , pays for trailer leases , utilities , external security , and part of the custodial expense . these trailers are located on macdill property in a fenced compound with security guards on duty . we toured some of the trailers and determined that centcom was providing the space and equipment typical of a small office for the coalition officers . congress required us to assess the implementation of this legislation . dod - wide guidance provides uniform direction throughout the department on how to implement programs and policies . while centcom has developed procedures for managing support to coalition liaison officers and has taken steps to provide the support authorized by the legislation in the least costly way , in the absence of dod - wide guidance , there can be no assurance that prudent procedures will always be followed . moreover , without dod guidance , should other commands choose to use the authority granted by this legislation , there is no assurance that they will implement it in a uniform and prudent manner . as of january 2004 , there was no dod office responsible for the implementation of the legislative authority allowing commands to pay for support for coalition liaison officers and no dod - wide guidance on its use . we recommend that the secretary of defense take the following two actions: ( 1 ) designate an office within dod to take responsibility for this legislation and ( 2 ) direct this designated office to promulgate and issue guidance to the combatant commands and their component and subordinate commands on how to implement this legislation . in official oral comments on a draft of this report , dod concurred with the report . dod stated that it would designate the joint staff as the office responsible for implementing the legislation and issuing appropriate guidance . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; and the director , office of management and budget . centcom officials established some basic standards for authorizing travel , subsistence , and personal expenses for the coalition liaison officers from developing countries . centcom pays for one round - trip airplane ticket from an officer's country of origin to tampa , florida , where centcom is headquartered , and return during a tour of duty . other trips home are at an officer's or his or her country's expense . meals and incidental expenses are based on the joint federal travel regulations' rate for tampa ( $42 per day in fiscal year 2003 ) paid monthly based on the number of days the officer actually spends in tampa . centcom provides housing for foreign coalition liaison officers through contracts it has negotiated with gated apartment complexes offering on - site security .