these procedures were based on requirements in the far . we identified the need to improve cbp's controls in two important areas . specifically , we identified the need to improve cbp's preventative controls over payments to the sbinet program contractor with respect to requiring invoices with sufficiently detailed data supporting billed costs to facilitate effective invoice review and specific , sufficiently detailed , risk - based invoice review procedures to enable full , effective , and documented reviews prior to making payments . because cbp's preventative controls were not fully effective , the agency will continue to ( 1 ) be impaired in its ability to provide assurance that the estimated $780 million already paid the prime contractor under the original sbinet program was proper and allowable , in the correct amount , and only for goods and services provided and ( 2 ) rely heavily on detective controls ( primarily contract closeout audits ) for assurance concerning the propriety of sbinet program disbursements . further , until cbp takes action to improve its preventative controls , it will continue to be impaired in its ability to effectively review the estimated $80 million obligated , but yet to be disbursed , to the prime contractor under the original sbinet program . in addition , our findings have implications as possible “lessons learned” for dhs to consider and address as appropriate in designing and implementing contract payment controls for its new technology portfolio approach . standards for internal control in the federal government and related guidance provide that an entity's internal controls should enable it to verify that ordered ( invoiced ) goods and services were proper and met the government's specifications . cbp's policies and related sops applicable to the original sbinet program required the prime contractor to submit invoices showing total costs incurred by cost element ( i.e. , direct labor , direct materials , major subcontracts , other direct costs , overtime premium , overhead , travel , and general and administrative expenses ) . however , cbp's policies and procedures did not require the invoices to include any additional supporting detail . not requiring such detail not only precluded us from testing whether invoiced costs complied with the sbinet contract and were properly supported , but , more important , resulted in numerous instances in which cbp's cos and cotrs did not have the detailed support they needed to effectively review the sbinet contractors' invoices . for example , in one instance a co requested additional detailed information such as travel dates and travel destinations to review the reasonableness of a lump sum invoiced cost amount for travel . figure 3 shows an example of a sbinet prime contractor invoice submitted and paid for costs incurred for the period from september 12 through 25 , 2008 . figure 3 also highlights lump sum invoiced costs for the “direct labor” and “travel” cost elements . in this example , the sbinet prime contractor billed , and cbp paid , a total of $3,705,718.70 , including $1,518,873.38 for the period for direct labor without any supporting details such as the hours worked and labor rate category .