fee care . va proposed initiatives to generate savings from health care services that va pays contractors to provide . va estimates a savings of $200 million a year for fiscal years 2012 and 2013 from reductions in its payments for fee - based care . changing rates . va proposed to purchase dialysis treatments and other care from civilian providers at medicare rates instead of current community rates . va estimates a savings of $315 million for fiscal year 2012 and $362 for fiscal year 2013 as a result of this rate change . realigning clinical staff and resources . va proposed to realign clinical staff and resources to achieve savings by using less costly health care providers . specifically , va plans to use selected non - physician providers instead of certain types of physicians , use selected licensed practical nurses instead of certain types of registered nurses , and more appropriately align required clinical skills with patient care needs . va estimates a savings of $151 million a year for fiscal years 2012 and 2013 from clinical staff and resource realignment . medical and administrative support . va proposed to employ resources more efficiently in various medical care , administrative , and support activities at each medical center and in other va locations . for example , a va official said that va could examine job vacancies for medical and administrative support to see whether vacant positions need to be filled . va estimates a savings of $150 million a year for fiscal years 2012 and 2013 for this operational improvement . va real property . va proposed initiatives to repurpose its vacant or underutilized buildings , demolish or abandon other vacant or underutilized buildings , decrease energy costs , change procurement practices for building supplies and equipment , and change building - service contracts . va estimates a savings of $66 million a year for fiscal years 2012 and 2013 from real property initiatives . in the past , va has proposed management efficiencies to achieve savings in order to reduce the amount of funding needed to provide health care services . however , in a 2006 report , we reported that va lacked a methodology for its assumptions about savings estimates it had detailed for fiscal years 2003 through 2006 , and we concluded that va may need to take actions to stay within its level of available resources if va fell short of its savings goals . according to va officials , va is planning to develop a system to monitor the operational improvements to determine whether they were generating the intended savings . va's health care budget estimate was increased overall by about $1.4 billion for fiscal year 2012 and $1.3 billion for fiscal year 2013 to support health - care - related initiatives proposed by the administration , according to va officials . some of the proposed initiatives can be implemented within va's existing authority , while other initiatives would require a change in law . va officials estimated that the majority of initiatives would increase resource needs for new health care services or expanded existing services . four initiatives which make up over 80 percent of the total amount for initiatives in the president's budget request are: homeless veterans programs .