this report contains recommendations to you . information systems controls were not effective at sec . we identified numerous weaknesses in electronic access controls and other information system controls . as a result , financial and sensitive information was at increased risk of unauthorized disclosure , modification , or loss , and operations at risk of disruption . a key reason for sec's weaknesses in information system controls is that it has not yet fully developed and implemented a comprehensive agency information security program to ensure that effective controls are established and maintained and that information security receives sufficient attention . effective implementation of such a program provides for an ongoing cycle of periodically assessing risks , establishing appropriate policies and procedures , promoting security awareness , and establishing an ongoing program of tests and evaluations of the effectiveness of policies and controls to ensure that they remain appropriate and accomplish their intended purpose . such a program is critical to providing sec with a solid foundation for resolving existing information security problems and continuously managing information security risks . weaknesses in the specific control areas are summarized here . a computer system must be able to identify and differentiate among users so that activities on the system can be linked to specific individuals . unique user accounts assigned to specific users allow systems to distinguish one user from another , a process called identification . the system must also establish the validity of a user's claimed identity through some means of authentication , such as a password , known only to its owner . the combination of identification and authentication , such as user account / password combinations , provides the basis for establishing individual accountability and controlling access to the system . accordingly , agencies should ( 1 ) implement procedures to control the creation , use , and removal of user accounts and ( 2 ) establish password parameters , such as length , life , and composition , to strengthen the effectiveness of account / password combinations for authenticating the identity of users . often segregation of computer functions is achieved by dividing responsibilities among two or more organizational groups . dividing duties among two or more individuals or groups diminishes the likelihood that errors and wrongful acts will go undetected because the activities of one individual or group will serve as a check on the activities of the others . inadequate segregation of computer functions increases the risk that erroneous or fraudulent transactions could be processed , improper program changes implemented , and computer resources damaged or destroyed . although computer functions were generally properly segregated at sec , we identified instances in which functions were not adequately segregated . for example , the commission did not sufficiently separate incompatible system administration and security administration functions of computer operating personnel on its key financial applications . to illustrate , the individuals responsible for performing system support were also responsible for setting security and audit parameters , reviewing user access privileges , and adding and deleting system users . similarly , sec assigned one individual to perform both security and software change management functions . yet sec did not provide supervisory oversight or establish other mitigating controls to ensure that this individual performed only authorized functions .