nnsa concurred with our recommendations . specifically , nnsa agreed to include more information on maintenance , recapitalization , and deferred maintenance on excess facilities and stated that it will address them in the 2017 budget request or budget support materials as appropriate . similarly , nnsa officials agreed that until improved data about the importance of facilities and infrastructure to the mission are available , they plan to clarify in the budget materials for the future - years nuclear security program the amount of the deferred maintenance backlog that is associated with facilities that have little to no effect on programmatic operations and is therefore low priority to be addressed . the four areas are interconnected . for example , experiments funded under the research , development , testing , and evaluation program area can contribute to the design and production of refurbished weapons , which is funded under the stockpile program area . the infrastructure program area offers critical support to both the stockpile and the research , development , testing , and evaluation program areas by providing a suitable environment for their various activities , such as producing weapons components and performing research and experimentation activities . the u.s. nuclear weapons stockpile is composed of seven different weapons types , including air - delivered bombs , ballistic missile warheads , and cruise missile warheads ( see table 1 ) . nnsa's 2016 budget estimates for modernization total $297.6 billion over 25 years , which is a slight increase from the 2015 estimates of $293.4 billion ; however , for certain program areas or individual programs , budget estimates changed more significantly . the overall increase was moderated by a shift of two counterterrorism programs to another area of nnsa's budget . program areas increased by as much as 13.2 percent or decreased by as much as 18.1 percent . within the stockpile program area , which experienced the biggest increase , budget estimates for some leps and an alteration increased significantly because of changes in production schedules and scope , among other things . according to the fiscal year 2016 stockpile stewardship and management plan , nnsa's estimates for the next 25 years total $297.6 billion for modernization activities — an increase of approximately $4.2 billion , or 1.4 percent ( in nominal , or current dollar , values ) , from the $293.4 billion nnsa reported in the 2015 plan . these budget estimates , which are for activities in the weapons activities area , are provided in the four areas discussed above: stockpile ; infrastructure ; research , development , testing , and evaluation ; and other weapons activities . the overall increase was moderated by the shift of two counterterrorism programs from the weapons activities budget into nnsa's separate defense nuclear nonproliferation budget . the two counterterrorism programs that were moved out of the weapons activities budget together totaled approximately $8 billion . according to nnsa's 2016 budget justification , this realignment is intended to provide greater clarity regarding the total funding and level of activity in the counterterrorism area .