but we do need to act . the passage of time is shrinking the window for action . albert einstein said the most powerful force in the universe is compound interest and today the miracle of compounding is working against us . after 2009 the social security cash surplus — which has cushioned and masked the impact of our imprudent fiscal policy — will begin to shrink , putting pressure on the rest of the budget . the medicare hospital insurance trust fund is already in a negative cash flow situation . i hope we do not wait to act until the social security trust fund turns to negative cash flow in 2017 . demographics narrow the window for other reasons as well . people need time to prepare for and adjust to changes in benefits . there has been general agreement that there should be no change in social security benefits for those currently in or near retirement . if we wait until the baby boom generation has retired , that becomes much harder and much more expensive . mr. chairman , senator gregg , members of the committee , meeting this long - term fiscal challenge overarches everything . but this is only part of the story . the federal government has been spending the surpluses in the social security and other trust funds for years ; if we include debt held by those funds , our total debt is much higher — $9.0 trillion . on september 29 , 2007 , the statutory debt limit had to be raised for the third time in 4 years ; between the end of fiscal year 2003 and the end of fiscal year 2007 the debt limit had to be increased by one - third . although borrowing by one part of the federal government from another may not have the same economic and financial implications as borrowing from the public , it represents a claim on future resources and hence a burden on future taxpayers and the future economy . as alarming as the size of our current debt is , it excludes many items , including the gap between future promised and funded social security and medicare benefits , veterans' health care , and a range of other commitments and contingencies that the federal government has pledged to support . if these items are factored in , the total burden in present value dollars is estimated to be about $53 trillion . i know it is hard to make sense of what “trillions” means . one way to think about it is this: imagine we decided to put aside and invest today enough to cover these promises tomorrow . it would take approximately $455,000 per american household — or $175,000 for every man , woman , and child in the united states . clearly , despite some progress in addressing our short - term deficits , we have not made progress on our long - term fiscal challenge . in fact , we have lost and continue to lose ground absent meaningful action ( see fig . although social security is a major part of the fiscal challenge , it is far from our biggest challenge .