borrowers have the right to prepay their loans . if a borrower repays any amount in excess of the amount due , the excess amount is a prepayment . loan repayments , including prepayments , are credited first to any accrued charges or collection costs and then to outstanding interest and principal . because prepayments generally reduce a borrower's principal balance outstanding , the amount of interest that accrues in subsequent months is also reduced , decreasing the amount of interest the borrower pays over the life of the loan . to what extent has education achieved administrative cost savings as a result of the program ? in conducting this work , we interviewed education officials and collected and analyzed cost and other pertinent information . to examine the extent to which education's cost justification assumptions about borrower behavior — the percentage of eda borrowers that would enroll in eda and the percentage that would change their prepayment patterns after enrolling — materialized , we reviewed education's cost justification , discussed its preparation and methodology with the education officials who developed it , and obtained and analyzed available information about the repayment behavior of borrowers who have enrolled in the eda program . to identify the information education had provided borrowers about possible cost implications of eda participation and prepayment options associated with eda , we obtained and reviewed all education direct loan repayment information available to borrowers . to estimate administrative cost savings , we reviewed education and department of the treasury ( treasury ) cost data associated with billing eda and non - eda borrowers and processing their payments . we discussed our analysis with officials at both agencies to ensure that we included all appropriate cost items . we conducted our work between march 2001 and february 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the fdlp legislation was enacted in august 1993 as part of a broader reform of the federal student loan programs . the first direct loans were made in fiscal year 1994 . fdlp makes it possible for students and their families to borrow directly from the federal government through the colleges or other postsecondary institutions the students attend . as of september 30 , 2001 , about 3.6 million borrowers were repaying more than $45 billion in direct loans . education services fdlp loans through a contract with affiliated computer services , inc. ( acs ) , an information technology systems and services company . as prime contractor , acs has overall responsibility for fdlp loan servicing . acs has a subcontract with academic financial services association data corporation ( afsa ) , under which afsa has the main responsibility for fdlp loan - servicing operations . education has an interagency agreement with treasury for processing direct loan payments . treasury , in turn , has agreements with and compensates certain commercial banks for processing both paper and electronic payments made by the public to federal agencies . treasury bills federal agencies only for those services that it considers outside the basic level of service negotiated with the designated commercial banks . in fiscal year 2000 , treasury charged education $26,353 for these ancillary services .