under the act , fps was transferred from the gsa to dhs . dhs later placed it within ice . the president's fiscal year 2010 budget requested the transfer of fps from ice to nppd . language in the budget request stated that fps responsibilities , such as providing physical security and policing of federal buildings , establishing building security policy , and ensuring compliance , are outside the scope of ice's immigration and customs enforcement mission and are better aligned with nppd's mission . the transfer of fps to nppd became effective when the fiscal year 2010 dhs appropriations act was signed into law on october 28 , 2009 . figure 1 shows fps's move within dhs from ice to nppd . fps conducts law enforcement activities as well as risk assessments to reduce facility vulnerability to criminal and terrorist threats and helps to ensure that facilities are secure and occupants are safe . additionally , we met with members of the transition senior working group , including the nppd senior counselor to the under secretary and the fps director , as well as interviewed members of all 16 staff - level working groups to discuss the extent to which fps's 18 mission - support functions had transferred from ice to nppd . the working groups included officials from fps , nppd , ice , and in some groups , dhs headquarters . we compared the fps information technology ( it ) transition schedule , the it transition cost estimate , and related documents to the practices in our cost estimating and assessment guide . we focused on the it mission - support function because it required a significant commitment of resources , oversight , and time by dhs to complete the transition . dhs developed a transition plan , the august 2009 fps - nppd transition plan , which describes dhs's overall transition planning process and milestones for completing the transition , among other things . the plan shifted fps's mission and responsibility for all of its mission - support functions , with the exception of financial accounting services and firearms and tactical training , from ice to nppd or other dhs components . while fps has its own law enforcement personnel to perform its mission responsibilities , it does not perform all of its mission - support functions such as payroll , travel services , and contracting . for this reason , fps has traditionally relied on gsa and ice to carry out these functions . for example , while under gsa , fps's contracting functions were handled by the contracting component of gsa's public buildings service , and under ice , by its office of acquisition . among other things , we asked questions about their experiences regarding the transition of fps's mission and mission - support functions from ice to nppd . fps was established in 1971 as the uniformed protection force of gsa government - occupied facilities . the mission of fps is to render federal properties safe and secure for federal employees , officials , and visitors in a professional and cost - effective manner by deploying a highly trained and multi - disciplined police force . fps was originally located within gsa's public buildings service ( pbs ) .