we subsequently received comments from both agencies . epa said that the report was accurate and that the agency agreed with our conclusions and recommendation . omb said that the report was accurate but raised several questions about epa's potential implementation of the recommendation . specifically , omb said it would be difficult for epa to gather data to monitor the rule's effects and that attributing emissions changes to the final rule would pose challenges . for example , omb said that it would be difficult to determine the level of emissions facilities would have released in the absence of the final rule . epa , however , said that the recommendation acknowledges these challenges and provides flexibility for the agency to work with state and local agencies to identify data collection strategies . epa and omb also recommended a number of technical changes to the report , which we have incorporated into this report as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 10 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the epa administrator , the director , office of management and budget , interested congressional committees , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . i can also be reached at stephensonj@gao.gov . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . omb agreed that the rule would not have a significant economic impact but was significant for policy reasons . we also spoke with the natural resources defense council , a national environmental advocacy organization that disputed epa findings . finally , we spoke with the nsr program manager within epa and another official within the agency's office of air quality planning and standards who were responsible for the report to the president . we conducted our work between august 2002 and august 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in addition to the individuals named above tim guinane , david hancock , and michael hix made key contributions to this report . nancy crothers , karen keegan , jeffrey larson , judy pagano , lisa turner , and laura yannayon also made important contributions . appendix i provides a more detailed description of our scope and methodology . under the clean air act , epa establishes health - based air quality standards that the states must meet and regulates air pollutant emissions from various sources , including industrial facilities and mobile sources such as automobiles and other transportation . figure 1 compares the emissions of key pollutants from industrial facilities to those from transportation and other sources . epa has issued health - based air quality standards for six primary pollutants — carbon monoxide , lead , nitrogen oxides , ozone , particulate matter , and sulfur dioxide — that have been linked to a variety of health problems .