we disagree . although doe has a 20-year plan that projects incremental increases in small business prime contracting up to 23 percent by 2022 , no strategy is in place that defines how doe will achieve this goal , identifies what the contributions of the various doe organizational components will be , or reconciles the differing views within doe as to what would be an appropriate level of small business prime contracting . second , doe said that we have mischaracterized its 23 percent small business prime contracting goal as an eventual long - term goal , while doe views it as a goal that it may or may not agree to , based on its annual negotiations with sba . we believe we have appropriately described doe's goal and we stated that it is not clear if doe will commit to the incremental increases that would lead to achieving the goal . finally , doe suggested technical corrections , which we incorporated as appropriate . doe has about 50 major sites around the country where the department carries out its missions , including developing , maintaining , and securing the nation's nuclear weapons capability ; cleaning up the nuclear and hazardous wastes resulting from more than 50 years of weapons production ; and conducting basic energy and scientific research , such as mapping the human genome . this mission work is carried out under the direction of nnsa and doe's program offices . with a workforce of 16,000 federal employees and more than 100,000 contractor employees , doe relies primarily on contractors to manage and operate its facilities and to accomplish its missions . in addition to accomplishing doe's core mission work , managing and operating the sites involves a broad range of support activities , such as information technology , safety , security , and purchase of products and services . the small business act , as amended by the small business reauthorization act of 1997 , directed the president to establish the goal that not less than 23 percent of the federal government's prime contracting dollars would be directed to small businesses each fiscal year . sba is charged with working with federal agencies to establish agency small business contracting goals that , in the aggregate , meet or exceed the 23 percent government - wide goal . sba negotiates an annual goal with each agency based on the overall amount of contracting in the agency ( contracting base ) and the agency's past achievements . sba guidelines for setting individual agency goals specify that certain types of federal spending should not be included in the contracting base . these exclusions include items such as grants , purchases from mandatory sources , or contracts for work done internationally for which u.s. small businesses would not be competing . for fiscal year 2003 , excluding such items resulted in a doe contracting base of about $21 billion subject to the small business prime contracting goal . as figure 1 shows , facility management contracts account for more than 80 percent of this amount .