a provided by usaid / afghanistan . improve comm management o watershed ma unity and farm level supply and demand f irrigation water resources and upstream n new reservoir gates and powerhouse that would raise th allow for signifi e water level and provide additional power plus igation of agricultural lands install new reservoir gates and powerhouse that would raise the water level and provide additional power plus allow for significantly increased irrigation of agricultural lands urpose dams ( plan & design ) 15 next step in th the u.s. army corps of engineers to design 25 small dams for irrigation and power production with associated watershed managemen o reduce soil erosion and siltation t t ) urban water supply and sanitation ( plan & design ) cision memorandum , march 2010 . cerp projects are part of the u.s . coin strategy of extending development benefits to win the hearts and minds of the afghan populace . these are among the lowest rates in the world . agriculture , the source of livelihood for almost 80 percent of the population , accounts for up to 93 percent of afghanistan's total water usage through irrigation . yet , only about 30 percent of afghanistan's agricultural land receives adequate water . between 2002 and the second quarter of 2010 , the u.s. government has awarded about $250 million for water development efforts in afghanistan and , in march 2010 , estimated it would need an additional $2.1 billion in funding to achieve u.s. development efforts in afghanistan's water sector from fiscal year 2010 through fiscal year 2014 . as u.s. government documents indicate , u.s. water - sector development efforts support the u.s. government's counter - insurgency ( coin ) strategy in afghanistan . this report examines ( 1 ) whether u.s. development goals and projects for the afghan water sector align with the goals of the afghan government ; ( 2 ) u.s. agencies' coordination of water - sector development efforts among themselves , with the afghan government and with the donor community ; ( 3 ) the u.s. government's efforts to manage and monitor its water - sector projects ; and ( 4 ) the u.s. government's efforts to build sustainability into water - sector projects . to address these objectives , we reviewed u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , department of defense ( dod ) , and other relevant u.s. government planning , funding , and reporting documents related to u.s. funding and projects for water - sector development in afghanistan . we discussed the funding and projects with officials from usaid , dod's commander's emergency response program ( cerp ) , the departments of state and agriculture in afghanistan , and with usaid , dod , and other relevant agencies' officials in washington , d.c . in afghanistan , we met with the minister of rural rehabilitation and development and the deputy minister of water and energy and attended a meeting of the technical secretariat of the supreme council for water affairs management , where relevant ministries were represented . we also met with some representatives of implementing partners for u.s. agencies and the donor community .