reg . 17004 ( april 2 , 2010 ) ) , and the epa's and u.s. department of transportation's joint promulgation of a final rule on april 1 , 2010 , that triggers regulation of ghgs under the clean air act , may trigger more climate based claims for damages , and may result in longer agency review time for development projects . the u.s. epa's announcement on january 14 , 2015 , outlining a series of steps it plans to take to address methane and smog - forming volatile organic compound emissions from the oil and gas industry . the current u.s. administration has established a goal of reducing the 2012 levels in methane emissions from the oil and gas industry by 40 to 45 percent by 2025 . carbon taxes in certain jurisdictions . our cost of compliance with norwegian carbon tax legislation in 2015 was approximately $31 million ( net share pre - tax ) . the agreement reached in paris in december 2015 at the 21st conference of the parties to the united nations framework on climate change , setting out a new process for achieving global emission reductions . in the united states , some additional form of regulation may be forthcoming in the future at the federal and state levels with respect to ghg emissions . such regulation could take any of several forms that may result in the creation of additional costs in the form of taxes , the restriction of output , investments of capital to maintain compliance with laws and regulations , or required acquisition or trading of emission allowances . we are working to continuously improve operational and energy efficiency through resource and energy conservation throughout our operations . compliance with changes in laws and regulations that create a ghg emission trading scheme or ghg reduction policies could significantly increase our costs , reduce demand for fossil energy derived products , impact the cost and availability of capital and increase our exposure to litigation . such laws and regulations could also increase demand for less carbon intensive energy sources , including natural gas . the ultimate impact on our financial performance , either positive or negative , will depend on a number of factors , including but not limited to: whether and to what extent legislation or regulation is enacted . the timing of the introduction of such legislation or regulation . the nature of the legislation ( such as a cap and trade system or a tax on emissions ) or regulation . the price placed on ghg emissions ( either by the market or through a tax ) . the ghg reductions required . the price and availability of offsets . the amount and allocation of allowances . technological and scientific developments leading to new products or services . any potential significant physical effects of climate change ( such as increased severe weather events , changes in sea levels and changes in temperature ) . whether , and the extent to which , increased compliance costs are ultimately reflected in the prices of our products and services .