significantly . the pobs could increase the county's future expenses if actual investment returns fall below 6 percent . over the prior 10-year period ending in 2010 , the retirement system's average investment rate of return was 4.1 percent , but returns over the prior 20-year period have been significantly higher at 8.4 percent . states and localities often packaged multiple pension changes together . for example , our analysis of the ncsl reports revealed that 23 states have both increased employee contributions and reduced member benefits . each change made , and the interplay among the changes , contributes to various impacts on plan sponsors , pension sustainability , and plan members . the following examples demonstrate some of the ways states have packaged these changes , and the varying impacts that are expected as a result . the county pension system subsequently lowered its assumed rate of return to 7.75 percent . this action , along with any future actuarial changes , would affect the expected savings from the pobs . missouri is an example of a state that packaged increases in member contributions with reductions in benefits to narrow the gap between plan assets and liabilities . for new general members of the missouri state employees retirement system and the missouri department of transportation and highway patrol employees' retirement system , the state increased the normal retirement age from 62 to 67 , expanded the vesting period from 5 to 10 years , and required members to contribute 4 percent of pay to the pension system , although current members do not contribute . these changes are expected to lower the state's contributions to the system over the long run by more than 5 percent of payroll , but the initial savings are much smaller . in fiscal year 2012 , the benefit and contribution changes are expected to reduce the state's contribution to its largest plan by less than 1 percent of payroll , since there will be only a small number of newly hired members in the system . however , by fiscal year 2018 , employees covered under the reduced benefit structure are expected to account for over half of payroll , further reducing the state's annual contributions . plan officials said these changes could pose issues for recruitment and retention , although the influence of retirement plan details will vary based on individual circumstances . they also noted that the changes could affect employee morale , since new employees will have to work longer to qualify for benefits and the required pension contributions will reduce their compensation . in the case of pennsylvania , the state passed a package of pension changes in 2010 that offset a short - term funding cap with long - term benefit reductions to limit the impact on the plan's funded status . for the state employees' retirement system , the most significant funding change was a statutory cap on employer contribution rate increases . the legislation addressed an expected 19 percent increase in actuarially required contributions by capping any increases at 3 percent for fiscal year 2011 / 2012 , 3.5 percent for fiscal year 2012 / 2013 , and 4.5 percent thereafter .