regulations . moreover , in 2005 guidance , oge encourages but does not require written advice under specific circumstances , such as when the advice applies the criminal principal conflict - of - interest law to specific facts — a circumstance common to advice given to commissioners about their participation in specific commission matters . as of february 4 , 2015 , the commission had not developed a course of action . based on our legal analysis and information provided by commission management and the attorney assisting the commission , we identified four options to restructure the commission so that it could better leverage the commissioners' expertise in light of the 2006 justice determination ( see table 1 ) . each of these options would require amending the denali commission act . additional information about the four options for restructuring the commission follows: make commissioners representatives on a faca advisory committee . under this option , the commissioners would be representatives on an advisory committee subject to faca rather representatives on faca than special government employees.committees provide stakeholder advice — advice reflecting the views of the entity or interest group they are representing , such as alaska natives , municipalities , or the state — whereas special government employees on faca committees , like all federal employees , are expected to provide their own best judgment in a manner free from conflicts of interest and without acting as a stakeholder representing any particular point of view . as representatives on a faca committee , commissioners would be expected to represent a particular and known bias of the particular group that they are designated and appointed to represent . under this option , the commissioners' open and avowed interests , biases , and commitments are intended to check and balance each other , resulting in a balanced and objective recommendation . however , commissioners would not be subject to the principal federal conflict - of - interest law . make commissioners members on non - faca advisory committee . under this option , the commissioners would be members of an advisory committee that is exempt from faca and subject to an alternative conflict - of - interest standard rather than the principal federal conflict - of - interest law , as in the case of the fishery management councils established by the magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management act ( magnuson - stevens act ) to advise the secretary of commerce in developing fishery management plans , among other things . to allow certain members of fishery management councils with financial interests in fisheries or fishery - related activities — including the financial interests of their employers — to participate in the councils , these members are exempt from the principal federal conflict - of - interest law when they comply with the financial disclosure and recusal requirements in the magnuson - stevens act and its implementing regulations . subject commissioners to alternative conflict - of - interest standard but retain decision - making role .