b . used ? useful ? timely ? “yes” “yes” 1 . guidance ( eg , a. dhs ( including fps and fema ) b . received ? federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) e. other sources ( please specify. ) information / intelligence ( eg , region , sector or site - “yes” “yes” gao survey on threat alerts 10 . we would like to know about the guidance and / or information / intelligence your agency received and used to determine the protective measures implemented specifically in response to the code - orange alert from may 20 to may 30 , 2003 . in addition to your agency's planned protective measures for national 10c . for each item you answer “yes” in threat levels , did your agency receive guidance and / or information / intelligence question 10b , please answer questions 10c and from any of the following sources to determine the measures implemented 10d: how useful was the guidance and / or specifically in response to the hsas code - orange alert from may 20 to may information / intelligence from the source ? ( please check one answer in each row under question 10a. ) was the guidance and / or information / 10b . for each item you answer “yes” in question 10a , please answer: did intelligence from the source timely ? your agency use the guidance and / or information / intelligence received from the source to determine the measures implemented specifically in response to the hsas code - orange alert from may 20 to may 30 , 2003 ? received ? used ? useful ? timely ? “yes” “yes” 1 . guidance ( eg , a. dhs ( including fps and fema ) e. other sources ( please specify. ) ( eg , region , sector or site - “yes” “yes” gao survey on threat alerts 11 . we would like to know about the guidance and / or information / intelligence your agency received and used to determine the protective measures implemented specifically in response to the code - orange alert from december 21 , 2003 to january 9 , 2004 . in addition to your agency's planned protective measures for national 11c . for each item you answer “yes” in threat levels , did your agency receive guidance and / or information / intelligence from any of the following sources to determine the measures implemented question 11b , please answer questions 11c and 11d: how useful was the guidance and / or specifically in response to the hsas code - orange alert from december 21 , information / intelligence from the source ? 2003 to january 9 , 2004 ? ( please check one answer in each row under question 11a. ) was the guidance and / or information / intelligence from the source timely ? for each item you answer “yes” in question 11a , please answer: did your agency use the guidance and / or information / intelligence received from the source to determine the measures implemented specifically in response to the hsas code - orange alert from december 21 , 2003 to january 9 , 2004 ? received ? used ? useful ? timely ? “yes” “yes” 1 .