ann . stat . requires that community college districts and universities cooperate in operating a statewide articulation and transfer system , including the process of transfer of lower division general education credits , general elective credits , and curriculum requirements for approved majors , to facilitate the transfer of community college students to arizona public universities without a loss of credit . ark . code ann . rev . stat . ann . requires the board of supervisors of community and technical colleges to continue development of articulation agreements between institutions under the management of the board and institutions managed by other postsecondary management boards , both public and private . rev . stat . ann . tit . states that one of the fundamental policies in the state's public higher educational planning is to provide for a uniform system of transferring credits for equivalent courses among the various units of the university of maine system . rev . cal . ed . code ยง 66730 and note . directs the regents of the university of california ( uc ) , the trustees of the california state university ( csu ) , and the board of governors of the california community colleges to have as a fundamental policy the maintenance of a healthy and expanded student transfer system . community college students must have access to a viable and efficient transfer agreement program to the california state university and the university of california for upper division work toward a baccalaureate degree . cal . ed . code ยง 66738 . holds the governing board of each public postsecondary education segment accountable for the development and implementation of formal systemwide articulation agreements and transfer agreement programs . cal . ed . code ยง 66739.5 . states the intent of the legislature as ensuring that community colleges students who wish to earn the baccalaureate degree at california state university are provided with a clear and effective path to this degree . cal . ed . code ยง 66740 . requires each department , school , and major in uc and csu to develop , in conjunction with community college faculty in appropriate and associated departments , discipline - specific articulation agreements and transfer agreements for those majors that have lower - division prerequisites . colo. rev . requires the colorado commission on higher education to establish , after consultation with the governing boards of institutions , and enforce student transfer agreements between 2-year and 4-year institutions and among 4-year institutions . such transfer agreements shall include provisions under which institutions shall accept all credit hours of acceptable coursework for automatic transfer to another state - supported institution of higher education in colorado . the commission shall also establish and enforce student transfer agreements between degree programs offered on the same campus or within the same institutional system . colo. rev . directs the colorado commission on higher education , in consultation with each colorado public institution of higher education , to outline a plan to implement a core course concept that defines the general education course guidelines for all public institutions of higher education . colo. rev . stat .