level 4 . in analyzing medicare operations division automated case tracking system ( modacts ) data , we excluded appeals resulting from cms referrals , and appeals in which the record indicated a final action of lost file or tape as level 4 did not review the appeal . we counted as one appeal any appeals in which the appellant filed one appeal but the medicare appeals council ( the council ) issued separate appeal decisions . type of appellant: to determine the type of appellant that filed the appeal , we used the fields “appellant type” and the name of the appellant , where the field “workload” indicated that cms had not filed the appeal . type of service: to determine whether the appeal was for a part a or part b service , we used the field “claim type.” we used the field “type of service” — specifically , values of durable medical equipment , orthotic , prosthetic , or surgical dressing — to identify whether the appeal was for a dmepos item . we did not take additional steps to categorize appeals of part b of a services as part b services as council officials told us that those services are already categorized as part b claims . subcategory of service: to determine the subcategory of service , we used the field “type of service.” we grouped type of service into 10 subcategories . ( see table 10. ) ra - related: an appeal was ra - related if the field “overpayment” was set to “rac.” for all appeal levels , we determined the percentage of appeal decisions issued after the statutory time frames . this proposal would institute a refundable filing fee for medicare parts a and b appeals for providers , suppliers , and state medicaid agencies , including those acting as a representative of a beneficiary , and requires these entities to pay a per‐claim filing fee at each level of appeal . according to the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) budget justification materials , this filing fee will allow hhs to invest in the appeals system to improve responsiveness and efficiency . fees will be returned to appellants who receive a fully favorable appeal determination . this proposal would extend the centers for medicare & medicaid services' ( cms ) prior that are at the highest risk for improper payment . the proposal observes that cms currently and services . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to better understand the effect of appeal decisions made after statutory time frames on the amount of interest paid by cms for successful appeals at level 3 , we also asked cms officials to estimate the amount of interest the agency has paid as a result . to examine data hhs uses to monitor the medicare appeals process , we reviewed documentation describing each appeals data system in use during the time frame of our evaluation to understand the data that track an appeal and appeal decision and how those data are collected and used . in addition , we interviewed officials from hhs agencies about the data systems and how they use the appeals data for monitoring .