there is no further competition . table 3 shows the 6 jwod contracts in our sample with selected contract information . compensation for randolph - sheppard blind vendors is computed differently from compensation paid to jwod disabled workers . for the randolph - sheppard program , blind vendors' compensation is generally based on a percentage of the profits generated by the dining facilities' operations . based on the 37 survey responses where we could determine the basis of how blind vendors' compensation was computed , 34 reported that that the vendor's compensation was computed either entirely , or in part , based on the profits generated by the dining facility contract . for compensation based entirely on the facilities' profits , the blind vendor received from 51 to 65 percent of the profits . for those blind vendors that were compensated partially based on profits , their compensation was based on fixed fees , administrative fees or salaries , and a percentage of the profits . where compensation was not based on profits , these three blind vendors received either a percentage of the contract value or a fixed base fee . figure 4 shows the annual compensation received by blind vendors for military food services contracts , within specified ranges , and the average compensation for each range . as shown in figure 4 , 15 of 38 randolph - sheppard blind vendors' annual compensation was between $100,000 and $200,000 . overall , blind vendors working at dod dining facilities received average annual compensation of about $276,500 per vendor . these figures are based on pretax earnings . we did not collect compensation information for employees of the blind vendors or employees of the teaming partners . for the jwod program , for most workers — including those with and without a disability — the compensation is determined by either federal law or collective bargaining agreements . the service contract act ( sca ) was enacted to give employees of contractors and subcontractors labor standards protection when providing services to federal agencies . the sca requires that , for contracts exceeding $2,500 , contactors pay their employees , at a minimum , the wage rates and fringe benefits that have been determined by the department of labor to be prevailing in the locality where the contracted work is performed . however , the sca hourly rate would not be used if there is a collective bargaining agreement that sets a higher hourly wage for selected workers . according to nish , the collective bargaining hourly rates are , in general , 5 to 10 percent higher than the sca's wage rates . of the six jwod contracts in our sample , holloman air force base and the marine corps' eastern and western regional contracts had collective bargaining agreements . for the three jwod sites visited , we obtained an estimate of the average hourly wages , average hourly fringe benefits rates , and average number of hours worked and computed their annual wages . the average hourly wage for the three jwod sites was $13.15 including fringe benefits . table 4 shows the average annual wages that an employee earned .