iii ) . these programs may provide funding to service providers for bus tokens , transit passes , taxi vouchers , or mileage reimbursement , for example , to transportation - disadvantaged persons for trips to access government services ( such as job - training programs ) , the grocery store , medical appointments , or for other purposes . for example , the departments of agriculture and labor both provide funding for programs that could provide bus fare for low - income youths seeking employment or job training . further , these services can be costly because of inconsistent , duplicative , and often restrictive program rules and regulations . for example , gao has previously reported that a transportation provider in one state explained that complicated fee structures or paperwork requirements for services funded under different programs may result in overlapping service such as two vehicles on the same route at the same time . the interagency transportation coordinating council on access and mobility , a federal entity charged with promoting interagency coordination , has taken steps to encourage and facilitate coordination across agencies , but action by federal departments will be necessary to better coordinate and eliminate duplication and fragmentation . contact points for our congressional relations and public affairs offices may be found on the last page of this statement . dod and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) two bureaus within the department of state ( state ) . department of the treasury's ( treasury ) internal revenue service ( irs ) department of health and human services' centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) department of homeland security ( dhs ) transportation security administration ( tsa ) dhs's customs and border protection ( cbp ) . the federal government spent more than $62.5 billion on the following 18 domestic food nutrition and assistance programs in fiscal year 2008 . table 2 lists selected federal programs that provide shelter or housing assistance . forty - four of the 47 federal employment and training programs gao identified ( see table 3 ) , including those with broader missions such as multipurpose block grants , overlap with at least one other program in that they provide at least one similar service to a similar population . however , our review of 3 of the largest programs showed that the extent to which individuals receive the same services from these programs is unknown due to program data limitations . this list contains programs that gao identified as providing transportation services to transportation - disadvantaged persons , with limited information available on funding . transportation is not the primary purpose of many of these programs , but rather access to services , such as medical appointments . in many cases , funding data were not available as funds are embedded in broader program spending . however , gao obtained fiscal year 2009 funding information for 23 programs ( see table 4 ) , which spent an estimated total of $1.7 billion on transportation services that year . specifically , addressing duplication , overlap , and fragmentation in these areas could help to minimize the administrative burdens faced by those entities — including states and localities as well as nonprofits — that are delivering these programs' services .