nnsa did not provide technical comments . for our first recommendation , dod agreed to update the 1997 memorandum of agreement for the council . in its comments , dod proposed that once the memorandum of agreement was updated and fully coordinated with all members of the council , the council chairman would issue a letter to the council members documenting the roles and responsibilities , structure , and functions of the council's support committees . dod believed that this approach was more appropriate than including that information in the high - level agreement between the secretaries of defense and energy . according to dod's written comments , this approach would preserve the council's ability to quickly respond to changing needs without the delay and inherent challenges of renegotiating an interagency memorandum of agreement . we believe that this is a reasonable approach and meets the intent of our recommendation to institutionalize the roles , responsibilities , structure , and functions of the council's two support committees — the standing and safety committee and the action officers group — in a formal document . for our second recommendation , dod stated that the letter from the council chairman that would be developed to address our first recommendation would require that budget and program evaluation officials from both dod and nnsa consistently and routinely attend meetings of the council and its support committees . such a requirement would meet the intent of our recommendation by ensuring that the expertise of budget and program evaluation officials would be available at all standing and safety committee and action officers group meetings . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , secretary of defense , secretary of energy , and administrator of nnsa . in addition , this report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact joseph kirschbaum at ( 202 ) 512-9971 ( kirschbaumj@gao.gov ) or david trimble at ( 202 ) 512-3841 ( trimbled@gao.gov ) . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . we corroborated our comparisons in interviews with dod and nnsa officials . appendix i presents a more detailed description of our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from june 2014 to may 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . congress established the council in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1987 . the structure , membership , and responsibilities of the council are generally found in section 179 of title 10 , u.s. code .