david j . wise , at ( 202 ) 512-5731 or wised@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , keith b. cunningham ( assistant director ) , russell c. burnett , colin j. fallon , robert k. heilman , wesley a. johnson , terence c. lam , john p. robson , james r. russell , crystal wesco , and nancy zearfoss made key contributions to this report . atf and omb did not have comments on the report . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . they then used that knowledge to reduce the number of workstations in their renovated space . irs officials told us that when their agency implemented a new collaborative workspace design at its headquarters , they held focus groups to obtain employee input on various design features . officials from each of the five private sector organizations we contacted also told us that when working to incorporate elements of mobility into space planning , either for a client or their own organization , data on how employees currently use their space is necessary for informed decision - making . for example , a representative of one organization told us that when working with a client , his organization first acquires data on how that client uses its space by examining costs , office density , and space utilization rates ; within his own organization , they perform daily head counts to determine how their office space is being utilized . similarly , a representative of another organization told us that he advises clients seeking to make physical changes to their workplace that they must first do some research to understand the current level of office utilization . when introducing physical space changes associated with increased workforce mobility — including the loss of dedicated workspace — organizations may encounter resistance from agency leaders , managers , employees , or employee organizations . officials from all of the agencies and the private sector organizations we contacted described redesigning space to reflect mobility as a significant change . several noted that employees have traditionally regarded their workspace as their own personal space and that mobility initiatives can result in reduced personal space for employees . some pointed out that managers also may be uncomfortable with mobility initiatives for various reasons . for example , managers may be uncomfortable supervising employees who work outside the office , or they may perceive a reduction in office space to mean that they or their programs have become less important to the organization . to implement changes , agencies we reviewed , as well as private sector organizations we contacted , have taken a number of actions to gain support . for example , irs officials told us they worked with agency leadership as well as their union , when they implemented new space standards that reflect changes in the mobility of their workforce . irs officials told us that they used budgetary pressures as the primary driver to help both managers and employees understand why they needed to substantially change their view of personal workspace .