budget . the ig act requires separate budgets for offices of inspector general ( oig ) within agency budgets , allowing congress to review ig budget requests separately . dcaa currently does not have this protection . igs that are appointed by the president with senate confirmation receive a separate appropriation , preventing agencies from reprogramming ig funds to other programs and activities . however , there is currently little visibility over dcaa's budget because it is funded under the operations and maintenance , defense - wide appropriation , which includes numerous dod agencies , such as the defense contract management agency ( dcma ) , the defense logistics agency , the defense finance and accounting service , and some buying command activities . therefore , dcaa's share of annual appropriations is subject to reprogramming , sometimes without congressional notification . according to the dcaa director and documentation provided by the director and office of comptroller / cfo , in the past , dod has reprogrammed funding between dcaa and other dod activities on numerous occasions . because these reprogrammings were below the $15 million threshold for congressional notification , congress did not have notice of these funding decreases at the time they occurred . for fiscal year 2009 , dod reprogramming increased dcaa's funding by $3.5 million . legislation similar to the ig act could grant dcaa a separate budget to provide visibility and protections from reprogramming of funds to other agency priorities . increased authority and independence . legislation could strengthen dcaa's audit authority by providing the same level of access to records and personnel available to igs . currently , dcaa has statutory access to certain records related to cost - type contracts or those that contain cost and pricing data , but not to contractor personnel . as a result , dcaa's subpoena power is limited to certain records and does not cover contractor personnel . while we recognize that dcaa auditors have ongoing discussions with contractor personnel , they do not have statutory authority to compel contractor officials to meet with them and submit to interviews . igs have authority , including subpoena power , to access all records , reports , audits , reviews , documents , papers , recommendations , or other material available that relate to programs and operations for which the ig has responsibilities . further , ig subpoena authority extends beyond access to records and documents in that ig auditors can administer or take an oath in order to obtain information . our discussions with dcaa auditors and reviews of audit documentation identified numerous instances where requests for contractor records were not met . obtaining increased access to contracting companies , especially their staff and documentation , would be an important provision to improve the effectiveness of dcaa audit staff . reporting and oversight of audit results . the ig act provides for semiannual reports to the agency head and appropriate committees of congress summarizing results of significant audits and investigations . dcaa currently has no external reporting requirement , reducing opportunities for oversight and transparency . congress could mandate some form of external dcaa reporting in legislation similar to the ig act .