( recommendation 3 ) . we provided a draft of this report to the department of defense ( dod ) for comment . specially , we reviewed dod instruction 1315.19 - exceptional family member program ; service - specific guidance and related documents from the air force , army , marine corps , and navy ; and dod instruction 1342.22 - military family readiness . standards for internal control in the federal government related to the documentation of responsibilities through policies , performance measures , and evaluating the results of monitoring activities . dod also stated that it is developing plans for evaluating the results of each service's monitoring activities for the efmp . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretaries of defense and education , and other interested parties . the report also is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 617 ) 788-0580 or nowickij@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2017 includes a provision for gao to assess the effectiveness of the department of defense's ( dod ) exceptional family member programs ( efmp ) . this report focuses on the assignment coordination and family support components of the efmp for dependents with special needs and examines: ( 1 ) the extent to which each service has provided family support as required by dod , and ( 2 ) the extent to which the services monitor and dod evaluates assignment coordination and family support . to address these objectives , we used a variety of data collection methods . key methods are described in greater detail below . for both objectives , we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and dod guidance and documentation that pertain to the efmp , including the following: the ndaa for fiscal year 2010 , which established the office of special needs and defined program requirements for assisting families with special needs , including assignment coordination and family support . dod's guidance for administering the efmp . we assessed how dod implements the requirements in the ndaa for fiscal year 2010 ; how each service implements assignment coordination and family support ; and how the services and dod monitor assignment coordination and family support using performance measures . we compared each service's procedures for monitoring assignment coordination and family support to these standards . to determine the extent of the services' efmp family support , we obtained and analyzed fiscal year 2016 efmp data ( the most recent available ) for each service . we reviewed dod policy to identify data variables that each service maintains related to its efmp . we used these data to summarize key characteristics of each service's efmp . their comments are not intended to represent all efmp - enrolled family members or caregivers .