information . the survey collected information on key program elements , including objectives , activities , target populations , outcome measures , and obligations during fiscal year 2011 . the survey response rate was 100 percent . the survey also allowed us to confirm , exclude , and add programs based on consultations with agency officials . as a result of our analysis of the survey data and follow - up contact with agency officials , we identified 12 programs that met one of the first two selection criteria and funded elder justice activities in fiscal year 2011 . we analyzed whether similarities and differences in key program elements indicated potential fragmentation , overlap , or duplication , and whether program officials monitored program outcomes . appendix i provides a detailed description of our methodology for the survey and its limitations , as well as its scope . to determine the extent to which federal programs coordinate their efforts and monitor elder justice outcomes , our survey collected information on federal elder justice programs' coordination , monitoring , and program evaluation . we conducted written follow - up with program officials about their efforts , reviewed their planning documents , and assessed this information to identify elder justice programs' monitoring and coordination efforts . to determine how state aging agencies , area agencies on aging and service providers deliver federal elder justice services and what challenges , if any , they face in doing so , we conducted site visits to arizona , illinois , and virginia . we selected these states because a relatively high percentage of the state population is over 60 years of age ; geographic dispersion ; and a relatively high percentage of older americans act of 1965 funding in the state's budget is devoted to elder care.4 in each state , we interviewed staff from the state aging agency , and three area aging agencies , and in one state , officials from two local service providers , about challenges in delivering elder justice services . we also interviewed experts in the field of aging and elder abuse including representatives of the american bar association - commission on law and aging , the national health policy forum , the national association of states united for aging and disabilities , and the woodrow wilson international center for scholars . findings from these site visits are not generalizable to all aging agencies or service providers , but provide important insights . the oaa uses the term “aging network” ( 42 u.s.c . § 3002 ( 5 ) ) but we found the more descriptive term “aging services network” in widespread use . area agencies on aging are sub - state organizations that can encompass one or more local governmental jurisdictions , such as cities and counties . regional planning and development agencies.10 the rest are located in colleges , community action agencies and other organizations . national health policy forum background paper no . 83: the aging services network: serving a vulnerable and growing elderly population in tough economic times , december 13 , 2011 . pub . l. no.111-148 , tit . vi , subtit . h , §§ 6701-6703 , 124 stat . 119 , 782-804 ( 2010 ) ( codified at 42 u.s.c . pub .