( see fig . for example , it went from 2,400 resource hours during the first quarter of 1999 , peaked at 91,000 hours during the first quarter of fiscal year 2002 ( immediately after september 11 , 2001 ) , and most recently stood at nearly 37,000 hours for the first quarter of fiscal year 2003 . in figure 1 , as well as the other resource figures that follow , we have added a line developed by using linear regression techniques to show the general trend for the period . it is important to note that while such lines depict the trend in resource hours to date , they should not be taken as a prediction of future values . other activity indicators , such as sea marshal boardings , also demonstrate an increased level of emphasis . before september 11th , such boardings were not done ; but there were over 550 boardings during the first quarter of 2003 . similarly , vessel operational control actions have risen by 85 percent since the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2001 . given the emphasis on homeland security , it is not surprising that efforts to interdict illegal immigrants have also increased . for example , during the first quarter of 2003 , the level of effort in this area was 28 percent higher than it was for the comparable period in 1998 . some of the coast guard's traditional missions , such as providing aids to navigation and search and rescue , have been the least affected by the increased emphasis on security . ( see fig . while resource hours for both of these missions have declined somewhat since the first quarter of fiscal year 1998 , the overall pattern of resource use over the past 5 years has remained consistent . although search and rescue boats and buoy tenders were used to perform homeland security functions immediately after september 11th , these activities did not materially affect the coast guard's ability to carry out its search and rescue or aids to navigation missions . search and rescue boats were initially redeployed for harbor patrols after the september 11th terrorist attacks ; but the impact on the mission was minimal because the deployments occurred during the off - season , with respect to recreational boating . similarly , some boats that normally serve as buoy tenders — an aids to navigation function — were used for security purposes instead ; but they were among the first to be returned to their former missions . for the first quarter of fiscal year 2003 , the number of resource hours spent on these missions was very close to the number spent during the comparable quarter of fiscal year 1998 . performance measurement data further demonstrates the relatively minimal impact on these missions resulting from the coast guard's emphasis on homeland security . for example , for search and rescue , the coast guard was within about half a percentage point of meeting its target for saving mariners in distress in 2002 . likewise , data show that with respect to its aid to navigation mission , in 2002 the coast guard was about 1 percent from its goal of navigational aid availability .