dhs . at dhs , our review covered three senior officials because , according to dhs officials , the secretary of homeland security did not use e - mail: these officials told us that the secretary did not have a dhs e - mail account , and that he did not conduct any official communications using external nongovernmental e - mail systems . for the remaining three officials , the e - mail management practices did not fully comply with the requirements . none of the e - mails of the senior officials were reviewed for their status as a record or filed in an appropriate recordkeeping system . instead , the officials were using their e - mail accounts to store all e - mails . two of the three officials personally managed their e - mail accounts ; the third shared this responsibility with a member of his staff . the staff of one of the officials who managed his own e - mail had access to the official's e - mail account , but the staff reviewed or accessed these only if instructed to do so by the official . the department said that the third official's office administrator had access to calendar functions only . according to one of these senior officials , storing e - mails on the computer is convenient for searching and retrieving . it was this official's opinion that this approach was safe from a legal standpoint because no e - mails were deleted . nonetheless , using an e - mail system to retain all e - mails indefinitely increases the difficulty of performing searches based on categories of records ; in contrast , such searches are facilitated by a true recordkeeping system . further , if e - mail records are not stored in an appropriate recordkeeping system ( paper or electronic ) , there is reduced assurance that they are useful and accessible to the agency as needed , or that they will be retained for the appropriate period . epa: at epa , the e - mail records of two of the four senior officials were being managed in accordance with key requirements reviewed . for these two senior officials , one of whom was the agency head , e - mail records were stored in paper - based recordkeeping systems . the epa administrator had two epa e - mail accounts , one intended for messages from the public and one for communicating with select senior epa officials ( not intended for use by the public ) . in the paper - based recordkeeping system , of 25 e - mail records inspected , all included transmission data and distribution lists , as required . for the nonpublic account , staff provided eight e - mail records for inspection , all of which also included transmission data and distribution lists . according to epa officials , the nonpublic account generated few records because the administrator receives most of his information from other sources , including face - to - face briefings and meetings .