the chairman was not included . late september office of the chief accountant begins scheduling interviews of pcaob candidates with the commissioners . mr. gradison receives a call from the chief accountant to come in for interviews . judge webster resigns as chairman of the pcaob . pcaob holds planning meeting that includes judge webster . office of the general counsel sends out supplemental questionnaires to pcaob members with a deadline of november 20 for submissions . mr. niemeier is also asked to come in for interviews . for the chairman , mr. biggs's appointment is contingent upon another specific individual being appointed to the pcaob . crm briefs the office of the general counsel on its preliminary findings and indicates that it will provide a more formal report on december 12 . crm is to provide a final report on the supplemental questionnaires to the office of the general counsel by this date . one of the other commissioners informs the chairman that a commissioner may not be willing to support that individual . sec chairman calls william h. webster to ask him to consider taking a position on the new pcaob . much can be done to improve the selection and vetting process . before any additional members are appointed to the pcaob , especially the chairman , we recommend that the commission reach agreement and document the process to be followed , the sequence and timing of key steps , and the roles to be played by the commission and the staff in the selection and vetting of candidates ; develop agreed - upon , detailed selection criteria for pcaob members and the chairman that fully embrace the principles articulated in the sarbanes - oxley act of 2002 ; develop a vetting process that ensures that before an applicant is brought to the commission for serious consideration , certain minimum background and reference checks are performed to ensure that the individual has no potential legal or ethical impairments and ensure that the vetting process is completed before the commission votes to appoint members to the pcaob ; and determine what candidate information should be documented , analyzed , and shared among the commission and staff . moreover , we recommend that the sec chairman , direct staff involved in the pcaob selection process to make greater use of available technology to conduct necessary background checks and to generate sufficient details on the qualifications of potential applicants so that the commission can make informed decisions on the fitness of potential applicants to be pcaob members . we requested comments on a draft of this report from sec commissioners , sec's general counsel , sec's former chief accountant , the chairman's former chief of staff , and others at sec involved in the selection and vetting process . in addition , we requested comments from judge william h. webster and john h. biggs . each of these parties provided only technical comments on the report's contents , which were incorporated as appropriate . the chairman and each of the commissioners also told us that they generally agreed with the report's recommendations .