evaluating the results . evaluating the actions taken by irs to reduce the tax gap would help maximize irs's effectiveness . evaluations can be challenging because it is difficult to isolate the effects of irs's actions from other influences on taxpayers' compliance . our work has discussed how to address these challenges , for example by using research to link actions with the outputs and desired effects . optimizing resource allocation . developing reliable measures of the return on investment for strategies to reduce the tax gap would help inform irs resource allocation decisions . irs has rough measures of return on investment based on the additional taxes it assesses . developing such measures is difficult because of incomplete data on the costs of enforcement and collected revenues . beyond direct revenues , irs's enforcement actions have indirect revenue effects , which are difficult to measure . the extent to which the tax gap would be reduced depends on which parts of the tax system would be simplified and in what manner as well as how any reform of the tax system is designed and implemented . neither approach , however , will eliminate the gap . further , changes in the tax laws and system to improve tax compliance could have unintended effects on other tax system objectives , such as those involving economic behavior or equity . simplification has the potential to reduce the tax gap for at least three broad reasons . first , it could help taxpayers to comply voluntarily with more certainty , reducing inadvertent errors by those who want to comply but are confused because of complexity . second , it may limit opportunities for tax evasion , reducing intentional noncompliance by taxpayers who can misuse the complex code provisions to hide their noncompliance or to achieve ends through tax shelters . third , tax code complexity may erode taxpayers' willingness to comply voluntarily if they cannot understand its provisions or they see others taking advantage of complexity to intentionally underreport their taxes . simplification could take multiple forms . one form would be to retain existing laws but make them simpler . for example , in our july 2005 report on postsecondary tax preferences , we noted that the definition of a qualifying postsecondary education expense differed somewhat among some tax code provisions , for instance with some including the cost to purchase books and others not . making definitions consistent across code provisions may reduce taxpayer errors . although we cannot say the errors were due to these differences in definitions , in a limited study of paid preparer services to taxpayers , we found some preparers claiming unallowable expenses for books . further , the joint committee on taxation suggested that such dissimilar definitions may increase the likelihood of taxpayer errors and increase taxpayer frustration . another tax code provision in which complexity may have contributed to the individual tax gap involves the earned income tax credit , for which irs estimated a tax loss of up to about $10 billion for tax year 1999 .