we disagree . we believe it is appropriate to summarize aggregate expense payment data as a percentage of premiums collected because , as noted in the report , the nfip is designed to pay for flood losses and operating expenses to the extent possible with premium revenues rather than tax dollars . our report also provides detailed information on the types of wyo payments made each year separately for claims and other costs , including agent commissions and expenses for selling and servicing policies . dhs concurred with our recommendation to work with naic to improve the consistency in the way wyo insurance companies compile and report this data so that it is useful as an estimate of the wyo companies' actual expenses for selling and servicing flood insurance policies . as progress is made , it will be incumbent upon fema to determine whether the data already collected on flood insurance program expenses are reliable and sufficiently comprehensive for fema to make a reasonable estimate of wyo insurance companies' actual expenses . dhs also concurred with our recommendation that financial statement audits be conducted and the results reviewed . and ( 3 ) how does fema provide assurance that financial and management controls in place for the wyo program operate as intended and in accordance with program requirements ? this is one of several reports and testimonies we have completed or have under way related to the administration and management of the nfip since the unprecedented losses from hurricane katrina and other major flood events in 2004 and 2005 illustrated the extent of the federal government's exposure to losses in catastrophic flood years . related work we recently completed addressed issues including the nfip's financing , oversight and management , implementation of the program in the aftermath of hurricanes katrina and rita , the inventory of insured properties that suffer repetitive flood losses , and the status of efforts to revise and improve the nation's flood maps . ( see the list of related gao products on page 52 of this report. ) in addition , we have reviews under way assessing how insurance companies manage losses that may be covered by both wind and flood insurance , the impact of subsidized properties on the nfip , and additional aspects of fema's financial oversight of wyo insurance companies . to assess how much fema paid to wyo insurance companies in recent years for operating costs and how fema determines the amount of these operating costs , we interviewed fema officials , examined documentation such as fema's financial subsidy arrangement with the wyo insurance companies , and analyzed fema data on amounts paid to wyo insurance companies for fiscal years 2004-2006 . we examined internal controls fema had in place to ensure the reliability of the data . we determined that the information was sufficiently reliable for our purposes by discussing with officials the internal control processes in place , observing the monthly process used by fema's program contractor to reconcile cost information submitted by wyo insurance companies , and reviewing audits of dhs financial statements . we conducted semi - structured interviews with representatives of a judgmental sample of five wyo insurance companies and the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) to obtain their perspectives on fema's payment methodologies .