( see fig . 2 for the organizational / command structure of the guard when it is performing its state - level mission. ) guardnet is a wan that bridges the military and civilian sectors , just as the national guard itself does . guardnet was created to support ngb's distributive training technology project ( dttp ) , a distance learning program established by congress in 1995 to ensure enhanced military readiness and improve command , control , and communications for the guard . according to ngb , guardnet became operational in 1998 . guardnet is a network of interconnected federal and state military networks ( both wide - area and local - area ) across the united states ( see fig . through guardnet , states , territories , and the district of columbia can connect to a defense network operated by the defense information systems agency ( disa ) , and through this network to the internet . in addition , some states and territories have established connections to other state networks , such as local - area networks on university campuses , which also allow access to the internet . according to ngb officials , firewalls exist at connections between the federally controlled and state - controlled portions of guardnet , between the federally controlled portion of guardnet and disa's network , and between disa's network and the internet . in addition , these officials stated that while they were not certain about the presence of firewalls between the state - controlled portions of guardnet and the state networks , approximately one - half of the states , on their own initiative , might have implemented these firewalls , since ngb has yet to do so . guardnet comprises 7 regional hubs , each of which connects to between 6 and 8 “state - area command” hubs within the 50 states , 3 territories , and the district of columbia ( see fig . the seven regional hubs are located in sacramento , california ; cheyenne , wyoming ; johnston , iowa ; latham , new york ; raleigh , north carolina ; little rock , arkansas ; and the army national guard readiness center in arlington , virginia . the backbone connections among the regional hubs are either oc - 3 or t - 3 lines , both of which are dedicated telecommunications lines that support voice , video , and data transmissions . the connections between the regional hubs and the state - area command hubs are primarily t - 1 lines . from the state - area command hubs , leased t - 1 lines provide permanent telephone connections to the dttp classrooms and local - area networks located at , for example , universities and guard armories . according to ngb , the army national guard provides the funding for guardnet . however , guardnet management is a shared responsibility between ngb at the federal level and directors of information management at the state level . the air national guard does not have any management responsibilities for guardnet . these respective roles and responsibilities are described in table 1 . industry best practices and dod guidance recognize the importance of clearly and formally defining system requirements .