i think the challenge is greater than that . if we think of these processes as being in equilibrium , where their inefficiencies are implicitly accepted as the cost of doing business , then the challenge for getting better outcomes is greater . seen in this light , it will take considerable and sustained effort to change the incentives and inertia that reinforce the status quo . second , while actions taken and proposed by dod and congress are constructive and will serve to improve acquisition outcomes , one has to ask the question why extraordinary actions are needed to force practices that should occur normally . the answer to this question will shed light on the cultural or environmental forces that operate against sound management practices . for reforms to work , they will have to address these forces as well . programs that have pursued risky and unexecutable acquisition strategies have succeeded in winning approval and funding . if reform is to succeed , then programs that present realistic strategies and resource estimates must succeed in winning approval and funding . those programs that continue past practices of pushing unexecutable strategies must be denied funding before they begin . this will take the cooperative efforts of dod and congress . fourth , consideration should be given to setting some limits on what is a reasonable length of time for developing a system . for example , if a program has to complete development within 5 or 6 years , this could serve as a basis to constrain requirements and exotic programs . it would also serve to get capability in the hands of the warfighter sooner . fifth , the institutional resources we have must match the outcomes we desire . for example , if more work must be done to reduce technical risk before development start — milestone b — dod needs to have the organizational , people , and financial resources to do so . once a program is approved for development , program offices and testing organizations must have the workforce with the requisite skills to manage and oversee the effort . contracting instruments must be used that match the needs of the acquisition and protect the government's interests . finally , dod must be judicious and consistent in how it relies on contractors . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you may have at this time . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . for example , there are a number of proposals to make cost estimates more rigorous and realistic , but do these address all of the reasons why estimates are not already realistic ? clearly , more independence , methodological rigor , and better information about risk areas like technology will make estimates more realistic .