( see fig . a similar pattern was found among rural districts , of which an estimated 67 percent targeted funds to needy primary schools . in contrast , equal percentages of urban school districts targeted funds to primary schools ( an estimated 42 percent ) and to schools with higher percentages of poor children ( an estimated 42 percent ) . in addition to distributing funds to individual schools , we estimate that over half the districts ( 58 percent ) reserve at least some of their title i grant , typically no more than 10 percent , for administration or other district activities . an estimated 61 percent of districts that reserve funds for such purposes do so because they believe it is more efficient or promotes consistency across schools in the district . districts use the reserved funds for such activities as professional development for teachers , parental involvement programs , preschool and summer school programs , and before and after school enrichment activities . in addition to the flexibility districts are allowed under the title i regulations , a district may apply for a waiver from the regulations if a district finds that it cannot use title i funds to best serve the needs of its schools within the existing regulations . waivers are used most commonly to allow districts to ( 1 ) serve schools of the same grade span without regard for their rank order in terms of poverty or ( 2 ) allow lower - poverty schools to use title i funds in schoolwide programs rather than for specific students , a practice otherwise allowed only in schools with greater than 50 percent of their children living in poverty . because districts have flexibility in making title i allocations to schools , and not all schools with poor children receive funds from their districts , the amount of title i funds that individual schools receive per poor child differs among schools . only three states , california , mississippi , and georgia , were able to provide us with electronic information on enrollment , free and reduced - price lunch eligibility , and title i dollar amounts allocated to individual schools . analyses of these three states' data show that in the 1999-2000 school year , among the schools receiving title i funds , schools with higher percentages of poor children received a larger percentage of the funds than schools with lower percentages of poor children , as shown in table 3 . although these findings are based on one year of data from only three states , they are consistent with education's findings that in the 1997-98 school year , nationally 66 percent of schools receiving title i funds had more than 50 percent of their children eligible for free or reduced - price lunch , and 35 percent of schools receiving title i funds had at least 75 percent of their children eligible for free or reduced - price lunch . when the number of poor children from low - income families shifts between states , title i allocations do not fully adjust in response .