our apprehension is not unfounded . in november 2004 , we similarly recommended that dod delay further procurement of the global hawk b until a new business case — one that reduced risk and applied a knowledge - based approach — was completed . dod chose not to concur with this recommendation , arguing that the department was effectively mitigating risk . despite dod's assurances , events that triggered the nunn - mccurdy review in april 2005 not only indicate that the risk mitigation measures were ineffective but underscore the wisdom of making a new business case . in addition to cost increases , schedule delays , and performance problems that have altered many of the program's conditions and plans as they were originally envisioned , officials said they are rethinking global hawk test plans and low - rate quantities , which could affect the elements on which a business case is made . our past work on major weapon systems acquisitions has clearly shown the value of preparing and maintaining a comprehensive business case to justify and guide investments , and the need to revisit the business case if circumstances substantially change , as they have on global hawk . to determine the extent to which global hawk and predator acquisition strategies and business cases were effective in meeting warfighter requirements we reviewed budget and planning documents . we also utilized gao's methodology for assessing risks on major weapon system acquisition programs to assess their acquisition strategies and business cases with respect to best practices criteria . the methodology is described from the best practices and experiences of leading commercial firms and successful defense acquisition programs . we interviewed dod and contractor officials and obtained programmatic data and reports for the global hawk and predator . we incorporated our recent global hawk and predator quick look efforts and past gao reports and testimony . we reviewed management plans , cost reports , progress briefings , and risk data to identify execution efforts and results to date . the primary comparisons made in the report are for the most part focused on the combined global hawk program and the predator b program . information on the predator a program mainly provides a historical perspective and lessons learned from that older and more mature system . we received dod comments questioning whether the global hawk and predator b programs can reasonably be compared given the differences in time frames ; global hawk's system start was in march 2001 , 3 years earlier than predator b's start in february 2004 . while we agree that there may sometimes be a period of time before problems in a newer program become evident , we believe the two programs can be compared to provide valuable lessons for future acquisitions . first , concerns about acquisition strategy , concurrency , and funding profiles are not particularly dependent on time frames . second , the dod policy preference for incremental acquisitions used as criteria in comparing programs was in effect when both programs started . third , the global hawk b , which comprises most of the global hawk program , did not begin production until after the start of predator b .