there is no float for cash . checks are subject to the longest float , primarily due to the need to physically transport checks . federal law and regulations prohibit depository institutions from paying interest on demand deposits consisting primarily of commercial checking accounts . many depository institutions , however , offer “sweep” accounts to business customers as a mechanism by which these customers obtain interest earnings on account balances above negotiated account minimums . during the business week , the depository institution transfers , or “sweeps,” commercial checking account balances above an agreed minimum into other accounts on which interest might be paid , such as mmdas , or into interest - earning nondeposit financial instruments . depository institutions typically invest these funds in short - term , low - risk assets , such as u.s. treasury bills and notes , or money market mutual funds , among others . depository institutions do not pay interest earnings on funds deposited on the weekend because they are unable to invest these funds until the next business day . overall , u.s. settlement schedules are similar to settlement schedules in most g - 10 countries . in some asian countries , settlement services are available for a limited number of hours on saturdays . specifically , in singapore and hong kong settlement occurs saturday mornings , in addition to monday through friday services . recently , south korea ended its saturday settlement hours because many commercial banks are closed on saturdays . appendix ii further illustrates international payment systems' operating hours . weekend settlement of financial transactions would provide small benefits for retailers and consumers , and little , if any , benefit for the economy as a whole . retail industry representatives identified weekend interest earnings as the main potential benefit for retailers . however , our analysis of grocery industry data indicated that the grocery industry currently forgoes small potential interest income on its weekend sales relative to the grocery industry's annual sales or the national economy . if weekend settlement were adopted , retailers also could realize some secondary benefits such as reducing the amount of cash held in stores . however , other secondary benefits such as accelerated settlement represent benefit transfers primarily from consumers or banks to retailers , creating no economic stimulus to the economy . although retail industry representatives identified weekend interest earnings as the main benefit for retailers , our analysis suggested that investing retailers' balances in sweep accounts and other investment vehicles over the weekend would provide minimal additional earnings to retailers and have virtually no impact relative to the economy as a whole . according to grocery industry publications , the industry had sales of $494 billion in year 2000 , as seen in figure 3 . therefore , because depository institutions are unable to invest retailers' weekend cash deposits until monday , we estimated , based on grocery industry data , that the grocery industry forgoes approximately $2.6 million each year in after - tax interest earnings , assuming a 2 percent interest rate , and $6.6 million a year , assuming an average 5 percent interest rate .