obtaining key recreational fisheries data . according to nmfs and some state officials , nmfs faces a challenge in collecting complete data on discards — that is , fish that are caught but then released — because of the difficulty of validating and verifying self - reported data as previously discussed . in light of this difficulty , louisiana does not collect recreational angler discard data as part of its own recreational fisheries data collection program because of concerns about the quality of angler self - reported data , according to a state official . targeting a representative sample in shoreside surveys . according to nmfs officials , nmfs faces challenges in collecting data on a portion of the recreational fishing sector since it generally does not collect data on private property or at private - access fishing sites . according to nmfs officials and other governmental stakeholders , this is an issue in states that have many private - access sites , such as california and florida , because there may be a significant portion of the recreational fishing sector that is not being surveyed . as a result of this limitation , according to nmfs officials and some state officials , nmfs relies on untested assumptions about , for example , catch and discard rates for anglers that use private - access fishing sites to develop recreational catch estimates . however , nmfs officials noted that survey data on fishing effort are collected from anglers regardless of whether they fish from public or private - access fishing sites . in addition , according to one state official , nmfs' standard protocols for determining when and where to assign shoreside observers to conduct interviews may not take into account local fishing patterns and , therefore , observers may not be located in the right places at the right times to collect the most representative data . for example , according to this official , nmfs' protocols for assigning shoreside observers do not account for the length of time anglers would typically take to reach federal waters and return from their trip . as a result , observers may not be at the shoreside when anglers return . obtaining a sufficient number of survey responses and biological samples . according to nmfs and some state officials , nmfs faces the challenge of collecting a sufficient number of survey responses and samples in its effort and catch surveys . for example , some nmfs and state officials told us coastal household telephone survey response rates have been declining , and a 2014 report prepared for nmfs noted that response rates to the survey had “declined considerably” in the previous decade , which could increase the potential for bias in the data collected on recreational angler fishing effort . also , one state official told us he does not believe nmfs assigns enough shoreside observers to collect the recreational angler catch and discard data needed to develop precise recreational catch estimates . in addition , another state official told us that the lack of shoreside observers has contributed to an insufficient amount of biological samples collected to adequately address scientific needs .