access mvpds . such an analysis , conducted as part of fcc's existing annual video competition reports — which , as discussed , already include relevant analyses — could help fcc determine if additional regulations are needed . the market for video services and devices to access video services has evolved significantly in recent years so that consumers now have considerably more choices for video services and devices to access such services than when congress passed the telecommunications act of 1996 . given the fast pace of change in the video market in recent years and the likelihood that it will continue to evolve to offer consumers more choices in how they access video content , it is important that fcc analyze the implications of these changes for its responsibilities under the act to assure the commercial availability for devices that can access mvpd programming . however , fcc has not conducted a comprehensive analysis to support an informed decision as to whether further action is needed or not . fcc's recently proposed rule and most recent annual video competition report contain limited analysis of the extent to which internet - based providers affect consumer choice for video programming and what that change means for the importance of consumer choice for devices in the context of the act . in contrast , a comprehensive analysis could inform fcc as to whether the market conditions of competition for both video services and devices have been reached under which , as stated in the act , any regulations implemented under the statute shall cease to apply . should such analysis show that those market conditions have not yet been reached , a clear articulation by fcc of what elements have and have not yet been met could help as a benchmark in fcc's further consideration of this issue as the market likely continues to evolve . without more comprehensive analysis of the industry's evolution and its effects on consumer choice for devices to access mvpd services , fcc could potentially take regulatory action — or choose not to take action — in a way that is not beneficial to consumers and does not meet the goals of the act . to help ensure that any future decisions by fcc regarding its efforts under the act are based on comprehensive analysis , we recommend that fcc , as part of its future annual video competition reports , analyze how the ongoing evolution in the video programming market affects competition in the related market for set - top boxes and devices , including how this evolution affects the extent to which consumer choice for devices to access mvpd content remains a relevant aspect of the competitive environment . ( recommendation 1 ) . we provided a draft of this report to fcc and the library of congress for review and comment . fcc responded with a letter in which it agreed with our recommendation . this letter is reprinted in appendix ii . fcc also provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate . the library of congress reviewed our report and did not provide any comments . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees and the chairman of the fcc .