cooperate on project funding . the joint memorandum encourages state srf and state - level rus officials to meet on a regular basis to cooperate in determining what projects will receive funding and which program should fund which project , and to discuss the possibility of jointly funding projects when necessary . this action is consistent with two of the leading practices for interagency collaboration identified in our previous work — agreeing upon roles and responsibilities and leveraging resources . through such actions , federal and state agencies funding water and wastewater infrastructure can clarify which agencies will be responsible for taking various steps and for organizing joint and individual agency efforts and thereby obtain benefits that they would not have realized by working individually . cooperate in preparing environmental analyses and meeting other common federal requirements . the joint memorandum states that , whenever possible , agencies should cooperate on federal requirements that are common across agencies — environmental analyses and other common documents , such as preliminary engineering reports — in order to create one comprehensive application package per project . this action is consistent with our leading practice for interagency collaboration of establishing compatible policies and procedures for operating across agency boundaries . through such an action , federal and state agencies would seek to make policies and procedures more compatible . in february 2012 , epa , usda , and several other federal and state agencies created a working group to examine the feasibility of developing uniform guidelines for preliminary engineering report requirements . the group plans to develop a draft outline for uniform preliminary engineering report guidelines by september 2012 and has received numerous examples and comments from participating states . according to rus officials , however , once the draft outline is developed it must be reviewed by participating state and federal agencies before it is considered final , and the final outline could be delayed if agency review and response times are slow . in addition , epa and usda have taken action at the federal level to help the states coordinate better and make programs more efficient for communities applying for funding . specifically , epa and usda coordinate at the federal level to encourage states to emphasize coordination between their srf programs and rus , as well as with local communities . according to epa and usda officials , to inform state officials and communities about the programs and funding opportunities available in their respective states , the federal agencies participate in conferences and workshops , conduct webinars , and sponsor training . the federal agencies also issue guidance to their programs . for example , epa issued a report in 2003 providing case studies and innovative approaches on how state srf programs could better coordinate with other programs with similar purposes . in addition , in june 2011 , epa and usda signed a memorandum of agreement to work together to help communities implement innovative strategies and tools to achieve short - and long - term water and wastewater infrastructure sustainability .