recipients can also receive their payments more quickly . benefit payments are deposited on a specific date , and recipients no longer have to wait in line to pick up a check or wait for it to arrive in the mail . the pilot was successful , and treasury launched the direct express card nationwide in april 2008 . according to treasury officials , results of a survey conducted after the pilot showed that 85 percent of the card users were satisfied with the debit card , and that 88 percent indicated that they would refer the program to a family member or a friend . information provided on treasury's web site indicated that direct express gives recipients the advantages of direct deposit , even if they do not have a bank account . in addition , treasury explained on its web site that the direct express card offers cardholders the convenience and security of making purchases anywhere that mastercard is accepted and of getting cash back at thousands of locations and atms . some of the services provided free of charge include purchases at retail locations , cash back with purchases , or cash withdrawal through banks or credit unions ; one atm cash withdrawal for each deposit posted to accounts each month when using a direct express atm ; balance inquiry at atms , by telephone or online ; and access to the toll - free customer service number or web site 24 hours a day , 7 days a week . furthermore , the direct express card benefits are fdic - insured , and the consumer protections of regulation e ( such as disclosures of consumer liability and procedures for resolving errors ) apply to the debit card account . the web site also notes that treasury and ssa strongly recommend that social security and ssi recipients receive benefits electronically — either by direct deposit to their bank accounts or to a direct express debit card . we interviewed officials at the following six federal agencies responsible for overseeing or administering federal benefit programs that provided recurring benefits to individuals to obtain information on their use of electronic payments: the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , department of labor ( dol ) , department of veterans affairs , social security administration ( ssa ) , department of the interior's bureau of indian affairs , and department of health and human services . we also attended conferences sponsored by nacha — the electronic payments association's electronic benefits and services council and the electronic funds transfer association to observe presentations from a variety of federal and state agencies , electronic payment providers , and private - sector consultants on issues related to implementing and using electronic payment methods to disburse benefits . to determine the extent to which federal programs use electronic payments , we used the catalog of federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) and the federal assistance award data system ( faads ) to identify federal benefit programs that provided recurring payments to individuals . two representatives from an industry group stated that they did not know how effective conducting consumer outreach would be because it was already well - known that electronic payment programs worked well .