however , not all ctos have implemented this safeguard . we also found that copies of these itineraries were maintained at cto offices that were accessible to any traveler who required assistance with travel reservations . further , at the pentagon , the gto stored the reconciliation packages in boxes with the centrally billed account numbers prominently written on the outside of the boxes in an office that was not secured . the following examples illustrate this improper use . between august 2001 and march 2002 , a navy seaman used the centrally billed account numbers assigned to two navy gtos to purchase over 70 unauthorized tickets totaling more than $60,000 . more than 70 tickets were detected by the gto during its reconciliation process , and referred to the naval criminal investigative service after a gto official suspected that the account had been compromised . we reprinted those comments in appendix ii . we conducted our audit work from june 2003 through may 2004 in accordance with u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards . we performed our investigative work in accordance with standards prescribed by the president's council on integrity and efficiency . the dod centrally billed travel card program is part of a governmentwide travel card program started in 1983 with the express purpose of increasing convenience to the traveler and lowering the government's cost of travel by reducing the need for cash advances to the traveler , and the associated administrative costs . the travel card program includes both the individually billed accounts — accounts held and paid by the individual cardholders — and the centrally billed accounts . in general , individual cardholders use the individually billed accounts to charge nontransportation travel - related expenses , while most dod services and units used the centrally billed accounts to purchase transportation services , such as airline and train tickets , and to pay expenses incurred for group travel . during fiscal years 2001 and 2002 , dod travelers charged more than $7.1 billion in expenses to the travel card program , with about $2.8 billion related to the use of the centrally billed accounts . unlike the actual credit cards issued to individuals and some unit credit cards , there are no actual credit cards for the centrally billed accounts used to purchase transportation services . we briefed dod managers , including dod officials in the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , dfas , and the office of the inspector general ; army officials in the office of deputy chief of staff for logistics ; navy officials in the office of the assistant secretary of the navy for financial management and comptroller ; air force officials in the office of the deputy chief of staff for installations and logistics ; and marine corps officials in the office of deputy chief of staff for installations and logistics concerning the results of our work . instead , bank of america issues account numbers to the government travel office ( gto ) for use by the cto — under contract with each dod service or service location to provide travel services to military and other dod personnel — to enable transportation charges on these accounts .