ii ) . many were not paying their tax bill or making payments towards fulfilling their tax obligations . as of december 2003 , business sponsors from our nationwide selection who were not in installment agreements with the irs or otherwise making payments to irs , for taxes due , had unpaid assessments totaling $3.7 billion . although these businesses with past applications to sponsor immigrant workers would not be affected by a change to requirements for sponsoring workers since they have already received immigration benefits , uscis officials said that businesses that apply to sponsor workers tend to do so in multiple years . if businesses were required to meet their tax obligations , to the extent that future business sponsors owe taxes , they would need to pay their tax bill or make payment arrangements with the irs to come into compliance before becoming eligible to sponsor immigrant workers to enter the country . uscis officials said a statutory change would be preferable to a regulatory change because , although they acknowledge no explicit prohibition exists in immigration laws against conditioning approval of employer petitions on their tax compliance , they have serious legal concerns about uscis's authority to issue such a regulation absent specific statutory authority . immigration applicants / taxpayers who were in irs's non - filer database could include individuals who did not meet irs filing requirements . we relied on irs's investigation of the 33 business sponsors that were not in irs's databases since disclosure rules limit our contact with taxpayers . since irs searched its tax data for the last 5 years ( 1999 – 2004 ) and we collected 7 years of immigration data ( 1997-2004 ) , an unknown but likely small percentage of the businesses that submitted applications during 1997 and 1998 , but are unknown to irs , could be no longer in operation . additionally , we did not assess the reliability of irs data on the cost of paper taxpayer consents since we used this information for background purposes . uscis officials said implementing a tax check for employment - based business applications — estimated to be at least 180,000 for fiscal year 2004 — would be less difficult to process than the six application forms that require financial information . also , because the same business sponsor could file applications more than once in a year , depending on how uscis implemented the requirement for a tax check , it could be valid for a certain period of time according to whatever policy uscis established . subsequently , the business would not have to undergo a tax check every time it sponsored a worker , which would not strain uscis's resources . although use of tax data has helped some federal agencies better administer their programs , some are concerned that widespread use of taxpayer consents may undermine taxpayers' right to privacy and , subsequently , voluntary tax compliance . the confidentiality of tax data is considered by many to be crucial to voluntary compliance . the joint committee on taxation and treasury's office of tax policy warn that the use of consents for programmatic governmental purposes potentially circumvents the general rule of taxpayer confidentiality because the taxpayer waives certain restrictions on agencies' use of the data .