susidized employment . the tanf , es , and wia adult programs maintain separate administrative structures to provide some of the same services to low - income individuals . at the federal level , the tanf program is administered by hhs , and the es and wia adult programs are administered by labor . at the state level , the tanf program is typically administered by the state human services or welfare agency , and the es and wia adult programs are typically administered by the state workforce agency . by regulation , es services must be provided by state employees . at the local level , wia regulations require at least one comprehensive one - stop center to be located in every local workforce investment area . these areas may have the same boundaries as counties , may be multicounty , or may be within or across county lines . jo search workshops . similarly , every county typically has a tanf office . tanf employment and training services may be delivered at tanf offices , in one - stop centers , or through contracts with for - profit or nonprofit organizations , according to hhs officials . in one - stop centers , es staff provide job search and other services to es customers , while wia staff provide job search and other services to wia adult customers . florida , texas , and utah have consolidated the state workforce and welfare agencies that administer the tanf , es , and wia adult programs , among other programs . in utah , the workforce agency administers the tanf program in its entirety . in florida and texas , the workforce agencies administer only that part of tanf related to employment and training services . in all three states , the one - stop centers serve as portals to a range of social services , including tanf . officials from these three states told us that consolidating agencies led to cost savings through the reduction of staff and facilities . for example , a utah official said that the state reduced the number of buildings in which employment and training services were provided from 104 to 34 . according to a texas official , texas also privatized 3,000 full - time staff equivalents ( fte ) at the local level , which reduced the pension , retirement , and insurance costs that had previously been associated with these state positions . officials in the three states , however , could not provide a dollar figure for the cost savings that resulted from consolidation . state officials also told us that consolidation improved the quality of services for participants in the wia adult and tanf programs . an official in utah noted the consolidation allowed job seekers to apply for assistance they had not considered in the past , allowed employment counselors to cluster services that made sense for the client , and allowed clients to experience seamless service delivery . these benefits reflected what the official said was one of the visions of consolidation: having one employment plan per client , rather than multiple employment plans for clients served by multiple programs .