gao - 06-25 . washington , d.c: november 21 , 2005 . provide support and technical assistance . what steps has education taken to facilitate program management ? to conduct our work , we analyzed data that dantes maintains on all individuals who have registered for the program , focusing specifically on those who have received funding between the enactment of nclba on january 8 , 2002 , and june 30 , 2005 , which marks the end of the 2004-2005 school year . for this population , we analyzed demographic and financial assistance data , as well as information on the schools and subject areas in which the teachers became employed . to assess the reliability of school placement data , we matched the data dantes provided to data from education's national center for education statistics' common core of data , which includes district and school - level information on free and reduced price meal eligibility , and the u.s. census bureau's small area income and poverty estimates program , which includes district - level information on poverty . in addition , of the 30 funded troops - to - teachers placement assistance offices , we contacted personnel from 7 to obtain the perspectives of those helping both large and small numbers of troops find employment through the program . we also interviewed education officials to discuss their management of the program and to assess program practices against gao standards for internal controls , which establish a framework for effective agency operations . further , we interviewed officials at dantes and reviewed the results from a recent survey of program participants conducted by the national center for education information — a private , non - partisan research organization specializing in survey research and data analysis . we also spoke with several researchers in the field of teacher recruitment , preparation , and professional development , and reviewed related reports on these topics . we assessed the reliability of all data elements used in the report and determined that the data were sufficient and reliable for the purposes of our study . we conducted our work between may 2005 and january 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology appears in appendix i . according to education , about 300,000 individuals obtain teaching certifications each year and the career path generally begins by enrolling in either a traditional or an alternative certification program , typically provided by a 4-year institution of higher education . programs are considered “traditional” when they combine subject matter instruction , training on how to manage a classroom , and field experience , or “alternative” when they enroll individuals who already have the subject matter knowledge and focus instead on classroom management and exposure to real - life teaching and learning conditions . based on education data , 46 states reported implementing alternative routes to certification , and about 35,000 individuals each year obtain their teaching credentials through alternative programs . according to education , many alternative certification programs are designed to recruit teachers into shortage areas such as math , science , and special education or to increase gender and ethnic diversity in the teaching workforce .