patriot . in august 2014 , dol required an additional $65 million in collateral from patriot , increasing its collateral from $15 million to $80 million . patriot appealed this decision and , in the 8 months that followed before patriot filed for bankruptcy in may 2015 , dol did not obtain additional collateral , or revoke patriot's ability to self - insure because the appeal was still pending . dol officials said they would not typically revoke an operator's authority to self - insure during an ongoing appeal . as a result , dol was hindered from using this enforcement tool . liens on operator assets can be an effective tool to protect the trust fund if an operator defaults on its benefit liability , but dol officials said they are hindered from using this tool if an operator files for bankruptcy . dol can place a lien on a coal operator's assets under federal law if they refuse the demand to pay the black lung benefit payments for which they are liable . in the event of bankruptcy or insolvency , federal law states that the lien imposed shall be treated in the same manner as a lien for taxes due and owing to the united states under certain laws . however , dol officials said that operators rarely stop paying benefits until after they file for bankruptcy . once a bankruptcy occurs , dol officials said that they are generally prevented by the court from placing a lien and taking an operator's assets in lieu of payment of current and future benefit liability . under bankruptcy law , dol officials said that they have no special status over other creditors with outstanding financial claims . dol officials said that obtaining sufficient collateral is a better way to protect the trust fund . in july 2019 , dol began implementing a new process for coal mine operator self - insurance that may help to address some past deficiencies , if implemented effectively . among other things , dol will require operators to periodically submit financial and claims information , including an actuarial estimate of the operator's current and future benefit liability . dol plans to use this information to assess the insolvency risk of each operator . depending on the results of their analysis , dol plans to categorize the risk - level of each applicant as low , medium , or high . dol will then set the amount of collateral required to self - insure by linking the operator's risk category to a corresponding percentage of the operator's actuarial estimated benefit liability . dol policies state that they would require a high - risk operator to secure with collateral 90 percent of estimated benefit liability , a medium - risk operator to secure 45 percent , and a low - risk operator to secure 15 percent . however , in february 2020 , dol officials said they plan to revise these percentages to 100 percent , 85 percent , and 70 percent for high - risk , medium - risk , and low - risk operators , respectively . coal mine operators that are already authorized to self - insure will be required to submit , among other things , an annual renewal application .