the other agencies provided no comments . doe's cerc program . cerc was announced in 2009 and work began on projects in 2011 . as seen in table 1 , at the program level , cerc has yielded results for select key performance measures through the end of 2015 . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix vii . you asked us to review u.s. - china cooperation on clean energy . this report examines ( 1 ) how much funding u.s. agencies have obligated to clean energy cooperation with china ; ( 2 ) what is known about the results of key u.s. - china cooperation programs and the extent to which these programs follow leading practices in performance monitoring ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) manages risks that may face u.s. participants in the u.s. - china clean energy research center ( cerc ) . to determine which types of technologies would be related to clean energy , we looked for a u.s. government definition of the term , but found that the u.s. government has no uniform definition of clean energy that is applied government - wide . doe officials emphasized that they focus their performance monitoring at the project level , where there have been more than 80 projects within the three cerc tracks . each project follows a 10-point plan describing , among other elements , the research objective , work schedule with interim milestones , and deliverables and dates . officials said that these plans are the basis for the information in the quarterly reports and are how cerc holds projects accountable for their performance . ustda has agency - wide goals used to evaluate its performance . officials further stated that these goals flow down from the agency to the east asia program . the goals are to create u.s. jobs by supporting exports of u.s. goods and services for priority development projects in emerging economies , foster opportunities for u.s. small businesses through significant involvement in ustda's programs , and utilize evidence and evaluation data to guide agency programming decisions . each agency - wide goal has associated performance measures . these same measures are also used to monitor the east asia program , according to ustda officials . ustda set a target for one of the agency - wide performance measures — to exceed the small business administration's benchmark of 23 percent of federal prime contracts awarded to u.s. small businesses — although ustda officials said that they do not break down this target by program . none of the other agency - wide or program - level performance measures had targets , although the agency does set targets at the project level for some performance measures reflecting certain goals such as potential exports . ustda officials said that there are several reasons why they do not have targets for most of their performance measures at the agency or program level .