.” of the fhfb . the business of the board shall be transacted in accordance with these rules ( policy statement 64 ) as the same may be amended from time to time: provided , however , that upon agreement of at least two members convened in a duly called meeting , the rules may be waived in any particular instance , except that action may be taken on items at a special meeting only in accordance with article v , section ( 3 ) b , hereof . section 2 . these rules may be changed or amended by the concurring vote of at least two members upon notice of the proposed change or amendments having been given at least 30 days before such vote . the president with the advice and consent of the senate appoints three members of the five - member board for a term of 6 years . in addition to the three appointive directors , there are two ex officio members of the fdic board: the comptroller of the currency and the director of the office of thrift supervision . general administrative powers of the chair: one of the appointive directors shall be designated by the president , with the advice and consent of the senate , to serve as chair of the board for a term of 5 years . the chair serves as the ceo . the board has delegated to the chair the authority to manage the fdic's day - to - day operations and the general powers and duties usually vested in the office of the ceo of a corporation . key administrative powers of the chair: appointment of senior officials: a delegation of authority to chair , approved on january 29 , 2002 , gave authority to the chair to appoint and remove senior officers . reorganizations: under the delegation of authority , the chair has authority to reorganize the agency . challenging administrative decisions made under delegation: two or more board members may initiate a review of any decision made under the delegation of authority . the board consists of four members appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the senate and each serve staggered 7-year terms , and the fifth member is an ex - officio member , the secretary of housing and urban development . general administrative powers of the chair: the president designates an appointed director as chair . the board has adopted a delegation of authority that authorizes the chair to effect the overall management , functioning , and , organization of the board . key administrative powers of the chair: appointment of senior officials: under the delegation of authority , a chair can appoint agency personnel without a board vote or obtaining board approval . reorganizations: under the delegation of authority , a chair can reorganize the agency without a board vote or consent . challenging administrative decisions made under delegation: under the delegation of authority , the chair must call a special session of the board to consider any matter of business on the request of any two or more board members . the board consists of seven members appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the senate .