forces korea . further , in terms of our review of pacom contractor personnel accountability and contractor vetting , our scope included only contract support in the pacom area of responsibility , excluding contract support located at pacom headquarters . to determine the extent to which pacom accounts for contractor personnel , we reviewed the department of defense ( dod ) , pacom , and joint staff personnel accountability guidance and interviewed pacom , service component , and subordinate unified command j1 personnel - directorate officials . what is our process for determining base access ? further , joint doctrine identifies a key ocs principle that states that contracted support is not restricted to logistics support , but may include significant nonlogistic support as well . joint doctrine also notes that close coordination between all primary and special staff members is required to ensure ocs planning balances effectiveness with efficiency and risk while seeking to attain the commander's strategic end state . the joint staff is in the process of developing an ocs planning manual that , according to officials , would encourage ocs integration with all staff directorates at a combatant command . specifically , officials stated the manual will discuss ways in which a command can ensure ocs equities are being considered from all directorates , including hosting ocs integration cell meetings open to all command staff . however , as of february 2017 , this manual had not been issued . pacom guidance also recognizes the important role directorates beyond logistics should play as stakeholders in ocs . specifically , pacom's ocs guidance identifies recommended planning considerations for command directorates , including nonlogistics directorates , with respect to ocs within the command's area of responsibility in preparation for a contingency operation . for example: j1 manpower and personnel directorate is to provide status reports ( through spot ) to dod on contractors authorized to accompany the force and to develop contractor reception policies and procedures in coordination with the j3 operations directorate . j2 intelligence directorate is to conduct intelligence - specific activities associated with data reported in spot , as required . j3 operations directorate is to integrate spot data into anti - terrorism force protection networks . j5 strategic planning and policy directorate is to provide awareness on joint planning tools in regard to generating ocs requirements and identifying capability gaps . while each of these directorates has ocs responsibilities as outlined above , they did not have representation in the ocs mission integrator demonstration . pacom officials acknowledged that maintaining its ocs integration cell within the logistics directorate complicates assignment tasking outside of that directorate and reinforces the view of ocs as a separate function , making it difficult to integrate ocs efforts in other directorates . in addition , pacom service component officials told us that the ocs mission integrator demonstration might have been more effective if it integrated individuals from all joint staff functions , including other directorates beyond logistics .