( app . i provides a more detailed description of the conditions in which deployed members operate and their exposure to potential medical hazards. ) national science foundation officials acknowledged that the operating environment in antarctica can be harsh and that employees from all participating agencies and organizations – not just 109th airlift wing personnel – face difficult working conditions . they said the national science foundation has adopted a variety of procedures that mitigate the hazards faced by u.s. antarctic program participants , including scientists , support contractor personnel , civilian federal employees , and dod civilian and military personnel . national science foundation officials said operational improvements were implemented to make antarctic flight operations safer and to mitigate the impact of the harsh environment on personnel . for example , an emergency divert airfield was established in 2002 , and navigational aids and more accurate weather forecasting capabilities have been implemented and remain a high priority . while duty performed for more than 30 consecutive days in the polar regions of antarctica and greenland qualifies for hardship duty pay , duty in the polar regions has not been designated as a hazardous duty . section 301 of title 37 of the united states code designates certain duties entitled to hazardous duty pay . these duties include parachute jumps , demolition of explosives , and participation in flight deck operations on an aircraft carrier . other hazardous duties include exposure to above - normal levels of toxic fuels or propellants , and the handling of chemical munitions . personnel handling these materials are compensated for the potential for accidental or inadvertent exposure and not for actual detectable exposure to these materials . a 109th airlift wing official expressed concern over the retention of unit personnel who require additional training for polar duty . flight crews receive training in greenland and antarctica on how to land on and take off from snow and ice and in zero visibility conditions . flight crews are also required to attend arctic survival training in greenland where they learn how to survive on an ice cap for extended periods with no heat and limited survival gear . flight crews typically take 3 years to receive their qualification to fly ski - equipped aircraft . maintenance personnel attend a maintenance recovery school in greenland , which teaches basic polar survival skills to enable them to cope with the extreme conditions they confront when they repair aircraft with little support equipment . a 109th airlift wing official said the unit is experiencing a high turnover of active guard and reserve members who directly support polar missions in aerospace maintenance ( pay grades e - 5 and e - 7 ) and aircraft hydraulics ( pay grades e - 5 and e - 7 ) . for the entire 109th airlift wing , the unit has difficulty retaining “traditional” guardsmen in the following critical skills: aerospace maintenance and ground equipment , avionics , and aircraft fuels . despite retention difficulties in some critical skills , the unit filled 98 percent of the active guard and reserve positions who directly support operations in antarctica in 2002 . the retention fill rate for the entire unit was 97 percent during the same year .