gao - 15-337 . march 19 , 2015 . responding to breaches of pii . in december 2013 we reported that eight federal agencies had inconsistently implemented policies and procedures for responding to data breaches involving pii . in addition , omb requirements for reporting pii - related data breaches were not always feasible or necessary . thus , we concluded that agencies may not be consistently taking actions to limit the risk to individuals from pii - related data breaches and may be expending resources to meet omb reporting requirements that provide little value . we recommended that omb revise its guidance on federal agencies' responses to a pii - related data breach and that the reviewed agencies take specific actions to improve their response to pii - related data breaches . omb neither agreed nor disagreed with our recommendation ; four of the reviewed agencies agreed , two partially agreed , and two neither agreed nor disagreed . implementing security programs at small agencies . in june 2014 we reported that six small agencies ( i.e. , agencies with 6,000 or fewer employees ) had not fully implemented their information security programs . for example , key elements of their plans , policies , and procedures were outdated , incomplete , or did not exist , and two of the agencies had not developed an information security program with the required elements . we recommended that omb include a list of agencies that did not report on the implementation of their information security programs in its annual report to congress on compliance with the requirements of fisma , as well as including information on small agencies' programs . we also recommended that dhs develop guidance and services targeted at small agencies . omb and dhs generally concurred with our recommendations . until federal agencies take actions to address these challenges — including implementing the hundreds of recommendations made by us and inspectors general — federal systems and information , as well as sensitive personal information about members of the public , will be at an increased risk of compromise from cyber - based attacks and other threats . in summary , the cyber threats facing the nation are evolving and growing , with a wide array of threat actors having access to increasingly sophisticated techniques for exploiting system vulnerabilities . the danger posed by these threats is heightened by weaknesses in the federal government's approach to protecting federal systems and information , including personally identifiable information entrusted to the government by members of the public . implementing gao's many outstanding recommendations will assist agencies in better protecting their systems and information , which will in turn reduce the risk of the potentially devastating impacts of cyber attacks . chairman chaffetz , ranking member cummings , and members of the committee , this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you may have . if you have any questions regarding this statement , please contact gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov . other key contributors to this statement include larry crosland ( assistant director ) , rosanna guerrero , fatima jahan , and lee mccracken . information security: irs needs to continue improving controls over financial and taxpayer data .