ii. ) state respondents generally do not expect that their efforts to alleviate congestion will be entirely successful . although 34 states indicated that they expect to spend a greater portion of their budget on urban congestion over the next 10 years , 42 states believe they will be falling behind in dealing with urban congestion . in addition , in its 1999 condition and performance report , fhwa predicted that congestion would worsen — that is , average travel time costs would continue rising — if investment and allocations stay at the current expected levels . in its reauthorization of surface transportation programs , congress could decide to select methods for investing federal resources in the interstates and other highway programs to help address local congestion problems in urban areas . to assist in making these decisions , we asked states about policies and tools that can be used in alleviating congestion . ( see app . iv for the states' responses. ) although states are particularly concerned about urban congestion levels , they also think that rural congestion will increase , especially on specific routes . officials from 18 states expect to rate rural congestion as “high” or “very high” in the next 10 years . for example , rural congestion is increasing on the i - 70 corridor — a 140-mile - long stretch through the rocky mountains of colorado . this section serves in moving skiers and truckers through the mountains . however , traffic congestion has become an increasing problem along this corridor , in part due to population growth in the surrounding areas — and will continue to worsen over the years . states expect certain factors , especially the levels of truck and car traffic , the age of the interstates' pavement and bridges , and funding constraints to negatively affect the conditions of their interstates over the next 10 years . fhwa data also indicate that traffic , especially the volume of truck traffic , will increase . in addition , many states believe they will be “falling behind” in satisfying the users of their systems , especially in terms of congestion . ( see fig . gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . the list contains links to the full - text document files . the census bureau reports that , from 1990 to 2000 , the population increased by about 13 percent nationwide . in addition , according to fhwa , the number of licensed drivers increased by 14 percent during the past decade . these , along with other factors , resulted in a 39 percent increase in the number of miles traveled in the united states in the past decade . freight movement by truck also increased by 40 percent over the first 8 years of the decade . however , interstate capacity in terms of lane miles increased by only 6 percent over the past decade . for example: increasing capacity through the addition of lanes . forty - four states indicated that adding lanes to increase capacity is very useful or moderately useful . redesigning problematic highway sections .