milestones . through july 2019 , the bureau had met its milestones laid out in the luca 2020 operational plan as summarized in table 1 , with two minor changes that provided participating governments additional time . first , in starting up the program , the bureau was able to mail out advance notice packages a month earlier than specified in the 2020 operational plan to give potential participants additional time to assess the resources they would need to participate before receiving the formal invitation . secondly , the bureau extended the deadline for participating governments to submit address updates because natural disasters affected large regions of the country . outreach and training . the bureau performed outreach and training according to its luca 2020 operational plan . for example , the bureau provided technical training workshops for government representatives , including training on address privacy laws . the bureau implemented a streamlined participation process and received address updates from participating governments covering 96 percent of the estimated population of the country . based on the bureau's post - 2010 recommendations to improve luca for the 2020 census , the bureau did not ask participants to provide their full address lists ( an option in 2010 ) , but invited governments to review only the bureau's address list and offer updates . as shown in table 2 , the bureau saw little change in the number of governments invited to participate , registering to participate , and responding from the 2010 census . the changes in participation options prevent precise analysis of participation beyond counting the number of governments that responded in some fashion . moreover , in 2000 , the bureau implemented luca with two phases of data collection — one for rural addresses and one for urban , with some governments eligible to provide address updates during both phases . this differs from later decennials which condensed luca into a single phase . however , the bureau's measure for government participation excludes important information about the degree of that participation . for instance , only 8,389 — or 21 percent of the nearly 40,000 tribal , state , and local governments — participated in luca 2020 . according to bureau officials and subject matter specialists we interviewed , address data are generally improved when both a state and another level of government participate in luca , even if the respective address updates cover some of the same addresses . according to the bureau , such redundancies can help address the possibility of coverage gaps in any one government's address updates . governments at the more local level can apply their targeted , on - the - ground intelligence in cases where a state government may lack the resources and data to cover the entire population as part of its review of the maf . as figure 3 shows , the degree of local participation in luca varied greatly across the country . for example , while state governments in new mexico and oklahoma participated , many counties and local governments ( eg , towns and cities ) within those states did not . moreover , states like texas and south dakota lacked any form of coverage in luca for many of their counties .