( app . ii provides an example of a vignette and practice expense estimates for one service. ) the ruc evaluates proposals submitted by the specialty societies and makes recommendations for final consideration by cms . the ruc meets three times a year , and , on average , reviews approximately 300 codes annually . the ruc also assists cms in the five - year review process — a review of fees for all services that the agency is required by law to conduct at least every 5 years to account for changes in medical practice . while cms may reject or modify the ruc's recommendations , from 1993 through 2009 , the agency accepted over 90 percent of the recommendations pertaining to 3,600 new and revised cpt codes . cms may at times also make changes to fees for services independent of ruc recommendations . efficiencies in multiple services that are furnished together may be factored into fees primarily in two ways . first , they disagreed with our assessment of the ruc workgroup's efforts to ensure that services are appropriately coded and valued . second , they stated that a broad application of the mppr to account for efficiencies in practice expenses and physician work was not appropriate . third , they opposed our matter for congressional consideration that suggests that any savings from implementing the report's recommendations be exempted from budget neutrality requirements . ama representatives disagreed with the report draft's characterization of the efficacy of the ruc workgroup , noting that the ruc workgroup's efforts have been aggressive , timely , and efficient . they also stated that the specialty societies had developed proposals to combine the type a and b service pairs that would result in significant savings should cms implement them in 2010 or 2011 . as an example , they projected that the proposals to combine 14 myocardial perfusion services of the workgroup's 53 type a and type b service pairs would result in annual savings of about $40 million from efficiencies occurring in the physician work component . in addition , they said that while they did not have an estimate , they believed that savings for the practice expense component would also likely be significant . finally , representatives stated that in its review of potentially misvalued services , the workgroup may have already identified and made recommendations on some of the unique codes or pairs included in our list of 149 code pairs . we acknowledge in the draft the time and effort the workgroup has expended in identifying potentially misvalued services . however , based on our review of the workgroup's processes and progress to date , we continue to believe that these processes are resource intensive and will likely limit cms's ability to quickly identify opportunities for savings from those service pairs that account for a high share of medicare spending . in addition , as stated in the draft , the workgroup has not prioritized its review to systematically focus on services with the greatest potential savings for medicare . while it is possible that some of the type a and type b service pairs the workgroup identified may be relatively costly , its methodology does not systematically focus on such services .