my statement is based on our march 2019 report . for that report , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and program documents ; analyzed federal contracting data from april 2011 through june 2018 ; and interviewed sba officials , officials from contracting agencies selected to obtain a range of experience with the wosb program , and three of the four private third - party certifiers . the work on which this statement is based was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . federal agencies conduct a variety of procurements that are reserved for small business participation through small business set - asides . these set - asides can be for small businesses in general , or they can be specific to small businesses that meet additional eligibility requirements in the service - disabled veteran - owned small business , historically underutilized business zone ( hubzone ) , 8 ( a ) business development ( 8 ( a ) ) , and wosb programs . the wosb program enables federal contracting officers to identify and establish a sheltered market , or set - aside , for competition among women - owned small businesses ( wosb ) and economically disadvantaged women - owned small businesses ( edwosb ) in certain industries . wosbs can receive set - asides in industries in which sba has determined that women - owned small businesses are substantially underrepresented . to determine these industries , sba is required to conduct a study to determine which north american industry classification system ( naics ) codes are eligible under the program and to report on such studies every 5 years . in response to the sba oig recommendation that sba implement the new certification process , sba stated that it would implement a new certification process by january 1 , 2020 . additionally , businesses must be at least 51 percent owned and controlled by one or more women who are u.s. citizens to participate in the wosb program . on may 3 , 2019 , sba officials explained that they expected to publish the proposed rule within a few days . in addition , leading fraud risk management practices include identifying specific tools , methods , and sources for gathering information about fraud risks , including data on trends from monitoring and detection activities , as well as involving relevant stakeholders in the risk assessment process . without procedures to regularly monitor and oversee third - party certifiers , sba cannot provide reasonable assurance that certifiers are complying with program requirements and cannot improve its efforts to identify ineligible firms or potential fraud . further , it is unclear when sba's final rule will be implemented .