facilities . the higher estimated u.s. costs reflect higher u.s. standards for facilities , according to state officials . the u.s. cost estimate includes more than $1.1 billion for facilities and related costs , which include facility maintenance , food service , laundry , management and administration , and residential leases for civilian personnel . in contrast , the actual un cost for facilities as part of minusca totaled $292 million over the same time period . communications and intelligence systems . the united states incurs costs associated with meeting u.s. intelligence standards that are not part of un operations , which lack comparable intelligence capabilities . the u.s. cost estimate includes $140 million for the cost of command , control , communications , computers , and intelligence systems , which represents additional operational costs to meet higher u.s. standards for u.s. communications and intelligence capabilities . medical capability . higher u.s. standards for medical care and medical evacuation capability as compared to the un are another factor that would contribute to higher u.s. medical costs for a hypothetical operation , according to dod and state officials . some un hospitals may not meet u.s. minimum standards for medical care , according to dod officials . although medical costs do not constitute a significant portion of the u.s. cost estimate , estimated u.s. medical costs ( $132 million ) greatly exceed actual un medical costs ( $8 million ) over the same time period . un and u.s. peacekeeping operations have various relative strengths , according to u.s. and un officials we met with . relative strengths of un peacekeeping operations include international and local acceptance , access to global expertise , and the ability to leverage assistance from multilateral donors and development banks , according to these officials . relative strengths of u.s. peacekeeping operations would include faster deployment and superior command and control , logistics , intelligence , and counterterrorism capabilities , according to u.s. and un officials . according to u.s. and un officials , un peacekeeping operations benefit from greater international and local acceptance , access to global expertise , and the ability to leverage assistance from multilateral donors and development banks . un peacekeeping operations also provide indirect benefits to the military capacity of participating countries . international and local acceptance . as a multilateral organization , the un benefits from greater international and local acceptance for its peacekeeping operations , according to state , dod , and un officials . these officials noted that the un's multinational character contributes to a reputation for local impartiality . conversely , the united states acting alone may not be viewed as impartial and could face challenges gaining or maintaining international or local support for peacekeeping operations , according to state and dod officials . global expertise . un officials noted that the un has unmatched convening power and access to expertise and experience from across the globe to implement the objectives of multidimensional peacekeeping operations . the un is able to bring in people with subject matter expertise , native language skills , and knowledge of local customs to work for these operations , according to u.s. and un officials . leveraging multilateral assistance .