population . we restricted our review to only include beneficiaries who received at least one prescription written during fiscal year 2011 . we also matched the medicaid data to other external sources to identify potential fraud and improper payments . we compared the beneficiary and prescriber identity information shown in the medicaid claims data to the social security administration's ( ssa ) complete file of death information from october 2012 to determine whether any individuals were reportedly deceased before or when they purportedly prescribed , dispensed , or received prescription drugs covered by medicaid . to identify prescription - drug claims that might have been improperly processed and paid by the medicaid program because either the prescribers or beneficiaries were incarcerated , we matched our selected states' mmis data to the states' departments of corrections prisoner databases . prisoner data included individuals incarcerated for any period during fiscal year 2011 . for arizona , florida , and new jersey , we identified provider and beneficiary records for which the medicaid social security number ( ssn ) and names matched that of a person who was incarcerated in fiscal year 2011 in any of the four states . michigan did not provide ssns in its incarceration data . for michigan , we identified provider and beneficiary records for which the medicaid name and birth day exactly matched that of a person who was incarcerated in fiscal year 2011 in any of the four states . we then identified medicaid claims associated with the identified individuals by matching to the msis data . we compared the beginning service date of the claims to the individual's admittance and release date to identify all claims that occurred while the associated beneficiary or provider identity was incarcerated . additionally , we reviewed these claims' type of service to determine that none qualified for federal matching funds . it is not possible to determine from data matching alone whether these matches definitively identify recipients who were deceased or incarcerated without reviewing the facts and circumstances of each case . for example , it is possible that individuals can be erroneously listed in the full death master file . similarly , a provider or beneficiary may have an ssn , name , and date of birth similar to an individual in state prison records . alternatively , our matches may also understate the number of deceased or incarcerated individuals receiving assistance because matching would not detect applicants whose identifying information in the medicaid data differed slightly from their identifying information in other databases . to identify medicaid beneficiaries who received benefits in two or more states concurrently , we identified all beneficiary ssns that appeared in two or more states' mmis data in fiscal year 2011 . we then found all claims associated with the beneficiary identities . we conducted further analysis to determine the states in which each beneficiary identity appeared and the service ranges — first and last prescribed date — for those states . we defined a concurrent claim as a claim that occurred within the service range of a second state for the same beneficiary identity . for each claim , we compared its prescription date to the service ranges for the beneficiary identity to determine whether it was a concurrent claim .