error ! no text of specified style in document . chairman murkowski , ranking member cantwell , and members of the committee: thank you for the opportunity today to discuss preliminary observations from our ongoing work looking at the implementation of federal immigration laws in the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands ( cnmi ) . the 1976 covenant defining the political relationship between cnmi and the united states exempted the cnmi from certain federal immigration laws but reserved the right of the federal government to apply federal law in these exempted areas without the consent of the cnmi government . the consolidated natural resources act of 2008 amended the u.s. – cnmi covenant to establish federal control of cnmi immigration beginning in 2009 . the act established a transition period and special provisions for foreign visitors , investors , and workers . specifically , it required the u.s. department of homeland security ( dhs ) to establish a temporary work permit program for foreign workers and to reduce annually the number of permits issued , reducing them to zero by the end of the transition period — now set to occur on december 31 , 2019 . as part of the temporary work permit program , dhs collects a vocational education fee from prospective employers of those applying for special nonimmigrant visas and transfers these fees to the cnmi government for ongoing vocational programs provided by the cnmi educational entities . this testimony discusses preliminary observations from our ongoing work on ( 1 ) the potential economic impact of reducing the number of foreign workers to zero and ( 2 ) federal and cnmi efforts to address labor force challenges . in a subsequent report , we will also discuss the changes in cnmi's labor market since federally mandated minimum wage increases began . we plan to issue our final report in may 2017 . error ! no text of specified style in document . to evaluate the potential economic impact of reducing the number of foreign workers in the cnmi to zero and replacing them with domestic workers , we created a simulated mathematical model of how the cnmi's gross domestic product ( gdp ) would change if the number of foreign workers were reduced to zero . we also analyzed dhs data on the annual number of approved cnmi - only transitional worker ( cw - 1 ) permits by country of birth , occupation , and business from 2014 through 2016 . to evaluate the possible replacement of cw - 1 workers with domestic workers , we analyzed the number of people seeking employment in 2016 , in the context of labor requirements for the cnmi's planned development projects as of december 20 , 2016 . to assess federal and cnmi government efforts to address labor force challenges , we reviewed the cnmi's job training programs and a report generated through a consultative process specified in section 902 of the u.s. – cnmi covenant ( hereafter , the 902 report ) . for job training programs , we analyzed the use of cw - 1 vocational education fees that dhs transferred to the cnmi government in fiscal years 2012 through 2016 .