( see app . implications for the nuclear weapons program ( congressional research service - 95-1020f , sept. 29 , 1995 ) . strategic alignment: tracking our progress ( department of energy , sept. 5 , 1995 ) . energy r&d: shaping our nation's future in a competitive world ( final report of the task force on strategic energy research and development , june 1995 ) . alternative futures for the doe national laboratories ( task force on alternative futures for the national laboratories ( secretary of energy advisory board , feb. 1995 ) . the following are gao's comments on the department of energy's letter dated november 30 , 2001 . our response is included in the body of the report . in our report , we acknowledge and support doe's efforts to implement performance - based contracting practices and to competitively award more of its contracts . as suggested , we have revised our report to note that the department has not been required to compete contracts to manage its federally funded research and development centers . as we state in our report , our concern is that some of doe's largest contracts , notably those with the university of california to manage several national laboratories , have never been opened to competitive bidding . according to doe , the decisions related to the most recent contract extension with this university were based on "national security considerations " and were not "contract management decisions …" the benefits of competing contracts are widely accepted and espoused by doe in its own policies . recent interest shown by another university in competing for the sandia national laboratory contract when it expires in 2003 suggests that there may be other capable competitors , and that national security considerations do not inhibit doe from attracting new performers . we agree that doe sponsors many "unique" projects that contain significant research and development that can impact cost and schedule assumptions , and we have incorporated this comment in our report . nevertheless , we concur with doe that this circumstance should not be used as "an excuse for the poor performance in project management" that was cited in our report . we do not concur with doe that the department's strategic planning process has worked effectively to organize and integrate its diverse missions . as we said in our report , doe told us that its strategic plan is a composite of plans that guides the program activities of the department's four "business lines," each of which establishes its own objectives and management systems . acknowledging the unfocused nature of the department , the secretary is just now taking steps to define an overarching departmental objective for all programs and to expand nnsa's new planning , programming , budgeting and evaluation system department - wide . he is also creating a new office under the chief financial officer that "will analyze and evaluate plans , programs and budgets in relation to the department's objectives…" the department said that it expects this office will serve as the "linchpin" for making improvements in strategic planning in the future .