( app . iv provides information on bilateral debt relief that the united states has provided to countries under the hipc initiative. ) treasury , ida , and adf have agreed to a financing approach for mdri called early encashment , under which the u.s. government earns income for early replenishment payments to ida and adf . since the u.s. government is currently in arrears on its replenishment payments to ida14 , early encashment does not fully fund the current u.s. mdri commitment . we also estimate that u.s. early encashment income will be insufficient to fully finance future mdri debt relief . furthermore , the u.s. financing approach is more costly than other options . the u.s. government currently uses an early encashment approach to fund u.s. mdri obligations at both ida and adf . early encashment income is earned by ida and adf when the united states allows the ifi to draw funds on , or encash , its replenishment commitment early , rather than according to a standard encashment schedule that spans 9 years for ida and 10 years for adf . the standard encashment schedule represents the ifi's expected disbursement pattern of the funds committed during the 3- year replenishment period . treasury has agreed to allow ida and adf to encash the u.s. replenishment commitment over an accelerated 4-year period . since the early encashments exceed amounts required during the first 4 years under the regular 9-year or 10-year encashment schedule , ida and adf can invest these funds and earn income ( see app . v ) . ida and adf guarantee fixed discount rates that determine the amount of income countries using the early encashment approach will receive for full and timely encashments according to the accelerated schedule , regardless of ida's and adf's actual earnings on early encashments over the period . these amounts are then credited to the u.s. government and can be used toward paying the u.s. mdri commitment . treasury has separate agreements with ida and adf regarding the methodology used to estimate the amount of early encashment income that the united states will earn . the world bank requires that the u.s. ida14 replenishment be paid in full before early encashment income can be earned and used to fund mdri ; however , the united states is currently in arrears on its replenishment commitment . in recent years , congress has withheld a portion of the u.s. replenishment contribution to encourage the world bank to undertake specified reforms such as strengthened efforts to enhance transparency and combat corruption . in fiscal year 2006 , congress required that 20 percent of the funds appropriated to ida be withheld from disbursement until the secretary of the treasury reported to congress that the world bank had undertaken certain anticorruption reforms . in fiscal year 2006 , most of these funds were eventually disbursed pursuant to the requirements in the law ; however , there was a shortfall in fiscal year 2006 of approximately $41 million due to both the anti - corruption withholding provision and an across - the - board rescission . in fiscal year 2007 there was an additional rescission of about $9.5 million .