workforce . gao - 03-883 . washington , d.c.: september 10 , 2003 . information technology: homeland security needs to improve entry exit system expenditure planning . gao - 03-563 . washington , d.c.: june 9 , 2003 . high - skill training: grants from h - 1b visa fees meet specific workforce needs , but at varying skill levels . gao - 02-881 . washington , d.c.: september 20 , 2002 . immigration benefits: several factors impede timeliness of application processing . gao - 01-488 . washington , d.c.: may 4 , 2001 . h - 1b foreign workers: better controls needed to help employers and protect workers . gao / hehs - 00-157 . washington , d.c.: september 7 , 2000 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . justice did not have formal comments on our report . homeland security agreed with our recommendations , and stated that uscis intends to include labor's application case number in its new information technology system . labor questioned whether our recommendation for more stringent application review measures is supported by the low error rate that we found , as well as whether the benefits of instituting such measures would equal or exceed the added costs of implementing them . in addition , labor said that congress intentionally limited the scope of labor's application review in order to place the focus for achieving program integrity on uscis . we believe that labor is at risk of certifying h - 1b applications that contain more errors than were found in the scope of our review . for example , we checked only for employer identification numbers with invalid prefix codes , and did not look for other combinations of invalid numbers or data . therefore , we do not know the true magnitude of the error rate in the certification process . we continue to believe there are cost - effective methods that labor could use to check the applications more stringently that would enhance the integrity of the h - 1b process . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for information regarding this testimony , please contact sigurd r. nilsen , director , education , workforce , and income security issues , on 202-512-7215 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include: alicia puente cackley , gretta l. goodwin , amy j. anderson , pawnee a. davis , sheila mccoy and rachael c. valliere . h - 1b visa program: labor could improve its oversight and increase information sharing with homeland security . gao - 06-720 . washington , d.c.: june 22 , 2006 . homeland security: better management practices could enhance dhs's ability to allocate investigative resources . gao - 06-462t . washington , d.c.: march 28 , 2006 .