a few of these projects are discussed below . workforce challenge according to a 2003 report that seattle's local workforce board and the washington state hospital association produced for the health care sector panel , health care facilities throughout the state faced a critical lack of staff , including registered nurses , licensed practical nurses , and radiology technicians , among others . patients were turned away from 55 percent of the state's emergency departments because of nursing shortages . the health care workforce was retiring faster than it could be replaced , colleges throughout the state had long waiting lists for courses in health care fields , and up to 30 percent of students in some health care training programs were dropping out before completing their training . the academy classes are offered to incumbent and displaced engineers and technicians ( see photo ) . initiative staff identified the following as integral to collaboration: industry - knowledgeable staff: initiative staff became knowledgeable about the engineering competencies needed in the automotive industry , to help build credibility with employers . employer input into curriculum: employers have suggested changes to the courses and can provide information about their current and future workforce needs , initiative staff said . workforce challenge in 2007 , according to a state official , an automotive employer projected a need for about 500 electrical engineers with skills in designing hybrid vehicles . unable to find such electrical engineers locally , the company reported that they would need to either recruit them from overseas or send their workers abroad for training . more generally , the state recognized that growth in production of “green” mobility products such as electric cars created an increased need for workers trained to work on the new technology . the workforce investment board's role magma board members reported that the workforce board helped administer grants and managed the administration of magma . additionally , southeast michigan community alliance michigan works ! is the lead board for the six other workforce boards in the initiative , initiative staff reported . southeast michigan community alliance michigan works ! ( workforce investment board ) key federal and state support to fund the initiative , the southeast michigan community alliance michigan works ! applied for statewide grants , which came from wia governor's set - aside funds , according to initiative staff . staff said they also used wia formula dollars from several boards , employer contributions , and another state grant for incumbent worker training . reported results initiative staff reported the following benefits from the initiative: benefits for jobseekers or workers: according to initiative staff , 312 people completed the training from the fall of 2009 through january 2011 , including 30 dislocated workers , and 281 additional students had enrolled for 2011 summer / fall academy classes . benefits for employers: according to initiative staff , magma will serve 15 companies in the summer and fall of 2011 , including chrysler , ford , and general motors . initiative staff said they believe that , because employers continue to encourage their workers to participate in training , this is evidence that the process is meeting their needs . furthermore , employers continue to provide information on their training needs .