other partner activities . pepfar country programs are planned with consideration of other donors' and groups' activities in the countries , and therefore pepfar activities may not address all national strategy goals . in many pepfar countries a number of other bilateral and multilateral development partners also fund and implement programs to support the national program . country team officials noted that in planning pepfar programs , they coordinate with other partners so that pepfar and partner activities will complement , rather than duplicate , one another and together support the national program . for example , the pepfar malawi team explained that although the malawi national strategy contains a goal of expanding workplace programs on hiv and aids in the public and private sectors and civil society , the 2010 pepfar malawi cop does not include activities that directly address this goal because other donors and groups are implementing programs that address it . size of pepfar program . the portion of a national strategy supported by pepfar activities also depends in part on the size of the pepfar program in that country relative to other donors' activities in the country . for example , ogac and country team officials told us that pepfar is more likely to cover larger portions of the national strategy in former focus countries where pepfar is generally the largest donor of hiv / aids funds . this corresponds with our finding that in the 2010 cops for former focus countries uganda and vietnam , where u.s. funding makes up a large share of the national hiv / aids response — 75 percent in uganda and 59 percent in vietnam from 2004 to 2008 — the activity descriptions directly address most national strategy goals and objectives . ogac and pepfar country team officials also noted that in non - focus countries , pepfar programs may support the achievement of priority goals , rather than cover every national strategy goal . for instance , in the non - focus countries cambodia and malawi , where u.s. funding makes up a smaller share of the national hiv / aids response — 47 percent in cambodia and 22 percent in malawi from 2004 to 2008 — we found that pepfar activities generally supported national strategy goals by filling resource gaps and focusing on interventions in which country teams have technical expertise . policy restrictions . pepfar may not support particular activities because of pepfar policy restrictions or other conflicts . for example , according to country team officials in vietnam , until recently pepfar funds could not be used to support needle exchange programs for intravenous drug users . as a result , pepfar has not supported this component of vietnam's national strategy . pepfar programs also may involve activities that are not specifically addressed in the national strategy but that support national strategy goals . in the four countries we visited , pepfar officials , government officials , donors , and pepfar implementing partners generally agreed that national strategies outline broad principles , goals , and objectives rather than specific programs or activities . according to these officials , the general nature of the national strategies allows flexibility to support specific programs to achieve these goals and respond to countries' evolving hiv / aids epidemics .