program . the guidance is directed at epa permit writers in states where epa directly implements the program ; the guidance does not address state - run uic programs ( including five of the six states in our review ) . epa's draft guidance is applicable to any oil and gas wells using diesel in hydraulic fracturing ( not just coalbed methane wells ) . the draft guidance provides recommendations related to permit applications , area of review ( for other nearby wells ) , well construction , permit duration , and well closure . sdwa also gives epa authority to issue orders when the agency receives information about present or likely contamination of a public water system or an underground source of drinking water that may present an imminent and substantial endangerment to human health . in december 2010 , epa used this authority to issue an emergency administrative order to an operator in texas alleging that the company's oil and gas production facilities near fort worth , texas , caused or contributed to methane contamination in two nearby private drinking water wells . epa contended that this methane contamination posed an explosion hazard and therefore was an imminent and substantial threat to human health . epa's order required the operator to take six actions , specifically: ( 1 ) notify epa whether it intended to comply with the order , ( 2 ) provide replacement water supplies to landowners , ( 3 ) install meters to monitor for the risk of explosion at the affected homes , ( 4 ) conduct a survey of any additional private water wells within 3,000 feet of the oil and gas production facilities , ( 5 ) develop a plan to conduct soil and indoor air monitoring at the affected dwellings , and ( 6 ) develop a plan to investigate how methane flowed into the aquifer and private drinking water wells . the operator disputed the validity of epa's order and noted that the order does not provide any way for the company to challenge epa's findings . nevertheless , the operator implemented the first three actions epa listed in the order . in january 2011 , epa sued the operator in federal district court , seeking to enforce the remaining three provisions of the order . in march 2011 , the regulatory agency that oversees oil and gas development in texas held a hearing examining the operator's possible role in the contamination of the water wells and issued an opinion in which it concluded that the operator had not caused the contamination . in march 2012 , epa withdrew the original emergency administrative order , and the operator agreed to continue monitoring 20 private water wells near its production sites for 1 year . according to epa officials , resolving the lawsuit allows the agency to shift its focus away from litigation and toward a joint epa - operator effort in monitoring . for more details about sdwa , please see appendix ii . to restore and maintain the nation's waters , cwa authorizes epa to , among other things , regulate pollutant discharges and respond to spills affecting rivers and streams .