identity protection . identifies risks and reduces vulnerabilities of identity information , enhances services and reduces burden and harm to identity theft victims , and increases collaboration and communication with irs stakeholders and external partners . incident management . assesses and reduces irs data loss incidents , promotes protection of personal identity information by irs employees , and informs taxpayers of identity theft risks discovered by the irs . online fraud detection and prevention . furthermore , for the measures to be in place in time to assess the initiatives performance during the 2010 filing season , timely action will be required . the measures will need to be developed early enough to give irs time to develop a plan for capturing the data needed to implement the measures . the answers to questions such as those listed above were not available when irs designed its identity theft initiatives . irs did not have an empirical basis for knowing what approach , such as having irs activities rather than ipsu resolve cases , would work best . furthermore , there have been some glitches with implementation . pipds officials told us that they are aware that some irs activities have not been consistent in how they applied the identity theft indicators , causing some discrepancies in how returns were run through the screening procedures . for example , some activities would put the indicator on the taxpayer's account before ensuring that the information by the identity thief was removed from the taxpayer's account . therefore , this resulted in legitimate taxpayer's returns failing the business rule screening and may have delayed the taxpayer's refund . in june 2009 , pipds officials subsequently met with the different irs activities to revise their procedures for placing indicators on taxpayer accounts before the 2010 filing season . our own review of the effectiveness of the identity theft indicator and screening process also uncovered some possible issues . we compared irs data from pipds and ci to test whether irs issued refunds to suspected identity thieves in cases where there was already a 501 or 506 identity theft indicator on the account of the innocent taxpayer . we used the limited data available for 2009 because we wanted to look at cases handled after the new initiatives were put in place . as shown in table 5 , we found that irs failed to prevent a fraudulent refund 15 times in early 2009 even though the account had an identity theft indicator . during the same period , ci stopped 3,281 refunds , 14 percent of which had an identity theft indicator on the associated taxpayer account . our analysis covers only part of the year and the initiatives are still new , so it is not possible to know whether this represents the long - term effectiveness of the initiative or not . further , according to tas officials , the number of tas cases that involved identity theft issues in the first half of fiscal year 2009 was more than twice as high as it was in the same period in fiscal year 2008 .