management of the institutes varies by school . some confucius institutes at u.s. schools are part of an academic department or an administrative office , while others report directly to the school president or other school leadership . confucius institute personnel generally consist of a confucius institute director or directors , confucius institute teachers , and a board of directors . at the 10 case study schools that were part of our review , the confucius institute director was a u.s. school employee — either a school administrator , faculty member , or professional hired to manage the confucius institute . in addition , several case study schools had a chinese assistant director , who reported to the confucius institute director from the united states , and often was an employee at the chinese partner university . in february 2019 , we reported that officials we interviewed from case study schools stated that confucius institutes' benefits include opportunities for schools to forge international connections and receive funding and other resources for china - related programs . these officials noted that because hanban pays the salaries of confucius institute teachers who teach language and assist with chinese programs at schools , sparing the schools these costs , these schools could offer chinese language courses even when enrollment was low . case study school officials also stated that confucius institutes provide valuable resources and opportunities to increase knowledge of and exposure to china and chinese culture within the school and in the broader community . case study school officials , researchers , and others we interviewed also offered various perspectives on whether having confucius institutes on campuses could bring about undue chinese influence . these parties discussed the potential for or absence of chinese interference in events and activities at the institute and on campus . they also expressed views on confucius institute teacher hiring , and quality of those teachers . several school officials , researchers , and others we interviewed expressed concerns that hosting a confucius institute could limit events or activities critical of china — including events at the institute and elsewhere on campus . two officials who expressed these concerns were faculty members at one case study school who have not applied for confucius institute funding for a research project because they believed hanban would not approve of the topic . in contrast , officials at multiple case study schools noted that u.s. school faculty members make all decisions regarding conference themes , guest speakers , and topics for events at their institute . officials at some schools offered examples of events and activities their confucius institute had sponsored that addressed topics that could be considered critical of china . specifically , they reported hosting a conference discussing intellectual property in relation to china and events on tibet , territorial disputes in the south china sea , and religion in china . in addition , multiple researchers and others we spoke with expressed concerns with the confucius institute teacher selection process whereby hanban or the chinese partner school accepts initial applications from potential confucius institute teachers and proposes candidates to the u.s. school .