assessments . state and usaid officials said that they can identify needs by conducting assessments of the rule of law in some of the countries we reviewed . they also sometimes contract with other organizations to conduct these assessments as part of the broader contract for a program . doj noted that they have used these assessments as an initial baseline against which to evaluate progress , identify critical local assistance needs , inform development of mission strategies such as the ics and cdcs , and prepare for future activities . according to u.s. officials , program implementing partners can also use assessments to prepare for specific projects and activities according to the terms of grants and contracts with u.s. government agencies . for example , according to officials: in colombia , state concluded a letter of agreement with the pan american development foundation to conduct an assessment of the function of the local justice sector . following this assessment , inl officials said they funded a project with the foundation to strengthen the capacity of colombia's attorney general to address issues related to the original assessment . also in colombia , usaid's justice for sustainable peace program conducted a local justice study with civil society organizations and academic experts in 45 municipalities and also conducted six regional political economy analyses during the initial phase of the project , among other analytical tools that shaped the project's implementation . in the philippines , a usaid assessment of closed cases and similar studies supported by the world bank showed that judicial inefficiency was the most serious concern of litigants . subsequently , usaid officials said they designed and funded a project intended to , among other things , address the two most significant results of inefficiency: docket congestion and court delay . they did this through supporting case inventories and disposition , streamlined litigation procedures , and automated case management . late in fiscal year 2018 , usaid also funded a project to improve access to justice by increasing access to legal information and assistance , and strengthening formal and informal alternative dispute resolution mechanisms . host government consultation . u.s. officials said they have also involved the host government in identifying rule of law needs . for example: in liberia , usaid worked closely with the liberian government while preparing the 5-year cdcs to best capture local views on justice sector needs , according to usaid officials . in the philippines , doj followed up judicial and prosecutor trainings with informal conversations to elicit local official views on rule of law needs and gaps , according to doj officials . according to usaid officials , usaid and the government of the philippines convened interagency meetings consisting of justice system stakeholders to jointly develop the joint country action plan which includes rule of law priorities and programmatic activities . in colombia , usaid and the colombian ombudsman's office jointly identify overlapping areas of interest and develop programs that fit these priorities , according to usaid officials . interagency review . u.s. officials described collaborative efforts used at missions to identify local rule of law needs .