recycled airbags are safe . advocates of this position — generally recycling organizations and some insurance companies — maintain that reusing nondeployed oem airbags is a viable , economical , and safe alternative to using new , more costly oem airbags when the recycled airbags are properly matched , handled , and installed . the advocates add that lower - income drivers may not be able to afford to replace their airbags with new , more expensive oem airbags . therefore , recyclers are creating a market in which drivers can purchase replacement airbags that are 50 percent to 70 percent cheaper than new airbags . we identified seven studies of aftermarket crash parts or recycled airbags , but their results do not conclusively resolve the issue of safety . five studies — one by consumer advocates , one by an auto manufacturer , and three by the insurance industry — examined the use of aftermarket crash parts . two studies — one by the recycling industry and the other by an insurance company — focused on the safety of recycled airbags . although these studies are useful , they do not resolve the debate over the safety of aftermarket crash parts and recycled airbags because they reach different conclusions and are limited in number and scope . in february 1999 , consumer reports published the results of its study and fueled the debate on the quality of aftermarket crash parts . consumer reports compared oem and aftermarket bumpers and capa - certified fenders for a 1993 honda accord and a 1993 ford taurus . it tested fender corrosion resistance , bumper protection , and the overall quality of the parts' fit . consumer reports found that capa - certified aftermarket fenders rusted more quickly and did not always fit properly . the report also stated that aftermarket bumpers did not fit properly and did not provide sufficient protection in low - speed collisions . aftermarket crash parts are safe . according to this position — held generally by insurance companies and aftermarket manufacturers — aftermarket crash parts are cosmetic only and do not affect vehicle safety . the debate on the use of recycled airbags is also divided . general opinions include the following: recycled airbags may be unsafe . advocates of this position — generally oems , some insurance companies , and body shop owners — maintain that deployed airbags should be replaced only with new oem airbags . advocates of this position maintain that airbags are a vital safety feature and the potential risks of recycled airbags should preclude replacing a deployed airbag with anything other than a new airbag . nhtsa does not approve vehicles or equipment . instead , federal law establishes a “self - certification” process under which each manufacturer is responsible for certifying that its products meet all applicable safety standards . the law also gives nhtsa the authority to investigate possible safety - related defects , to decide whether a defect exists , and to order a manufacturer to notify consumers and to remedy any defect . appendix i provides a detailed discussion of our scope and methodology . crash parts are generally made of sheet metal or plastic and installed on the exterior of a motor vehicle .