02-06 , was inapplicable . that was not our intent nor the focus of our review . as stated in our report , the problems we encountered indicate that additional emphasis should be placed on doj's financial management policies and procedures to minimize errors in recording hcfac transactions . doj did state that it will continue its standing practice of continually educating its staff and reinforcing its financial management policies and procedures to minimize errors in recording hcfac and all other transactions within doj . however , based on our findings , this standing practice needs modification in order to bolster its effectiveness . doj also stated that our reference to the findings for departmental systems as cited in the audit report: u.s. department of justice annual financial statement fiscal year 2001 , report no . to address doj's concerns , we clarified the report to cite problems that its financial statement auditors found at entities within doj that process hcfac transactions . finally , regarding our recommendation to both hhs and doj to assess the feasibility of tracking cost savings and expenditures attributable to hcfac activities by the various federal programs affected , hhs / oig stated in its written comments that it had previously considered alternatives that would allow it to track and attribute cost savings and expenditures but had identified obstacles to doing so . at the same time , hhs / oig agreed with our recommendation to perform an assessment of tracking cost savings and expenditures by program , which is critical to developing effective performance measures . however , doj stated that it is neither practical nor beneficial to track cost savings or non - medicare expenditures associated with hcfac enforcement activities . without capturing such information , the congress and other decision makers do not have the ability to fully assess the effectiveness of the hcfac program . therefore , we continue to believe that , at a minimum , doj should study this further , as hhs has agreed to do . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of hhs , the attorney general , and other interested parties . copies will be made available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9508 or by e - mail at calboml@gao.gov or kay l. daly , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-9312 or by e - mail at dalykl@gao.gov . key contributors to this assignment are listed in appendix iv . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products .