ii ) . in these comments , cms identified actions it is taking or plans to take to address our recommendations and stated that effective management of it investments is a critical priority at the agency . cms contended that many of the agency's improvements to its it investment management process were not fully reflected in the report , and took exception with the need for up - to - date , documented processes to ensure consistency . concerning our description of progress in implementing investment management processes , cms commented that the report indicates that the agency has only established 2 out of 27 key practices needed to manage investments as a portfolio . component leads . these individuals provide support in the it investment management process by serving as liaisons between the office of information services and individual project managers . component leads are to assist project managers in understanding cms's investment management process and other operational policies and processes . they can also provide project managers with key contacts for various it services that project owners may require during implementation of a project . in the spring of 2005 , cms implemented a new budget formulation process and used it to select its it investments . this process begins with an information request from the cio asking that each component submit information on all of its investments , both new and ongoing . this information is to include ( 1 ) a score sheet for each investment that shows how it compared with prescribed criteria , such as alignment with business drivers and it strategic goals , and ( 2 ) a prioritized list of all investments for the component . for new investments , the components also are to submit an it fact sheet ( an investment proposal ) that the itirb support staff ; the enterprise architecture group ; and , ultimately , the board review to determine if the need for the new investment is justified . if the need is found to be justified , project managers receive funding to develop a business case analysis ( smaller projects may not require such a document ) , which goes through the same review process as the it fact sheet . the itirb support staff review all information submitted in response to the information request and prepare it for the escs' review . the escs reevaluate the investments against the criteria , making adjustments to the scoring if necessary , and make funding recommendations to the board . the itirb makes strategic and funding recommendations regarding cms's it capital investment portfolio to cms's chief operating officer who , in turn , provides recommendations to the cms's office of financial management for integration into the agency's overall budget . figure 2 illustrates cms's process for selecting its internal it investments . to date , the itirb's role in controlling ( overseeing ) it investments has been primarily limited to those associated with the mma and revitalization initiatives . according to cms officials , efforts to define procedures for the board to control all internal investments , in accordance with the responsibilities described in its charter , are currently under way . the itirb plays no role in approving and monitoring state medicaid it investments .