predecessor contract . the contract in place prior to the award of a bridge contract . follow - on contract . a longer - term contract that follows a bridge contract for the same or similar services . this contract can be competitively awarded or awarded on a sole - source basis . contracts , orders , and extensions ( both competitive and noncompetitive ) are included in our definition of a “bridge contract” because the focus of the definition is on the intent of the contract , order , or extension . dod and some of its components , including the navy , the defense logistics agency ( dla ) , and the defense information systems agency ( disa ) , have established their own bridge contract definitions and policies . we verified , using our definition of bridge contracts as criteria , that 13 of 142 contracts and orders in our generalizable sample were bridge contracts based on reviews of j&as , limited source justifications , or exceptions to fair opportunity , among other documents . in addition , we found two additional bridge contracts related to our generalizable sample while conducting our in - depth review , bringing the total number of bridge contracts we identified during this review to 15 . the u.s. special operations command ( socom ) placed an approximately 8-month , $1 million order for radio spare parts and cited national security as the reason for a noncompetitive award . we estimate that about 8 percent of contracts and orders above $150,000 in fiscal year 2016 at dod , dhs , and hhs were bridge contracts . consistent with our october 2015 findings , agencies we reviewed face continued challenges with oversight of bridge contracts , based on 15 contracts and orders we reviewed in - depth . for example , we found that in 9 of the 15 cases , bridge contracts were associated with additional bridges not apparent in the documentation related to the contract and order we reviewed , such as a j&a , and corresponded with longer periods of performance and higher contract values than initially apparent . agency officials cited a variety of reasons for needing bridge contracts , including acquisition planning challenges , source selection challenges , and bid protests . based on our generalizable sample , we estimate that about 8 percent of contracts and orders above $150,000 in fiscal year 2016 at dod , dhs , and hhs were bridge contracts . we found that the bridge contracts we reviewed were often longer than initially apparent from our review of related documentation , such as a j&a , and sometimes spanned multiple years . bridge contracts can be a useful tool in certain circumstances to avoid a gap in providing products and services , but they are typically envisioned to be used for short periods of time . when we conducted an in - depth review of the bridge contracts , such as by reviewing the contract files for the predecessor , bridge , and follow - contracts , we found that in most cases , these involved one or more bridges that spanned longer periods and corresponded with higher contract values than initially apparent .