§ 2687 thresholds . table 2 describes each military service's guidance and the requirements to evaluate any effect on civilian personnel . in addition to the requirement to provide data on the effect on civilian personnel , each service's basing decision process includes legal reviews of basing decisions , which , according to service officials , occur at multiple stages throughout the process and ensure compliance with 10 u.s.c . § 2687 as well as all other applicable laws and policies . service attorneys told us that during reviews of basing actions , if compliance questions arise there is coordination with osd attorneys to ensure decisions are consistent across the services and comply with all applicable laws . for example , according to officials , service and osd attorneys are currently discussing how to interpret a provision added to 10 u.s.c . § 2687 in january 2013 that states that no action may be taken to close or realign a military installation within 5 years after the date on which a decision is made to reduce the authorized civilian personnel at that installation below 300 . on the basis of our interviews with service and osd attorneys , there are variations in how to interpret this provision . in the view of osd and air force officials , the new provision is retrospective — that is , any closure or realignment occurring after january 2013 would need to be evaluated to determine whether a service had taken action to reduce civilian positions below the threshold during the previous 5 years . conversely , army , navy , and marine corps officials interpret the statute as prospective — that is , if any installation after january 2013 reduces its civilians below 300 , dod is prohibited from closing or realigning that installation for the next 5 years . at the time of our review osd officials said that they were informally discussing the statute with the services as it relates to proposed realignments and closures ; however , osd officials stated that they have no immediate plans to issue clarifying guidance and stated that generally they play a minimal role in determining how the services manage their organizational needs through basing actions . § 2687 establishes congressional notification and waiting - period requirements that dod must meet when implementing closures or certain realignments , dod may close or realign installations without being subject to those requirements if the proposed action falls below specific thresholds . specifically , closures and realignments that trigger congressional notification and waiting include any: closure of any installation with 300 or more direct - hire permanent dod civilian authorized positions ( this includes all authorized positions , regardless of whether they are vacant or filled ) ; or realignment of any installation with 300 or more direct - hire permanent dod civilian authorized positions ( vacant or filled ) , if the realignment will involve a reduction by ( 1 ) 1,000 or more civilian positions , or ( 2 ) 50 percent or more of the total civilian authorized positions . according to service officials , they undertake hundreds of basing actions each year that do not trigger the requirements in 10 u.s.c .