we reviewed pub . 109-461 , section 502 , to identify the statutorily mandated requirement that va set its own goals for vosb and sdvosb subcontracting activities , and to identify the requirement that va confirm reported subcontracting activity . we conducted interviews with osdbu to assess va's progress in establishing a review mechanism of prime contractors' subcontracts with sdvosbs and other vosbs . finally , we obtained and reviewed va form 0896a – – which is the form that va intends to use to implement its subcontracting review mechanism . we conducted this performance audit from october 2007 through may 2010 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we evaluated the accuracy and completeness of this analysis by obtaining data from va on contracting dollars awarded to the department of the interior , the general services administration , the department of the navy's space and naval warfare systems center , and the u.s. army corps of engineers . to evaluate the challenges , if any , va faced in meeting its prime contracting goals for vosbs and sdvosbs , we reviewed previous congressional hearing transcripts that discussed va's challenges in meeting its contracting goals as well as emerging challenges . for example , va's continued success in contracting with vosbs and sdvosbs has coincided with difficulties in meeting other small business goals , such as wosb and hubzone goals . beginning january 1 , 2009 , agreements into which va enters with federal agencies to acquire goods or services on va's behalf must include language requiring the agencies to comply , to the maximum extent feasible , with va's vosb and sdvosb contracting goals and preferences when acquiring goods or services . we found that one interagency agreement into which va entered after january 1 , 2009 , did not contain the required language . this sample contained approximately the same proportion of sdvosbs as did the full study population . we conducted the file review at cve's offices in washington , d.c. , during the week of november 16 , 2009 , and reviewed both electronic and paper files . because we followed a probability procedure based on random selections , our sample is only one of a large number of samples that we might have drawn . since each sample could have provided different estimates , we express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample's results as 95 percent confidence internal ( plus or minus 10 percentage points ) . this is the interval that would contain the actual population value for 95 percent of the samples we could have drawn . all percentage estimates from our sample have 95 percent confidence intervals within plus or minus 10 percentage points of the estimate . we created a data collection instrument based on requirements from cve's verification procedures , pretested the instrument on sample businesses , and then reviewed each business' file according to the finalized instrument .