gao - 06-401 . washington , d.c.: march 31 , 2006 . these carriers also generally own all program assets . as a result , if a carrier's contract with an employer was not renewed , the carrier would usually be required by its contract to continue insuring those individuals for whom it issued policies . several large carriers dominated the long - term care insurance coverage sold in the individual and group markets , as of december 31 , 2005 . while the long - term care insurance industry experienced 18 percent annual growth in the number of policies sold from 1987 through 2002 , the industry has experienced a downturn in more recent years , according to industry experts . how do the marketing efforts for the federal long term care insurance program compare with those for other long - term care insurance plans ? how does the federal long term care insurance program's claims experience , updated to reflect the program's fourth year , compare with initial expectations ? to obtain information on the profit structure of the federal long term care insurance program , we interviewed officials at opm and partners and reviewed relevant documents , including the contract between opm and partners . we limited our review to the payments that were defined in this contract as profits . to obtain comparable information on any profit structures used in the private sector , we interviewed officials from four of the nation's largest long - term care insurance carriers — bankers life and casualty company , genworth financial , john hancock life insurance company , and metropolitan life insurance company . all four insurance carriers sold products in the individual market , and two of the four — john hancock life insurance company and metropolitan life insurance company — were also among the five largest carriers that sold products in the group market . we also interviewed benefits officials from four states — california , new jersey , north carolina , and texas — that offered long - term care insurance to state employees and certain other groups , and we interviewed industry experts and actuaries regarding the profit structures used in the industry . to obtain information on marketing efforts for the federal long term care insurance program , we interviewed officials from opm and partners and reviewed marketing plans for the federal program . to obtain comparable information on the marketing efforts used in the private sector , we interviewed actuaries , industry experts , officials from the four insurance carriers , and benefits officials from the four states . to describe how the federal program's claims experience , updated to reflect the program's fourth year , compared with initial expectations as established by partners in its contract with opm , we analyzed data from partners on the number of enrollees , the number of paid claims , and the amount of claim payments made for the federal program from april 1 , 2005 , through march 31 , 2006 . we also included data presented in our previous report regarding the claims experience of the federal program in its first 3 years , from april 1 , 2002 , through march 31 , 2005 .