gao - 09-306sp . washington , d.c.: march 2 , 2009 . nasa is implementing this architecture under the constellation program . among the first major efforts of this program are the developments of new space flight systems — including the ares i crew launch vehicle and the orion crew exploration vehicle . ares i and orion are currently targeted for operation no later than 2015 ( see fig . as illustrated by figure 1 above , the constellation program , including the ares i and orion projects , is approaching the end of the formulation phase of nasa's acquisition life - cycle for spaceflight programs and projects . these include incorporating a passive damping system inside the first stage solid rocket booster aft skirt that will act like a shock absorber during launch ; adding a composite structure and springs between the first and second stages to isolate the upper stage and crew vehicle from the first stage ; and could possibly use the upper stage propellant fuel tanks to offset thrust oscillation in the first stage . officials said that nasa will be unable to verify the success of solutions until thrust oscillation occurs during an integrated flight . officials noted that because thrust oscillation is not expected to occur in every flight , it is difficult to forecast when the solutions will be verified . the orion vehicle requires a large - scale ablative heat shield , at the base of the spacecraft , to survive reentry from earth orbit . these heat shields burn up , or ablate , in a controlled fashion , transporting heat away from the crew module during its descent through the atmosphere . nasa is using an ablative material derived from the substance used in the apollo program . after some difficulties , nasa was successful in recreating the material . because it uses a framework with many honeycomb - shaped cells , each of which must be individually filled without voids or imperfections , it may be difficult to repeatedly manufacture to consistent standards . according to program officials , during the apollo program the cells were filled by hand . the contractor plans to automate the process for the orion thermal protection system , but this capability is still being developed . the common bulkhead separates the hydrogen and oxygen fuel within the ares i upper stage fuel tank . the initial ares i design employed a simpler two - tank configuration with lower manufacturing costs but did not meet mass requirements . according to project officials , the common bulkhead represents the critical path in both the development and manufacturing of the upper stage . lessons learned from the apollo program indicate that common bulkheads are complex and difficult to manufacture and recommend against their use . according to nasa officials , the difficulty of designing and manufacturing common bulkheads stems from the sheer size of components and the tight tolerances to which they must be manufactured . to accelerate the manufacturing process nasa is exploring using an oven with a vacuum bag instead of an autoclave to bond and cure the metallic and composite materials used in the manufacture of the common bulkhead . if this process proves unsuccessful , the program may encounter schedule delays .