this is consistent with our recommendation . as we state in our report , the interagency agreement should be a corrective action to prevent the inadvertent public disclosure of sensitive information in future draft declarations or other documents prepared for iaea by multiple u.s. agencies , rather than addressing broader , governmentwide standards on how to mark and handle all unclassified but sensitive information . the house of representatives' sergeant at arms did not comment on our recommendations but provided three points of clarification regarding the office of security's role in reviewing and transmitting the draft declaration . iaea was not the originating agency for the information . as a result , it continues to be our view that the director of the house office of security did not provide the correct advice to the house clerk on who she should have contacted to obtain authorization on releasing sbu information . as we noted in our report , u.s. agencies that prepared the draft declaration placed the iaea marking on the document . the presidential message explained that the draft declaration was prepared by the united states and would be submitted to iaea . first , the house sergeant at arms stated that , contrary to what we stated in our draft report , the house security office made no determination as to whether the draft document could be published and did not provide the house clerk's office with any direction or legal advice regarding this matter . second , according to the house sergeant at arms , the house security office properly advised the house clerk's office to contact iaea regarding the handling of the draft document . third , the house sergeant at arms stated that the house security office did not need to take control of the draft document , nor was the security office requested to take control of the document . in addition , the security office does not have the authority to order a house of representatives office or entity to store a document with the security office . regarding the first point , we believe that given the sensitive nature of the draft document — and commensurate with its role and responsibilities — the house security office should have , at a minimum , raised concerns with the house clerk's office about publicly releasing 266 pages of information on u.s. nuclear sites and activities and advised the house clerk not to print the document without explicit authorization from the agencies that designated the information sbu . while we do not dispute the statement that the house security office did not provide any advice or direction regarding the printing of the document , we believe that it would have been appropriate for this office to play a more assertive role because the house clerk sought advice and guidance in determining whether the document could be printed . however , based on these comments , we modified the text of the report to reflect the claims made by the house security office . specifically , we removed reference to the security office on page 16 to avoid inferences that the security office provided direction or legal advice to the clerk's office that it could print the document .