mitigation evaluation . mitigation evaluation is the identification of mitigation alternatives to assess the effectiveness of the alternatives . the alternatives should be evaluated for their likely effect on risk and their cost . mitigation selection . mitigation selection involves a management decision on which mitigation alternatives should be implemented among alternatives , taking into account risk , costs , and the effectiveness of mitigation alternatives . selection among mitigation alternatives should be based upon preconsidered criteria . there are as of yet no clearly preferred selection criteria , although potential factors might include risk reduction , net benefits , equality of treatment , or other stated values . mitigation selection does not necessarily involve prioritizing all resources to the highest - risk area , but in attempting to balance overall risk and available resources . risk mitigation — risk mitigation is the implementation of mitigation actions , in priority order and commensurate with assessed risk ; depending on its risk tolerance , an entity may choose not to take any action to mitigate risk ( this is characterized as risk acceptance ) . if the entity does choose to take action , such action falls into three categories: ( 1 ) risk avoidance ( exiting activities that expose the entity to risk ) , ( 2 ) risk reduction ( implementing actions that reduce likelihood or impact of risk ) , and ( 3 ) risk sharing ( implementing actions that reduce likelihood or impact by transferring or sharing risk ) . in each category , the entity implements actions as part of an integrated “systems” approach , with built - in redundancy to help address residual risk ( the risk that remains after actions have been implemented ) . the systems approach consists of taking actions in personnel ( eg , training , deployment ) , processes ( eg , operational procedures ) , technology ( eg , software or hardware ) , infrastructure ( eg , institutional or operational — such as port configurations ) , and governance ( eg , management and internal control and assurance ) . in selecting actions , the entity assesses their costs and benefits , where the amount of risk reduction is weighed against the cost involved and identifies potential financing options for the actions chosen . monitoring and evaluation of risk mitigation — monitoring and evaluation of risk mitigation entails the assessment of the functioning of actions against strategic objectives and performance measures to make necessary changes . monitoring and evaluation includes , where and when appropriate , peer review and testing and validation ; and an evaluation of the impact of the actions on future options ; and identification of unintended consequences that , in turn , would need to be mitigated . monitoring and evaluation helps ensure that the entire risk management process remains current and relevant , and reflects changes in ( 1 ) the effectiveness of the actions and ( 2 ) the risk environment in which the entity operates — risk is dynamic and threats are adaptive . the risk management process should be repeated periodically , restarting the “loop” of assessment , mitigation , and monitoring and evaluation .