adequacy . a plan is adequate if it complies with applicable planning guidance , planning assumptions are valid and relevant , and the concept of operations identifies and addresses critical tasks specific to the plan's objectives . completeness . a plan is complete if it incorporates major actions , objectives , and tasks to be accomplished . the complete plan addresses the personnel and resources required and sound concepts for how those will be deployed , employed , sustained , and demobilized . it also addresses timelines and criteria for measuring success in achieving objectives and the desired end state . including all those who could be affected in the planning process can help ensure that a plan is complete . consistency and standardization of products . standardized planning processes and products foster consistency , interoperability , and collaboration , therefore , emergency operations plans for disaster response should be consistent with all other related planning documents . feasibility . a plan is considered feasible if the critical tasks can be accomplished with the resources available internally or through mutual aid , immediate need for additional resources from other sources ( in the case of a local plan , from state or federal partners ) are identified in detail and coordinated in advance , and procedures are in place to integrate and employ resources effectively from all potential providers . flexibility . flexibility and adaptability are promoted by decentralized decisionmaking and by accommodating all hazards ranging from smaller - scale incidents to wider national contingencies . interoperability and collaboration . a plan is interoperable and collaborative if it identifies other stakeholders in the planning process with similar and complementary plans and objectives , and supports regular collaboration focused on integrating with those stakeholders' plans to optimize achievement of individual and collective goals and objectives in an incident . under the post - katrina emergency management reform act , fema has responsibility for leading the nation in developing a national preparedness system . fema has developed standards — the comprehensive preparedness guide 101 — that call for validation , review , and testing of emergency operations plans ( eop ) , . according to the comprehensive preparedness guide 101 , plans should be reviewed for conformity to applicable regulatory requirements and the standards of federal or state agencies ( as appropriate ) and for their usefulness in practice . exercises offer the best way , short of emergencies , to determine if an eop is understood and “works.” further , conducting a “tabletop” exercise involving the key representatives of each tasked organization can serve as a practical and useful means to help validate the plan . fema's guidance also suggests that officials use functional and full - scale emergency management exercises to evaluate eops . plan reviews by stakeholders also allow responsible agencies to suggest improvements in an eop based on their accumulated experience . the exercise program should be tailored to the range of hazards that confronts the jurisdiction . we reported in april 2009 that fema lacked a comprehensive approach to managing the development of emergency preparedness policies and plans . specifically , we reported that fema had completed many policy and planning documents , but a number of others were not yet completed .