sffas no . 50 permits each reporting entity to use alternative methods when presenting financial statements , or one or more line items , ( 1 ) for the first time or ( 2 ) after a period during which existing systems could not provide the information necessary for producing financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles ( gaap ) without using alternative methods . sffas no . 50 permits reporting entities to apply an alternative method only once per line item after the period during which the existing systems could not provide the information for producing financial statements in accordance with gaap . as of march 2018 , the navy has not made an unreserved assertion attesting that its opening balances of g - pp&e are reported in accordance with sffas no . after opening balances are established using an alternative valuation method , federal accounting standards require historical cost to be used in valuing g - pp&e acquired or constructed . dod already uses plant replacement value ( prv ) for decision making and management purposes and has reported that it will use prv to develop opening balances for the navy's buildings . navy is also currently using prv ( an allowable alternative valuation method under sffas no . 50 ) for financial statement reporting of its buildings and plans to do so until the don makes an unreserved assertion that its financial statements or its g - pp&e line item or reported assets classes are presented fairly in accordance with gaap . prv represents an estimate of the replacement cost in current year dollars to design and construct a facility to replace an existing facility at the same location . as such , the replacement ( or construction ) cost factor , generally applied to buildings as a dollar amount multiplied by square footage , is also indexed to increase or decrease the amount to account for other variations in costs for different geographic areas or complexity of the facility . once the calculation prescribed by the formula has resulted in prv , accumulated depreciation is computed based on the placed in service date . figure 1 shows an example of the prv formula being applied to an enlisted housing facility . the valuation adjustment factors , as shown below , vary by location and use of the building . acquisitions and capital improvements made to existing buildings during subsequent financial periods are to be recorded at the actual cost of obtaining the asset or improvement and placing it into service . internal control activities , as defined in standards for internal control in the federal government , are the policies , procedures , and techniques that enforce management's directives to achieve the entity's objectives and address related risks . a deficiency in internal control exists when the design , implementation , or operation of a control does not allow management or personnel , in the normal course of performing their assigned functions , to achieve control objectives and address related risks .