we commend sec and nasd for taking these actions . the disclosures being proposed by sec and nasd are intended to ensure that investors have information that they can use to evaluate the potential conflicts their broker - dealer may have when recommending particular fund shares to investors . however , such disclosures would likely also require improving related investor education programs to better ensure that investors understand the importance of these new disclosures . sec has also taken another action to address a practice that creates conflicts of interest between fund shareholders and broker - dealers or fund advisers . on february 11 , 2004 , sec proposed prohibiting fund advisers from using trading commissions as compensation to broker - dealers that sell their funds . such arrangements are called “directed brokerage,” in which fund advisers choose broker - dealers to conduct trades in their funds' portfolio securities as an additional way of compensating those brokers for selling fund shares . these arrangements represent a hidden expense to fund shareholders because brokerage commissions are paid out of fund assets , unlike revenue sharing , which is paid out of advisers' revenues . we support this action as a means of better ensuring that fund advisers choose broker - dealers based on their ability to effectively execute trades and not for other reasons . sec is considering actions to address conflicts of interests created by “soft - dollar arrangements” and has taken actions to enhance disclosures related to the costs of owning mutual funds , including considering making more transparent costs included in brokerage transactions . although sec has taken some actions , we believe that additional steps could be taken to provide further benefits to investors by increasing the transparency of certain mutual fund practices and enhancing competition among funds on the basis of the fees that are charged to shareholders . soft dollar arrangements allow fund investment advisers to obtain research and brokerage services that could potentially benefit fund investors but also increase investor costs . when investment advisers buy or sell securities for a fund , they may have to pay the broker - dealers that execute these trades a commission using fund assets . in return for these brokerage commissions , many broker - dealers provide advisers with a bundle of services , including trade execution , access to analysts and traders , and research products . soft dollar arrangements are the result of regulatory changes in the 1970s . until the mid - 1970s , the commissions charged by all brokers were fixed at one equal price . another abuse that has come to light is known as market timing . market timing occurs when certain fund investors place orders to take advantage of temporary disparities between the share value of a fund and the values of the underlying assets in the fund's portfolio . for example , u.s. mutual funds that use the last traded price for foreign securities ( whose markets close hours before the u.s. markets ) to value their portfolio when the u.s. markets close could create opportunities for market timing if events that subsequently occurred were likely to cause significant movements in the prices of those foreign securities when their home markets reopen .