before an agency guarantees a loan . sba officials explained that sba and certified development companies ( cdc ) approve a project for 504 financing before construction begins , but sba does not disburse loan funds or issue a debenture guarantee until after the project is completed . ( see app . ii for a more detailed description of each of these nine programs. ) they are the two hud cdbg programs ( entitlement and state programs ) ; the wia adult , dislocated workers , and youth programs ; usda and hud's respective ez / ec programs ( for designated rural and urban communities , respectively ) ; usda's b&i program ; and sba's 504 program . sba voluntarily applies a nonrelocation provision to its 7 ( a ) program . all nine programs that we identified with statutory restrictions on employer relocations use job loss in a relocating company's original location as the primary criterion for applying a nonrelocation provision , but the job loss threshold varies by program . as shown in table 2 , the statutory language for three programs — hud and usda's ez / ec program and usda's b&i program — do not specify a job loss threshold , but these agencies interpret the job loss threshold as one job lost . the three wia programs specify a job loss threshold of one job lost . the remaining three — hud's cdbg entitlement and state programs and sba's 504 program — have higher job loss thresholds . in addition to job loss , these three programs specify other conditions for applying a nonrelocation provision , such as requiring that the relocations occur across geographically defined areas . hud regulations for the cdbg entitlement and state programs make business relocations ineligible for funding if they involve certain job losses . any relocation involving the loss of 500 or more jobs is prohibited . in contrast , relocations involving the loss of 25 or fewer jobs are exempt from the nonrelocation provision . for relocations involving between 25 and 500 jobs , the nonrelocation provision applies if the number of jobs lost equals or exceeds one - tenth of one percent of the number of employed persons in the labor market experiencing the loss . the cdbg program's statute does not specify a job loss threshold ; it only requires that the agency prohibit funding for business relocations that are likely to result in a significant loss of employment . see figure 1 for an overview of the funding process for economic development projects involving businesses . entitlement communities may carry out activities under cdbg directly , or they may award funds to subrecipients , which include , as hud defines them for the purposes of the cdbg program , governmental agencies such as housing authorities as well as private nonprofit and a limited number of private for - profit entities . under hud regulations , subrecipients must enter into a signed , written agreement with entitlement communities regarding compliance with laws and regulations . states distribute their funds to nonentitlement communities for activities such as business financing .