pharmacy . for enrollee prescriptions filled at civilian pharmacies , dod's costs were recorded like other network claims . for prescriptions filled at mtf pharmacies , dod reported its costs based on data from local mtf pharmacy information systems . for enrollees' prescriptions from dod's national mail order pharmacy system , dod extracted cost information from nmop's separate information system . administrative overhead . we used dod's figures for senior prime's administrative costs associated with its managed care support contractors . dod officials told us that dod does not have a central system for collecting and reporting the administrative costs of mtf care . as a result , our estimate somewhat understates senior prime's total overhead costs . we calculated total costs to dod of the demonstration for enrollees , nonenrollees , and all older retirees . for enrollees , we calculated dod's total costs by summing the mtf , network , pharmacy , and overhead costs reported by dod for 1999 . for nonenrollees , we used the total cost estimates reported by dod for 1999 . to determine dod's total costs for all older retirees , we summed the total costs of enrollees and nonenrollees at the demonstration sites . to calculate the change in total cost for older retirees ( enrolled and nonenrolled ) due to the demonstration , we compared dod's 1999 health care costs for older retirees in the demonstration areas to its historical loe . we analyzed dod's per - enrollee costs because they affect the size of medicare's final payment to dod even though they are not an explicit factor in the calculation of this payment . we calculated monthly costs per senior prime enrollee for 1999 as total senior prime costs — mtf , civilian network , pharmacy , and administrative overhead — divided by total member months in 1999 . total monthly costs per enrollee for senior prime were $586 . this represents the cost to dod of providing the combined medicare and tricare prime benefit package to senior prime enrollees . in contrast , under the demonstration's payment rules , in 1999 dod was credited for senior prime enrollment at a medicare capitation rate of $320 per month per enrollee . we found that dod's costs for delivering the senior prime benefit package ( which includes prescription drug coverage ) to enrollees were over 80 percent higher than the senior prime capitation rate . dod's higher costs partly reflected senior prime's coverage of prescription drugs , but even net of drug expenses senior prime's costs still were high . table 3 presents senior prime costs in three ways: the first ( total costs ) is comprehensive and measures dod's costs of providing the senior prime benefit package ; the second measures dod's costs of providing the medicare benefit package , which does not include prescription drug coverage ; and the third ( in effect , medical claims ) measures dod's costs of providing the medicare benefit package , net of the overhead costs associated with dod's managed care support contractors for senior prime . even if one of the less comprehensive measures is selected , dod's costs for senior prime enrollees were much higher than the senior prime capitation rate .