however , we disagree . washington , d.c.: february 18 , 2004 . justice is the lead agency for providing guidance and support to federal agencies on foia issues and has statutory responsibility for encouraging agency compliance with the act . justice has several vehicles for providing such guidance , including the periodically updated freedom of information act guide and privacy act overview , as well as training materials and other online updates such as the department's “foia post.” to confirm that we had appropriately addressed our recommendation to justice rather than omb — which is required to issue a uniform schedule of fees for all agencies — we contacted the deputy administrator , office of information and regulatory affairs , omb , who agreed that the recommendation should be addressed to justice . this is commonly referred to as the foia fee waiver . an agency must provide a fee waiver if two conditions are met: disclosure of the requested information is in the public interest because it is likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of the operations or activities of the government , and disclosure of the information is not primarily in the commercial interest of the requester . under the act and guidance , when these requirements are both satisfied , based upon information supplied by a requester or otherwise made known to the agency , the fee waiver or reduction is to be granted by the foia officer . where one or both of these requirements is not satisfied , a fee waiver is not warranted . as these criteria suggest , fee waivers are to be granted on a case - by - case basis . individuals who receive fee waivers in some cases may not necessarily receive them in other cases . in fiscal year 2004 , doe reported receiving 2,289 new foia cases and closing 2,440 . in 76 percent ( 1848 of 2440 ) of the closed cases , doe provided some or all requested records to the requesters . of all new cases received across the department , headquarters , albuquerque , and richland — the sites selected for our review — received 31 percent ( 705 of 2,289 ) . specifically , headquarters received 431 cases , albuquerque received 152 cases , and richland received 122 cases . if you have any questions concerning this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-6240 or send e - mail to koontzl@gao.gov . key contacts and major contributors to this report are barbara collier , john de ferrari , wilfred holloway , stephanie lee , david plocher , and elizabeth zhao . we determined that doe headquarters and the department's sites at albuquerque , new mexico , and richland , washington , processed about 77 percent of doe's fee waiver cases in fiscal year 2004 and 35 percent of the cases in which fees were charged .