each category of items not observed is discussed below . database errors or omissions represented 156 items that were not observed ostensibly because of insufficient database information . these errors included assets for which the property database did not ( 1 ) indicate a disposal date , though property officials told us the item had been disposed of , or ( 2 ) did not indicate a location for the property item . one property official said the predecessor property control system had not included a field for a disposal date , and when the program was modified to add that capability , then - existing records were not updated . other database errors included records that did not accurately identify the asset as building service equipment , which represent items that are essentially part of facility buildings rather than personal property , or entries with one equipment identification number that represented several component items constituting one system . at the washington medical center , we could not locate three property items , each valued at over $1 million , because of other data entry errors . the explanation for two of the three items was that the assets were on order but had not yet been received . center officials attributed these errors to property personnel entering these assets into the property control system prior to receipt . for the third item , center officials informed us that one bar code number had been issued for a system of several pill dispensing machines , the components of which were at various locations throughout the medical center and had a combined value over $1 million , rather than bar coding each component and entering it in the property record to provide a means of controlling each item . also , specific hours worked recorded by physicians on their time and attendance reports sometimes differed from information entered in the payroll system . we also found that latitude provided in vha's directive 2003-001 , issued in january 2003 , on time and attendance of part - time physicians was a factor in the various ways the six locations carried out part - time physician attendance monitoring responsibilities . while newly emphasized policies stressed the importance of this matter , compliance in some cases had been slow to develop and oversight processes varied and were not fully effective . our standards for internal control state that control activities , such as approvals and authorizations , are integral to an entity's accountability for stewardship of resources . consistent with that management control objective , vha's january 2003 directive called for specifying work schedules in writing in advance of the biweekly pay period , showing the specific days and hours that part - time physicians were to work , including core hours when employees working adjustable shifts must be present . our review showed that schedules were not always established in advance of the pay period as required by vha . for the two pay periods ending in september 2003 , our review of records for 10 part - time physicians at each of the six locations we visited revealed that only the houston medical center had documented preapproved schedules for all physicians whose records we tested .