entry process . when a foreign national arrives at a poe's primary inspection booth , biographic information , such as name and date of birth , is displayed on the bottom half of a computer workstation screen , along with a photograph obtained from state's ccd . the inspector at the booth scans the foreign national's fingerprints ( left and right index fingers ) and takes a digital photograph . this information is forwarded to the ident database , where it is checked against stored fingerprints in the ident lookout database . if the foreign national's fingerprints are already in ident , the system performs a match ( a comparison of the fingerprint taken during the primary inspection to the one on file ) to confirm that the person submitting the fingerprints is the person on file . during this process , the inspector also questions the foreign national about the purpose of his or her travel and length of stay . status management process . the status management process manages the foreign national's temporary presence in the united states , including the adjudication of benefits applications and investigations into possible violations of immigration regulations . adis matches entry and exit manifest data to ensure that each record showing a foreign national entering the united states is matched with a record showing the foreign national exiting the united states . adis receives status information from claims 3 and sevis on foreign nationals . exit process . the exit process includes the carriers' submission of electronic manifest data to ibis / apis . this biographic information is passed to adis , where it is matched against entry information . at the two poes where the exit pilot is being conducted , foreign nationals use a self - serve kiosk where they are prompted to scan their travel documentation and provide their fingerprints ( right and left index fingers ) . this departure record is then stored in adis ( along with the person's arrival record ) and used to verify if a foreign national has complied with the admission terms of his or her visa . key us - visit milestones are legislatively mandated . for example , the immigration and naturalization service data management improvement act of 2000 requires that us - visit be implemented at all air and sea poes by december 31 , 2003 ; at the 50 highest volume land poes by december 31 , 2004 ; and at all remaining poes by december 31 , 2005 . because of limited progress during the 7 years following the legislation that originated the entry exit system requirement , dhs acknowledged that it could not complete permanent solutions in these time frames , and thus it planned to implement interim ( temporary ) solutions . for example , increments 1 through 3 include the interfacing of existing systems and the design and construction of interim facilities at land poes .