comments . u.s. army , europe , regulation 350-50 ( cmtc training ) forces command regulation 350- 50-1 ( ntc training ) forces command regulation 350-50-2 ( jrtc training ) ( no corresponding required report section. ) ( no corresponding required report section. ) ( no corresponding required report section. ) tactical lessons learned , to include command and control ; maneuver ( offense / defense ) ; fire support ; intelligence ; air defense ; mobility / countermobility ; electronic warfare ; nuclear , biological , chemical defense ; and combat service support . tactical lessons learned . ( 2 ) do the army and the marine corps report nbc training at the ctcs in a standardized format that allows the services to identify trends and lessons learned and to do cross - unit and cross - center comparisons ? to obtain information on nbc training that occurred at the army's and marine corps' ctcs during fiscal years 2002 and 2003 , we interviewed officials and analyzed relevant documents at each of the centers and other army and marine corps organizations related to nbc and ctc training . we determined that the data and documents we reviewed were sufficiently reliable for answering the above questions . we performed our review from march 2003 through october 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . a more thorough description of our scope and methodology is included in appendix i . the army has three large combat training centers that train brigade - sized units during exercises , referred to as “rotations,” that last for 13 to 25 days: the national training center , located at fort irwin , california ; the joint readiness training center , located at fort polk , louisiana ; and the combat maneuver training center , located at hohenfels , germany . figure 1 illustrates nbc training being conducted at the army's combat maneuver training center in hohenfels , germany . the marine corps has an air ground combat center at twentynine palms , california , where it trains brigade - sized units in a combined arms exercise that similarly allows marine corps units to train to perform their missions in large maneuver areas and to fire their ground and air weapons . “a ctc experience is the closest thing to combat the army's soldiers , leaders , staffs and units ever experience . it is a battlefield where soldiers can die , come back to life , correct their mistakes , and fight again . the army must look at harnessing the role of the ctcs in developing doctrine and collecting data so it can maximize their potential and draw the right conclusions from lessons learned in a training environment.” during fiscal years 2002 and 2003 , 57 active and reserve component rotations took place at the three army ctcs . rotation costs are significant: in 1999 we reported that the army spent about $1 billion a year to provide training at the ntc , the jrtc , and the cmtc . these centers are equipped with instrumentation and simulators that allow the units to have their battle effectiveness measured , recorded , and commented on by observers / controllers , who are army subject - matter experts for nbc defense and other mission areas .