ii ) . see table 1 for a description of the roles of each bureau or office at state and usaid and select u.s. ngos in independent media development . our analysis of available documents revealed that together , state and usaid obligated at least $40 million in fiscal year 2004 to support a number of independent media development efforts . according to state , it obligated approximately $14 million for media development projects for fiscal year 2004 . state also transferred more than $700,000 to the bbg for fiscal year 2004 independent media development obligations . usaid was not able to provide global budget obligations figures for its 2004 support of independent media . however , we calculated that usaid obligated at least $25.6 million in fiscal year 2004 . usaid's largest independent media contractors — internews and irex — received fiscal year 2004 obligations of $14.1 million and $11.3 million , respectively . in addition , the asia foundation identified that it received $175,000 in fiscal year 2004 obligations provided by usaid . diana glod , melissa pickworth , julia a. roberts , and joe carney made key contributions to this report . martin de alteriis , ernie jackson , amanda k. miller , and valerie j. caracelli provided technical assistance . agency officials from missions in several countries we examined provided examples of approaches to addressing unregulated media environments , including the following: limited press freedom . in order to limit editorial interference by state bodies , usaid's media project in kyrgyzstan currently supports local efforts to draft a new broadcasting law , which would include stipulations for the transformation of state television and radio to a public broadcasting system . to dilute the editorial influence of oligarchs who own the vast majority of tv stations in georgia , usaid's implementing partner in tbilisi introduced a television rating system , which produced verifiable ratings that made the commercial market far more attractive to advertisers . the increased interest of advertisers in the media market has made nonbusiness - based policies more costly for oligarch owners . changing legal and regulatory frameworks . usaid's media development project in ukraine has established a media law institute that will provide journalists with an outlet for legal defense and consultations when faced with political pressure . the center also plans to train local lawyers and judges on media law reform , and to publish bulletins about changes in legislation . limited training opportunities . the usaid mission to mali has tried to address the lack of professional media training institutions by supporting a technical training facility , bringing professionals to mali to conduct training sessions , and sending broadcast and print journalists as well as key members of the government and civil society to an anticorruption ethics training seminar . lack of skilled journalists . croatia's usaid media development project focused on developing the capacity of the national journalist association , including conferences to improve journalists' professionalism , their capacity for reporting , and their relationships with other sectors of society , such as the police and judiciary . additionally , university of zagreb's journalism school partnered with the u.s. embassy to participate in academic exchange programs , international visits , and speaker programs .