as such , the number of actions we report is not comparable to the number of cases we reported in 2011 . we found that all six agencies reported an increase in the number of suspension and debarment actions from fiscal year 2009 to 2013 as shown in table 2 . the agencies generally experienced a notable increase starting in fiscal year 2011 when they began to take action to incorporate the characteristics associated with active suspension and debarment programs . agency officials told us that the actions taken since 2011 to incorporate the characteristics associated with active suspension and debarments programs have resulted in an increased level of suspension and debarment activity at their respective agencies , though officials emphasized different factors . for example , officials from the departments of commerce , state , and the treasury stated that improved coordination between the office of the inspector general and the suspension and debarment official coupled with increased training and awareness resulted in more referrals and the processing of more actions . while the number of actions treasury reported for fiscal years 2009 through 2013 has been modest , officials told us that 62 actions have been processed in the first 5 months of fiscal year 2014 and they expect continued increases in the number of referrals . justice officials stated that one factor that may have contributed to an increased number of referrals and actions is the attorney general's january 2012 memorandum to all litigating authorities and the director of the federal bureau of investigation , reminding them to consider whether the facts of a case could be used as a basis for an exclusion or debarment and to coordinate with agency suspension and debarment authorities . hhs officials noted that an increased number of actions have resulted in part from the office of inspector general providing additional resources for training investigators and auditors on how to make suspension and debarment referrals involving procurement and nonprocurement matters . officials from dhs attributed an increase in the number of actions at fema and across dhs to having a centralized suspension and debarment office , a directive establishing common standards , increased staffing , and training . the number of suspension and debarment actions government - wide has increased in recent years , more than doubling from 1,836 in fiscal year 2009 to 4,812 in fiscal year 2013 , as shown in figure 1 . isdc officials do not consider the overall number of suspensions and debarments as the only measure of success , and emphasized that increased suspension and debarment activity has been coupled with agencies' increased capability to use suspension and debarment appropriately and adhere to the principles of fairness and due process as laid out in the governing regulations . according to isdc officials , the programmatic improvements made by many agencies are due in part to increased management attention within individual agencies , guidance from omb , and support from the isdc . omb and isdc have taken a number of actions to strengthen government - wide suspension and debarment efforts .