we discussed internally all potential conflicts . the 19 experts were determined to be free of conflicts of interest , and the group as a whole was judged to have no inappropriate biases . see appendix ii for a list of the experts . the 2-day expert meeting was comprised of eight sessions covering a range of topics , such as incidents involving incomplete inactivation , scientific issues , and standards and guidance . we developed the session topics based on our researchable objectives and issues that were identified in our audit work , including our review of the peer - reviewed literature , analysis of agency documents , and interviews with agency and laboratory officials . the meeting was recorded and transcribed to ensure that we accurately captured the experts' statements , and we reviewed and analyzed the transcripts as a source of evidence . although the expert meeting was not designed to reach a formal consensus on the issues , a number of themes emerged from the group's discussion to which there was general agreement . the group generally agreed on various issues and had several suggestions for how to address them . following the meeting , we asked five of the experts to review our draft report to ensure expert comments and scientific concepts were appropriately captured . in selecting experts to review our draft , we first excluded all foreign individuals because the draft had not undergone a sensitivity review , as well as all federal officials because federal agencies had separate opportunities to comment on the draft during the agencies' official comment period . then , from the remaining experts , we selected experts to represent a range of expertise , including ( 1 ) one expert from industry , ( 2 ) one biological safety officer , ( 3 ) one policy expert , ( 4 ) one director of a high - containment laboratory , and ( 5 ) one individual with legal expertise . we incorporated comments from these experts into our final report . to evaluate the extent to which incidents involving incomplete inactivation occurred , we analyzed documentation on incidents reported to the cdc , aphis , and nih since 2003 — when reporting of incidents involving the theft , loss , and release of select agents was first required under the select agent program — through 2015 — the most recent year for which data were available . we also interviewed officials from cdc and aphis on the reporting of incidents to the select agent program , and officials from nih on the reporting of incidents involving recombinant pathogens . we took several steps to determine the reliability of the agencies' incident databases , including interviewing agency officials and reviewing agency documents . we determined that the select agent program incident database did not capture some cases of inactivation and was therefore not reliable on its own for establishing the number of incidents . we verified through interviews and documentation each incident identified in the select agent program database as well as additional incidents that we identified .