nor can designs be finalized . increased used of fixed - price contracting requires that technologies be demonstrated early , the design stabilized before construction begins , and realistic estimates for cost and schedule made . given the risk of cost growth in shipbuilding , it is equally important that the navy strengthen its oversight of shipyard cost performance . our work has shown that the navy may not have adequate management tools necessary to identify and react to early signs of cost growth . what happens when the elements of a solid business case are not present ? unfortunately , the results have been all too visible in the lpd 17 and the lcs . ship construction in these programs has been hampered throughout by design instability and program management challenges that can be traced back to flawed business cases . the navy moved forward with ambitious schedules for constructing lpd 17 and lcs despite significant challenges in stabilizing the designs for these ships . as a result , construction work has been performed out of sequence and significant rework has been required , disrupting the optimal construction sequence and application of lessons learned for follow - on vessels in these programs . in the lpd 17 program , the navy's reliance on an immature design tool led to problems that affected all aspects of the lead ship's design . without a stable design , work was often delayed from early in the building cycle to later , during integration of the hull . shipbuilders stated that doing the work at this stage could cost up to five times the original cost . the lead ship in the lpd class was delivered to the warfighter incomplete and with numerous mechanical failures , resulting in a lower than promised level of capability . these problems continue today — 2 years after the navy accepted delivery of lpd 17 . recent sea trials of the ship revealed problems with lpd 17's steering system , reverse osmosis units , shipwide area computing network , and electrical system , among other deficiencies . navy inspectors noted that 138 of 943 ship spaces remained unfinished and identified a number of safety concerns related to personnel , equipment , ammunition , navigation , and flight activities . to date , the navy has invested over $1.75 billion constructing lpd 17 . in the lcs program , design instability resulted from a flawed business case as well as changes to navy requirements . from the outset , the navy sought to concurrently design and construct two lead ships in the lcs program in an effort to rapidly meet pressing needs in the mine countermeasures , antisubmarine warfare , and surface warfare mission areas . the navy believed it could manage this approach , even with little margin for error , because it considered each lcs to be an adaptation of an existing high - speed ferry design . it has since been realized that transforming a high - speed ferry into a capable , networked , survivable warship was quite a complex venture . implementation of new naval vessel rules ( design guidelines ) further complicated the navy's concurrent design - build strategy for lcs .