should not be driven by fta . on - board transit survey: fta is considering requiring that a recent survey of transit riders be used to inform the technical work completed during alternatives analysis . fta suggests that “recent” could be defined as within the 5 years preceding a request to enter preliminary engineering . what weights should fta apply to each measure ? fta's anprm for small starts generated a significant volume of public comment . while members of the transit community were supportive of some proposals for the small starts program , they also had a number of concerns . in particular , the transit community questioned whether fta's proposals would , as intended , provide smaller projects with a more streamlined evaluation and rating process . as a result , some commenters recommended that fta simplify some of its original proposals in the final nprm to reflect the smaller scope of these projects . for example , several project sponsors and industry representatives thought that fta should redefine the baseline alternative as the “no - build” option and make the before and after study optional for small starts projects to limit the time and cost of project development . in addition , others were concerned that fta's proposals minimized the importance of the new land use and economic development evaluation criteria introduced by safetea - lu , and they recommended that the measures for land use and economic development be revised . since fta does not plan to issue its final rule for the new starts and small starts programs until early 2008 , fta issued proposed interim guidance for the small starts program in june 2006 to ensure that project sponsors would have an opportunity to apply for small starts funding and be evaluated in the upcoming cycle ( i.e. , the fiscal year 2008 evaluation cycle , which begins in august 2006 ) . the proposed interim guidance describes the process that fta will use to evaluate proposed small starts projects to support the decision to approve or disapprove their advancement to project development and the decision to recommend projects for funding , including whether proposed projects are part of a broader strategy to reduce congestion in particular regions . in addition , although not required by safetea - lu , fta introduced a separate eligibility category within the small starts program for “very small starts” projects in the proposed interim guidance . small starts projects that qualify as very small starts are projects that do not include the construction of a new fixed guideway , are in corridors with existing riders who will benefit from the proposed project and number more than 3,000 on an average weekday , including at least 1,000 riders who board at the terminal stations , and have a total capital cost of less than $50 million and less than $3 million per mile ( excluding rolling stock ) . according to the proposed interim guidance on the small starts program , fta intends to scale the planning and project development process to the size and complexity of the proposed projects . therefore , very small starts projects will undergo a very simple and streamlined evaluation and rating process .