biannual scheduler audits . va's july 2016 scheduling policy required biannual audits of the timeliness and appropriateness of schedulers' actions and accuracy of entry of the clinically indicated date and preferred date , the start dates of wait - time measurement as identified by the revised scheduling policy . in june 2017 , va deployed a standardized scheduling audit process for staff at va medical centers to use . as part of our recommendation follow - up in july 2019 , va reported 100 percent completion of the required biannual scheduling audits in fiscal year 2018 . as noted above , va reported to us that the error rate for the patient indicated date ( either the clinically indicated date , or in the absence of that date , the patient's preferred date ) was 8 percent of about 667,000 appointments audited . while va asserts that errors in the clinically indicated date have decreased , an error rate of 8 percent still yields errors in more than 53,000 appointments audited . given these errors , we remain concerned about the reliability of wait times measured using preferred date ( one part of the patient indicated date ) , and have requested additional information from va about these errors . second level scheduler audits . in november 2018 , va implemented a second - level scheduling audit ( audit the auditors program ) , which is overseen by the va integrated service networks tasked with oversight of va medical facilities within their regions . each medical center within a network region is paired with another medical center and they audit each other's scheduling audit . throughout the cycle , medical centers share their findings with each other and the network . the goal is to standardize scheduling audit practices across the network and to ensure reliability of the scheduler audit results . according to va , the first cycle was completed april 30 , 2019 , by all va medical centers . first internal system - wide audit of wait - time data and scheduling . in its first internal audit completed in august 2018 , va was unable to evaluate the accuracy and reliability of scheduling and the wait - time data . specifically , va was unable to determine the accuracy and reliability of the scheduling and wait - time data , databases , and data flow from the electronic health record and scheduling system to the va access and quality website because they were not able to obtain the rules for calculating wait times . given our continued concerns about va's ability to ensure the reliability of the wait - time data , we plan to obtain additional information from va about its methodology and assessment of evidence underlying the audit findings . in december 2012 , we also found inconsistent implementation of va's scheduling policy that impeded va medical centers' scheduling of timely medical appointments . specifically , we found that not all of the clinics across the medical centers we visited used the electronic wait list to track new patients that needed medical appointments as required by va's scheduling policy , putting these patients at risk of being lost for appointment scheduling .