both taxpayers and irs can initiate abatements . taxpayers can request an abatement by filing an amended tax return ( eg , form 1040x ) , by filing an irs form 843 ( claim for refund and request for abatement ) , or by calling or writing to irs . irs can also initiate abatements . when , for example , an irs auditor finds evidence that a taxpayer overstated the tax liability on a return , this evidence could lead to an abatement , depending on the results from the rest of the audit . to fulfill our objectives , we reviewed a stratified , random sample of 486 individual taxpayer abatements made in fiscal year 1998 due to errors by taxpayers , irs , or third parties . our sample includes abatements in which taxpayers elected to change their filing status or basis for deductions when the original assessment also changed . if a taxpayer had multiple abatements , we studied only the abatement that was drawn into our sample . if you have any questions concerning this report , please contact tom short or me at ( 202 ) 512-9110 . key contributors to this work are listed in appendix i . in addition , royce baker , larry dandridge , thomas venezia , james fields , anne rhodes - kline , sam scrutchins , thomas bloom , and rodney hobbs contributed to this report . these officials represented irs' wage and investment division , irs' chief of operations and irs units that record , collect , or abate assessments , such as those that process or examine tax returns . we attempted to develop more reliable cost estimates but irs was unable to provide sufficient data in time for including in this report . we did work at irs offices in washington , d.c. , and new carrollton , md , as well as irs' kansas city service center because of our staff's proximity . the unit cost of abatements made in examination units is higher because , among other reasons , they use higher - graded ( or paid ) staff . third , irs incurs costs for some abatements when issuing a refund check that otherwise would have been unnecessary . this check is for tax amounts overpaid by individuals because of the assessment made in error . taxpayers also incurred costs when tax assessments were made and then abated . irs' examination units can increase assessments during audits when taxpayers do not provide documents to support their tax return . the cost to record tax assessments is higher when a post - processing unit does the work to create an assessment . the greatest cost is associated with examination units because their auditors have higher pay grades , audit more complex cases , and need more time to work cases compared to nonaudit staff . irs attempted to collect an estimated 609,000 of the 2.3 million abated tax assessments . irs could have avoided the associated collection costs if the tax assessment , which was abated because of errors , had not been made . for the portion that was abated of the other 1.7 million tax assessments , irs did not take collection action .