gao - 12-357 . consistent with dod's december 2011 guidance on the inventory review , most components certified that they conducted the inventory review , but provided only limited information of their review methodologies , results of their review , or use of the inventory to inform annual program reviews and budget processes . as of april 2013 , 29 of the 31 components certified that they had completed a review of their inventory . at&l and p&r officials stated that the requirement to submit certification letters represented a significant improvement over prior years' reviews when dod could not determine whether or not the required reviews were conducted and believed that the letters provided useful insights into the components' processes and methodologies for conducting the reviews . our analysis indicates , however , that none of the components reported on all six elements required in the guidance . for example , about half of the component letters provided limited or no information on the methodology used to perform the reviews . in addition , components provided limited information on their efforts to ensure appropriate government control when contractors were performing closely associated with inherently governmental functions . further , while the army and air force identified instances where contractors were performing inherently governmental functions and unauthorized personal services , they did not report whether they fully resolved these issues . in december 2011 , at&l and p&r issued guidance to components directing them to review at least 50 percent of their inventories and to the maximum extent possible , give priority to contracts not previously reviewed or those that may present a higher risk of inappropriate performance . in addition , heads of components were required to provide a letter to p&r by november 25 , 2012 , certifying completion of the inventory review and at a minimum include a discussion on the following six elements: an explanation of the methodology used to conduct the reviews and criteria for selection of contracts to review ; delineation of the results in accordance with all applicable title 10 provisions and the december 2011 guidance ; the identification of any inherently governmental functions or unauthorized personal services contracts , with a plan of action to either divest or realign such functions to government performance ; the identification of contracts under which closely associated with inherently governmental functions are being performed and an explanation of steps taken to ensure appropriate government control and oversight of such functions , or if necessary , a plan to either divest or realign such functions to government performance ; the identification of contracted services that are exempt from private sector performance in accordance with dod instruction 1100.22 , which establishes policies and procedures for determining the appropriate manpower mix ; require special consideration under 10 u.s.c . ยง 2463 ; or are being considered for cost reasons , to be realigned to government performance ; the actions being taken or considered with regards to annual program reviews and budget processes to ensure appropriate reallocation of resources based on the reviews conducted . the army has previously included this requirement in its contracts . at&l officials have also been working to develop a new provision to implement the reporting requirements in the defense federal acquisition regulation supplement .