this system is referred to as a cryocooler . see figure 2 for a depiction of the cooling system on jwst . the cryocooler moves helium gas through 10 meters ( approximately 33 feet ) of refrigerant lines from the sun - facing surface of the jwst observatory to the colder shaded side where the isim is located . according to nasa officials , a cooler system of this configuration , with so much separation between the beginning and final cooling components , has never been developed or flown in space before . project officials stated that the miri cryocooler is particularly complex and challenging because of this relatively great distance between cooling components located in different temperature regions of the observatory and the need to overcome multiple sources of unwanted heat through the regions before the system can cool miri . see figure 1 . the mid - infrared instrument ( miri ) — one of jwst's four instruments in the integrated science instrument module ( isim ) — requires a dedicated , interdependent two - stage cooler system designed to bring the optics to the required temperature of 6.7 kelvin ( k ) , just above absolute zero . specifically , the cooling components span temperatures ranging from approximately 300k ( about 80 degrees fahrenheit , or room temperature ) where the spacecraft is located on the sun - facing surface of the telescope to approximately 40k ( about - 388 degrees fahrenheit ) within the isim . since entering development in 1999 , jwst has experienced significant schedule delays and increases to project costs . prior to being approved for development , cost estimates of the project originally ranged from $1 billion to $3.5 billion with expected launch dates ranging from 2007 to 2011 . in march 2005 , nasa increased the jwst's life - cycle cost estimate to $4.5 billion and delayed the launch date to 2013 . we reported in 2006 that the cost growth was due to a delay in launch vehicle selection , budget limitations in fiscal years 2006 and 2007 , requirements changes , and an increase in the project's reserve funding — funding used to mitigate issues that arise but which were previously unknown . in april 2006 , an independent review team confirmed that the project's technical content was complete and sound , but expressed concern over the project's reserve funding , reporting that it was too low and phased in too late in the development lifecycle . the review team reported that for a project as complex as jwst , a 25 to 30 percent total reserve funding was appropriate . the team cautioned that low reserve funding compromised the project's ability to resolve issues , address risk areas , and accommodate unknown problems . the project was baselined in april 2009 with a life - cycle cost estimate of $4.964 billion — including additional cost reserves — and a launch date in june 2014 . shortly after jwst was approved for development and its cost and schedule estimates were baselined , project costs continued to increase and the schedule was extended .