iii. ) fta headquarters and regional officials , as well as three project sponsors we spoke with , indicated that local issues , such as delays in finalizing funding or lack of agreement on a project's route , often affect how long a project spends in development . of the 29 small starts and very small starts projects fta has recommended for funding , 11 projects have received construction grants . these projects took from about 9 months to almost 4 years to complete the project development phase and receive a construction grant from fta . while the amount of time it takes for a project to complete project development can be influenced by several factors , fta officials and project sponsors told us that local issues can delay the progress of a small starts or very small starts project . of the 10 project sponsors we interviewed , half told us that they experienced delays during project development . three of the five project sponsors that experienced delays said that local issues caused the delays . one project sponsor , for example , said that the lack of committed funds for the project from the state government caused a 6-month delay in the project's development , while one other project sponsor said that its project was delayed while it addressed the public's concerns on the project route . another project sponsor faced delays due to local and federal issues ; specifically , the project had to wait for passage of a local referendum providing operating funds for the project and had to do additional work because it received conflicting information from fta on the work it needed to complete to fulfill federal environmental requirements . to examine the project development process , we discussed the advantages and disadvantages of the requirements with a variety of stakeholders , including 10 project sponsors , officials from fta headquarters and 7 regional offices , and 2 industry groups . the perspectives of the stakeholders we spoke to depend , in part , on their experience with small starts and very small starts projects , as well as any experience with new starts projects . for example , 6 of the 10 project sponsors we spoke with had experience planning and implementing new starts projects , while the other 4 sponsors had no such organizational experience . fta officials in some regions told us that since the sponsors of many small starts and very small starts projects were unfamiliar with the requirements for new starts projects , these sponsors may not be aware of the difference in requirements or the degree to which some requirements had been scaled for their projects . fta regional officials also had varying experience overseeing small starts and very small starts projects . five regional offices had overseen only 1 small starts or very small starts project while one regional office had overseen 13 projects . stakeholders we spoke with cited advantages related to fta's project development requirements for both small starts and very small starts projects .