we also removed the recommendation . beyond the aforementioned oral comments , cncs's chief operating officer also provided technical comments via email , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the cncs chief executive officer , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . should you or your staff have questions on matters discussed in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9286 . i can also be reached by e - mail at pownerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . the objectives of this study were to determine ( 1 ) to what extent the corporation for national and community service's ( cncs ) planned information technology ( it ) modernization projects align with business and management needs for grant monitoring and ( 2 ) what progress cncs has made toward ensuring the successful and timely delivery of a new system to support its grant monitoring process . to address the first objective , we collected and reviewed documentation that describes the cncs it modernization projects , including the it modernization program management plan and related system development plans . we assessed whether the agency's project plans aligned with needs of grant monitoring officials by comparing their contents against documentation that described the agency's grant monitoring process and requirements for providing it support of the current monitoring process . we identified enhancements needed to assist program and grant officers , by examining planning documentation , such as cncs's strategic plan , system requirements definitions , and presentations and minutes from business stakeholder requirements gathering sessions . we also reviewed documentation that noted changes to requirements and interviewed agency officials , such as the chief information officer , to determine the rationale for the changes . we compared the final requirements definition to the needs initially defined by grant monitoring officials to determine the impact that changes had on the agency's plans to align its it modernization projects with business needs for grant monitoring . to address the second objective , we first determined the progress cncs had made toward delivering a modernized system to support its existing grant monitoring process . to do so , we collected and evaluated documentation that provided evidence of ongoing system development and implementation activities , including project schedules and status tracking reports . we compared planned dates and milestones documented in the schedules to actual dates obtained from project artifacts , such as monthly program performance reports , to determine whether milestones had been met and , when they had not , identified the tasks that were not conducted or completed as planned and that caused gaps between intended outcomes and functionality to be provided by the system and delays in the system development and delivery schedule . this stage is referred to as regression testing .