the state department and the u.s . permanent mission to the united nations continue to promote further reforms and report on the status of major reform initiatives to the u.s. congress . the call for reforms has also grown as a result of problems identified in the united nations' management of the oil for food program . last year we reported that the former iraqi government obtained $10.1 billion through oil smuggling and illicit commissions and surcharges on commodity and oil contracts . the iraq survey group , responsible for investigating iraq's activities in developing weapons of mass destruction , estimated illicit revenues at $10.9 billion and found similar irregularities in contract overpricing and surcharges . in april 2004 , the secretary general established the u.n . independent inquiry committee ( iic ) to investigate allegations of mismanagement and misconduct within the oil for food program . in february 2005 , the iic issued an interim report on the initial procurement of u.n. contractors , recipients of oil allocations , internal audit structure and activities , and management of administrative expenses . oip was responsible for examining these contracts for price and value at its new york headquarters . however , in december 2004 , the general assembly required oios to include in its annual and semi - annual reports titles and brief summaries of all oios reports issued during the reporting period and to provide member states with access to original versions of oios reports upon request . the iic also recommended that oios and its internal audit division directly report to a non - executive board and that budgets and staffing levels for all audit activities be submitted to the general assembly and endorsed by an independent board . the iraqi government's ability to negotiate contracts directly with commodity suppliers was an important factor in enabling iraq to levy illegal commissions . oios believed that these contracts were outside its purview because the security council's sanctions committee was responsible for their approval . however , oip management also steered oios toward program activities in iraq rather than headquarters functions where oip reviewed the humanitarian contracts . in may 2002 , oip's executive director did not approve the auditors' request to conduct a risk assessment of oip's program management division , citing financial reasons . as with the lloyd's register contract , oios found that oip officials charged with monitoring the saybolt contract had made no inspection visits to iraq but had certified the contractor's satisfactory compliance with the contract and approved extensions to the contract . in an april 2003 report , oios cited concerns about amendments and extensions to cotecna's original $4.9 million contract . specifically , oios found that oip increased cotecna's contract by $356,000 4 days after the contract was signed . the amendment included additional costs for communication equipment and operations that oios asserted were included in the original contract . in addition , oios found that the contract equaled the offer of the second lowest bidder through amendments and extensions during the contract's first year .