governmentwide budgetary constraints . throughout the process of retiring the space shuttle , nasa , like other federal agencies , will have to contend with urgent challenges facing the federal budget that will put pressure on discretionary spending — such as investments in space programs — and require nasa to do more with fewer resources . while the space shuttle program is still in the early stages of planning for the program's retirement , its development of a detailed long - term strategy to sustain its future workforce is being hampered by several factors: near - term focus on returning the space shuttle to flight . since the space shuttle columbia accident , the program has been focused on its near - term goal of returning the space shuttle safely to flight . while this focus is understandable given the importance of the space shuttle's role in completing assembly of the iss , it has led to the delay of efforts to determine future workforce needs . uncertainties with respect to implementing the vision . while the vision has provided the space shuttle program with the goal of retiring the program by 2010 upon completion of the iss , the program lacks well - defined objectives or goals on which to base its workforce planning efforts . for example , nasa has not yet determined the final configuration of the iss , the final number of flights for the space shuttle , how iss operations will be supported after the space shuttle is retired , or the type of vehicle that will be used for space exploration . these determinations are important because they impact decisions about the transition of space shuttle assets . lacking this information , nasa officials have said that their ability to progress with detailed long - term workforce planning is limited . despite these uncertainties , the space shuttle program could follow a strategic human capital management approach to plan for sustaining its critically skilled workforce . studies by several organizations , including gao , have shown that successful organizations in both the public and private sectors follow a strategic human capital management approach , even when faced with an uncertain future environment . in our march 2005 report , we made recommendations aimed at better positioning nasa to sustain a critically skilled space shuttle workforce through retirement . in particular , we recommended that the agency begin identifying the space shuttle program's future workforce needs based upon various future scenarios the program could face . scenario planning can allow the agency to progress with workforce planning , even when faced with uncertainties such as those surrounding the final number of space shuttle flights , the final configuration of the iss and the vehicle that will be developed for exploration . the program can use the information provided by scenario planning to develop strategies for meeting the needs of its potential future scenarios . nasa concurred with our recommendation , and nasa's assistant associate administrator for the space shuttle program is leading an effort to address the recommendation .