staff can then comment on the offering statement . that is , they may note deficiencies with the offering documents or ask for clarifications . the process of filing a regulation a offering with sec , and working with sec to qualify the filing , can be time - consuming and costly , according to several stakeholders with whom we met . for example , several stakeholders , ( including a recent regulation a issuer , attorneys who worked with recent issuers , and a small business advocate ) described the process as detailed and time consuming ; two of these stakeholders described the process as akin to filing a registered public offering . other stakeholders noted that the process of filing a regulation a offering is considered in the industry to be a “mini - registration.” stakeholders also noted that because the process of receiving and addressing comments from sec could entail multiple rounds that involved attorneys and accountants , it could be costly to the small businesses involved . two of the regulation a issuers with whom we met stated that sec required them to address comments related to their financial statements , and that such comments required the issuers to work with their accountants to clarify accounting - related information , which was costly . sec does not comment on or approve these notifications . businesses that make offerings under rules 504 or 505 must register them at the state level if required in the state in which they are made , while offerings made under rule 506 are preempted from state registration by the national securities markets improvement act of 1996 . in addition to federal securities laws , state securities laws are designed to protect investors against fraudulent sales practices and activities . while these laws can vary from state to state , they require securities issuers ( including businesses making small offerings ) to register their offerings with the state before the offerings can be sold in that state unless state registration for the offering has been preempted by federal law or a state registration exemption applies . according to state securities administrators with whom we met , blue sky laws are beneficial because they provide an additional layer of protection for potential investors . we determined the data reliable for our purposes . we also reviewed sec's policies and procedures for qualifying small businesses' filings for exemption through regulation a . to describe how states register regulation a filings , we reviewed published research and north american securities administrators association ( nasaa ) documentation of state registration methods . we interviewed nasaa officials to discuss states' registration methods and regulation a filings , and state securities administrators from seven states to discuss their registration methods . we interviewed a non probability sample of state administrators' offices based on geographic diversity , recent experience with regulation a , and referrals from nasaa . specifically , we interviewed staff from the state securities administrators of the following: arkansas , delaware , florida , ohio , texas , virginia , and washington . we also interviewed a non probability sample of three small businesses from different industries that had issued regulation a offerings in multiple states from 2010 through may 2012 to provide a diversity of perspectives .