sapro leads this effort . the prevention collaboration forum and working group develops coordinated prevention approaches that address factors impacting personnel readiness such as sexual harassment , sexual assault , and domestic violence involving sexual assault . according to its proposed charter , the focus of the forum is on enhancing the health of military unit and family climates as well as strengthening and promoting the resiliency and readiness of the total force through a coordinated effort around integrated policies , collaborative direction of research , alignment of resources , analysis of gaps , and synchronization of activities . the assistant secretary of defense for readiness leads this effort with sapro providing administrative and facilitation support . the victim assistance leadership council advises the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness on policies and practices related to victim assistance across dod . according to its charter , the council provides a forum for senior leaders to exchange information and collaborate on issues affecting victims of all forms of crime and harassment within dod , including but not limited to victims of sexual harassment , sexual assault , and domestic violence involving sexual abuse . leadership rotates between sapro , fap , and odmeo and other offices . regarding the cross - cutting efforts involving two of the three key stakeholders , the sexual harassment prevention and response working group is led by odmeo and includes sapro . the group was established to evaluate how to best position sexual harassment prevention and response policy and oversight and to leverage technology to automate annual reporting requirements . the four other cross - cutting efforts are ( 1 ) the hazing and bullying working group , ( 2 ) retaliation working groups created under the sapr integrated process team , ( 3 ) domestic abuse rapid improvement events , and ( 4 ) odmeo and sharp meetings . the remaining collaborative efforts we identified are specific to fap , sapro , and odmeo . for example , the sexual assault prevention roundtable is a forum for representatives from osd , the military departments , and the national guard bureau to share information on sexual assault prevention efforts and requirements . according to its charter , the roundtable's activities include , among other things , sharing promising practices and prevention updates ; discussing challenges in prevention program implementation , including servicemember training , and identifying approaches to address them ; identifying metrics to assess the impact and effectiveness of prevention efforts , and opportunities to collaborate on research projects ; and tracking the implementation of prevention tasks identified in the dod sapr strategy . sapro leads this effort . the defense diversity working group is an odmeo - specific group that collaborates with various osd and military service offices on military and civilian diversity and inclusion issues and implements mandated diversity plans and programs . studies by dod and others have shown that unwanted sexual behaviors do not exist in isolation but are part of a range of interconnected , inappropriate behaviors that are connected to the occurrence of a sexual assault .