in some cases , this period can stretch into years . some of the pension advocacy groups and union representatives we spoke with said that these long periods without communication are problematic for participants for several reasons . for example , retirees whose benefits are subject to the guarantee limits but who continue to receive their higher plan - level benefits for long periods of time may come to depend on these higher amounts and believe that the this payment level is permanent . they are surprised when — years later — their benefits are suddenly reduced . however , these warnings may not have the same meaning for participants when talked about in generalities as when they later receive notices concerning their specific benefit amounts . it can still come as a shock when — perhaps years later — they receive a final benefit determination letter with this news . their frustration may be compounded if they fail to understand the explanations provided in the benefit determination letters . some pension advocates and union representatives we spoke with said that this is often the case in complex cases involving large benefit reductions . although benefit statements are generally attached , the logic and math involved can be difficult even for pension experts . some pension advocates and union representatives we spoke with said that they found the explanations in these letters to be too vague and generic , and that the letters did not provide enough information specific to the individual's circumstances to be helpful . at the same time , they were generally sympathetic to the difficulty of communicating such complicated information . as one advocate acknowledged , for the letters to be accurate , they have to be complicated ; this may just be “the nature of the beast.” pbgc officials have taken steps to shorten the benefit determination process , although their initiatives have focused on ways to expedite processing of straightforward cases instead of the more difficult cases prone to delays . pbgc has also developed more than 500 letter formats — in both english and spanish — to address the myriad of situations that may arise in the benefit determination process . nevertheless , pbgc officials acknowledged that their standard letter formats may not always meet the needs of participants , especially those with complex plans and complicated benefit calculations . this means that the program still needs urgent congressional attention and agency action . we specifically noted pbgc's prior - year net deficit , as well as the risk of the termination among large , underfunded pension plans , as reasons for the program's high - risk designation . over the last 6 years or so , the assets and liabilities that pbgc accumulated from trusteeing plans have increased rapidly . this is largely due to the termination , typically through bankruptcies , of a number of very large , underfunded plan sponsors . last may , pbgc reported that unaudited financial results through the second quarter of fiscal year 2009 showed its deficit tripling since the end of fiscal year 2008 , from about $11 billion to about $33.5 billion . since then , the influx of large plan terminations has continued .