( fig . 1 illustrates the number of fatal and nonfatal commercial air carrier accidents from 1998 through 2010. ) similarly , faa analyzes data on incidents , such as those where there is a risk of a catastrophic accident . for example , data on runway incursions , other surface incidents , and airborne incidents are collected at airports that have air traffic control towers . faa analyzes those data to categorize incidents according to the actions or inactions of air traffic controllers , pilots , or others , such as pedestrians or vehicle operators , and determines the severity of those incidents . these data are then used to assess the root causes of incidents to identify potential remedies . using this process , faa has taken steps to improve safety in the terminal area since 2007 and has both reduced the number of serious runway incursions — where collisions are narrowly avoided or where there was a significant potential for a collision — and undertaken successful efforts to increase the reporting of incidents . although faa will continue using data in a reactive manner to understand the causes of accidents and incidents , it is shifting emphasis to a proactive approach in which it analyzes data to identify and mitigate risks to prevent future accidents as part of its adoption of sms . as a result , data that can be used to help identify accident and incident precursors — such as data on an incident that is voluntarily reported by pilots , air traffic controllers , or others to faa or air carriers — have become more critical for accident prevention , according to the independent review of faa's safety oversight in 2008 . cast is also now moving beyond the forensic approach of examining past accident data to a more proactive approach that will focus on risk prediction and mitigation strategies and aims to reduce the u.s. commercial fatality risk by 50 percent from 2010 to 2025 . faa's effort to integrate aviation safety data — the aviation safety information analysis and sharing ( asias ) system , which connects 46 safety databases across the industry and has 45 participating airlines — is integrated into the cast process . asias enables better safety information management and data sharing as it proactively extracts from public and non - public data sources , including accidents , incidents , and voluntary reporting . faa has demonstrated the potential of using integrated safety data to better understand the causes of certain safety events and identify mitigating strategies . for example , faa fused data from government and industry sources to identify underlying factors contributing to numerous nuisance warnings pilots were receiving from their terrain awareness warning systems ( taws ) . by combining all of the data , faa was able to identify needed changes in the way it handles air traffic as well as improvements in the design of the taws software . faa also plans to use data proactively to model the impact of the next generation air transportation system ( nextgen ) on the safety of the national airspace system , to proactively identify risks that might emerge with the introduction of nextgen changes .