ccsp agreed with all of our recommendations . after our report was issued in august 2005 , omb released its fiscal year 2007 report to congress on climate change expenditures . several of our recommendations were implemented in that report . for example , omb included data on existing climate - related expenditures . omb also labeled its tables for the major types of funding with respect to fiscal year and budgetary metric ( actual budget authority , enacted budget authority , obligations , outlays , and proposed budget authority ) . ccsp has implemented our recommendation about explaining changes in report content or format . in 1990 , the congress enacted the global change research act . this act , among other things , required the administration to ( 1 ) prepare and at least every 3 years revise and submit to the congress a national global change research plan , including an estimate of federal funding for global change research activities to be conducted under the plan ; ( 2 ) in each annual budget submission to the congress , identify the items in each agency's budget that are elements of the united states global change research program ( usgcrp ) , an interagency long - term climate change science research program ; and ( 3 ) report annually on climate change “expenditures required” for the usgcrp . in 1992 , the united states signed and ratified the united nations framework convention on climate change , which was intended to stabilize the buildup of greenhouse gases in the earth's atmosphere , but did not impose binding limits on emissions . omb viewed this as an appropriate interpretation of the congressional requirements since the committees on appropriations work with budget authority and not outlays . moreover , omb told us that these committees had never objected to its interpretation of “obligations and expenditures” as budget authority and that omb had always identified the data provided in the table as budget authority . in our august 2005 report , we expressed several concerns with omb's approach . first , omb's approach of reporting budget authority did not comply with the language of the annual legal requirements to report on climate change “obligations and expenditures.” second , in reviewing the legislative history of these reporting requirements , we found no support for omb's interpretation that when the congress called for “obligations and expenditures” information , it actually meant “budget authority” information . third , omb's interpretation was not consistent with its own circular a - 11 , which defines budget authority as stated above , not actual obligations and expenditures . nonetheless , we recognize that it is not possible for omb to meet the most recent reporting requirements because it must provide a report on climate change obligations and expenditures for the current fiscal year within 45 days of submitting the president's budget for the following fiscal year ( which must be submitted the first monday of february ) . effects on planetary biodiversity are projected to be even more pronounced . for more than a decade , the federal government has funded programs to study the earth's climate and to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases linked to climate change .