are some of the first to be affected . bop officials said that deferring hiring during crs has made it difficult for bop to maintain or improve the ratio of corrections officers to inmates as the prison population increases . vba officials cited missed opportunities in processing additional benefits claims and completing other tasks . because newly hired claims processors require as much as 24 months of training to reach full performance , a vba official said that the effects of hiring delays related to crs are not immediate , but reduce service delivery in subsequent years . however , vba was able to achieve its hiring goals by the end of the fiscal year in each of the past 4 years . the effects of crs on hiring at other departments as described by departmental cfos and others who participated in our panel discussion were similar to those identified by officials at case study agencies . to avoid these types of hiring delays , fbi proceeded with its hiring activities based on a staffing plan supported by the president's budget during the cr period in 2009 . this helped fbi avoid a backlog in hiring later in the year and cumulatively over time . however , fbi assumed some risk that the regular appropriation for the year would not support the hiring plan . according to fbi officials , if the agency had not received a regular appropriation equal to or greater than the president's fiscal year 2009 budget request , it likely would have had to suspend hiring for the remainder of the fiscal year and make difficult cuts to other nonpersonnel expenses . in addition to delays in hiring , case study agencies also reported delaying contracts during the cr period . for example , vha medical facilities did not start nonrecurring maintenance projects designed to improve and maintain the quality of va medical centers ( eg , repairs to electrical or sewage systems ) but instead waited until the agency received its regular appropriation to fund these projects . bop reported that it frequently postponed awarding some contracts during a cr . for example , bop reported delaying the activation of its butner and tucson prison facilities and two other federal prisons in 2007 during the cr period to make $65.6 million in additional resources available for more immediate needs . according to bop , delays resulting from crs contributed to delays in the availability of additional prison capacity at a time when prison facilities were already overcrowded . a recent bop study found that overcrowding is an important factor affecting the rate of serious inmate assault . as of july 9 , 2009 , bop facilities were 37 percent over capacity systemwide . as a result of delaying contracts during crs , officials from bop , vha , and vba said that they sometimes had to solicit bids a second time or have environmental , architectural , or engineering analyses redone resulting in additional costs in time and resources for the agency . according to bop , delaying contract awards for new bop prisons and renovations to existing facilities prevented the agency from locking in prices and resulted in higher construction costs .