we do not agree . our review extended to six key acquisition control areas , all of which are reflected in dod's own acquisition policies as well as other federal guidance . effective implementation of these controls can minimize program risks and better ensure that system investments are defined in a way to optimally support mission operations and performance , as well as deliver promised system capabilities and benefits on time and within budget . however , we found that none of these key it management controls were being effectively implemented on navy cash , and the department agreed with our recommendations aimed at correcting this . second , the department stated that the report's findings do not accurately capture the program's maturity since the system has been deployed to over 80 percent of its user base . while we do not question the extent to which the system has been deployed to date , and in fact state in our report that the system has been deployed to about 80 percent of the fleet , we do not agree that the program is mature , as evidence by the numerous it management control weaknesses that we found and the fact that about $60 million in modernization funding remains to be spent on the system . third , the department stated that it recognizes that some security management limitations exist , but added that these limitations do not pose a serious risk to the confidentiality , integrity , or availability of the deployed system , and that our report may cause cardholders to become unnecessarily concerned . we do not agree that these limitations do not pose a serious risk . our report details a number of serious security management weaknesses relative to both dod and nist guidance , such as not following an adequate process for planning , implementing , evaluating and documenting remedial actions for known information security vulnerabilities , as well as not obtaining adequate assurance that fms has effective security controls in place to protect navy cash applications and data . as a result , we appropriately conclude in our report that such failures to effectively manage navy cash security places the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of deployed and operating shipboard devices , applications , and financial data at increased risk of being compromised . swift implementation of our recommendations is the best solution to alleviating any cardholder concerns that may arise from these weaknesses . in fms's comments , signed by the commissioner of fms and reprinted in appendix iii , the service stated that our recommendations will help strengthen navy cash and that it has begun addressing our findings and recommendations . in addition , it stated that it will support dod in implementing the recommendations , and consistent with dod , commented that it did not agree with one part of one of our recommendations , adding that limiting investment in navy cash beyond fielding and maintaining already tested system capabilities would place future operations at risk . as stated above , this recommendation is focused on limiting further investment in modernization funding , not operations and maintenance funding . to avoid any confusion about this , we have added language to other parts of the report to emphasize this focus .