while these challenges are difficult , they are not insurmountable . without sustained leadership and oversight by senior management , the likelihood of success is diminished . in its fiscal year 2002 performance and accountability report , usaid noted that it was in the process of implementing an agencywide financial management system . usaid reported that the system has been successfully implemented in washington . to provide reasonable assurance that the current effort is successful , top management must be actively involved in the oversight of the current project . management must have performance metrics in place to ensure the modernization effort is accomplished on time , within budget , and provides the planned and needed capabilities . in this regard , in fiscal year 2002 , usaid redesigned its overall governance structure for the acquisition and management of information technology . specifically , usaid created the business transformation executive committee , chaired by the deputy administrator and with membership including key senior management . the committee's purpose is to provide usaid - wide leadership for initiatives and investments to transform usaid business systems and organizational performance . the committee's roles and responsibilities include: guiding business transformation efforts and ensuring broad - based cooperation , ownership , and accountability for results . initiating , reviewing , approving , monitoring , coordinating , and evaluating projects and investments . qualified personnel must be in place to implement and operate these systems . usaid's role is critical to the success of these rebuilding efforts . my statement today will provide an overview of usaid's progress in addressing its financial management challenges . table 2 shows that while usaid's opinions on its financial statements improved , reported material weaknesses , reportable conditions , and noncompliance increased . the increase in reported material weaknesses , reportable conditions , and noncompliance is , in part , due to the full scope audits that were not possible in prior years . since the early 1990s , we have reported that usaid has made limited progress in addressing its human capital management issues . a major concern is that usaid has not established a comprehensive workforce plan that is integrated with the agency's strategic objectives and ensures that the agency has skills and competencies necessary to meet its emerging foreign assistance challenges . while a viable financial management system is needed , and offers the capacity to achieve reliable data , it is not the entire answer for improving usaid's financial management information . in addition to the improved opinions for fiscal year 2002 , the ig reported that while usaid had made improvements in its processes and procedures , a substantial number of material weaknesses , reportable conditions , and noncompliance with laws and regulations remain . the report also noted that usaid's financial management systems do not meet federal financial system requirements . as financial information improved over the years , it has assisted the usaid ig in identifying additional internal control and system weaknesses . identifying these additional weaknesses is constructive in that they highlight areas that management needs to address in order to improve the overall operations of the agency and provide accurate , timely , and reliable information to management and the congress .