we disagree . to the contrary , dod officials did not provide any specific documentation from ousd ( p&r ) or civilian personnel policy requiring the new office to develop such plans , when asked about this plan . in fact , we were told that the department did not have a performance plan and that the civilian personnel policy office , which had responsibility for the new program management office , normally does not produce such documents . we were further told that , essentially , any overall plan for the new office was scattered through several documents — including position descriptions , budget requests , and briefings to senior leadership . dod also stated that , at the time of our review , the establishment of the civilian readiness office was only a couple of months old and its staffing was ongoing . we note however , that another office , per dod officials , had been addressing the fy 2006 ndaa requirements and that dod did not provide us with a performance plan for that office either . after reviewing dod's comments , we asked for additional documentation to support its statement that the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness and the deputy under secretary of defense for civilian personnel policy had required the development of a performance plan . dod officials told us that while they have drafted a performance plan , they were unable to provide a copy because it is currently under review . in light of these circumstances , we believe it is imperative that dod have a performance plan that provides additional guidance and measures to assess the extent to which the program management office is addressing the requirements of the fy 2006 ndaa . dod also partially concurred with the recommendation to task the newly established executive management office , which is responsible for addressing the requirements of the fy 2007 ndaa , to develop a performance plan that includes establishing implementation goals and timeframes , measuring performance , and aligning activities with resources . the department stated that , at the time of our review , the executive management office was only a couple of months old . it further noted that ousd ( p&r ) and the deputy under secretary of defense ( civilian personnel policy ) had required the new office to develop both a performance plan ( which measures performance and aligns activities to resources ) and a road map ( with implementation goals and timeframes ) . the department also noted that development of these documents was in progress . again , dod officials did not mention or provide gao with any specific documentation from ousd ( p&r ) or civilian personnel policy requiring the new office to develop such plans . these actions , if performed , appear consistent with the intent of our recommendation to develop a performance plan that provides additional guidance and measures to assess the extent to which the executive management office is addressing the requirements of the fy 2007 ndaa .