ii. ) we obtained immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) adjudications division's views on how the occupations for which the grant programs trained compared with h - 1b visa workers' occupations . in addition , we analyzed descriptions of programs funded with more recent skill grants . manufacturing extension partnership – nationwide network of not - for - profit centers in over 400 locations nationwide to provide assistance to small and medium - sized manufacturers . if this assistance includes obtaining new equipment , these centers may provide training on the new equipment . technology - led economic development – web site that identifies federal , state , and local initiatives related to technology - led economic development . agency / office department of education office of vocational and adult education ( ovae ) preparing america's future – initiative that provides a framework to connect ovae's activities to support education reform and prepare the 21st century workforce . this effort organized three teams , high school excellence team ; community and technical colleges team ; and adult learning team , to develop a coherent strategy for preparing america's future with implications for policy and practice . carl d. perkins vocational - technical education act amendments of 1998 – provides federal funding for vocational and technical education programs and services to youth and adults . the majority of the funds are awarded as grants to state education agencies as state basic grants and tech prep grants . career clusters – established 16 broad career clusters that consist of entry level through professional - level occupations in a broad industry area . each cluster includes academic and technical skills and knowledge needed for further education and careers . it career cluster initiative – partnership of the education development center , inc. , the information technology association of america , and the national alliance of business to create a national model and career cluster curricular framework for it careers . this initiative is sponsored by the department of education and national school - to - work office . community technology centers program – grants to create or expand community technology centers that will provide disadvantaged residents of economically distressed urban and rural communities with access to information technology and related training . grants to address emerging nursing shortage include: advanced education nursing traineeship grants . advanced education nurse anesthetist traineeship grants . geriatric nursing knowledge and experiences in long - term care facilities grants . nurse faculty development in geriatrics grants . cooperative agreements for health workforce research — available for state or local governments , health professions schools , schools of nursing , academic health centers , community - based health facilities , and other appropriate public or private nonprofit entities , including faith - based organizations to conduct research that will contribute to ( 1 ) the development of information describing the current status of the health professions workforce and ( 2 ) analysis of fundamental health workforce related issues . information communications technology voluntary partnership – sponsoring research for the development of skill standards and the potential alignment of industry - based certifications in the information technology and telecommunications sector .