surgeon general . the surgeon general also reported that among adults who had ever smoked cigarettes daily , 87 percent had tried their first cigarette by the time they were 18 years of age . in 2009 , the family smoking prevention and tobacco control act ( tobacco control act ) granted the food and drug administration ( fda ) , an agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , authority to address concerns about tobacco use by young people and to regulate the manufacturing , marketing , and distribution of tobacco products using a public health standard . the act provides fda with a range of authorities , such as restricting tobacco sales to minors and setting tobacco product standards . the tobacco control act represents the first time that fda has had the authority to regulate tobacco products . the tobacco control act established the center for tobacco products ( ctp ) within fda as the entity responsible for implementing the act . ctp was formed in 2009 — the first new center within fda in 21 years — and it implements the act by educating the public on the dangers of tobacco use ; developing the science needed for tobacco regulation ; developing and enforcing regulations on the manufacture , marketing , and distribution of tobacco products ; and performing other activities . to support fda's tobacco regulation activities , the tobacco control act authorized fda to assess and collect user fees — the sole source of funding for ctp's activities — from each tobacco manufacturer and importer subject to fda's regulation . the tobacco control act mandated that gao review fda's authority and resources to regulate the manufacture , marketing , and distribution of tobacco products . this report examines ( 1 ) how fda spent tobacco user fees for key activities using its authorities granted in the tobacco control act and ( 2 ) any challenges fda encountered in using its authorities granted in the tobacco control act . to examine how fda spent tobacco user fees for its key activities using its authorities granted in the tobacco control act , we analyzed data on tobacco user fees collected through march 31 , 2014 , such as the amounts collected by fda and the amounts spent by ctp's offices . we also interviewed agency officials and reviewed agency documents , including budget justifications , reports to congress , performance reports , and agency documentation of ctp's activities to identify the key activities the agency carried out . we analyzed spending data provided by fda for these activities for fiscal years 2010 through the first half of fiscal year 2014 ( march 31 , 2014 ) and planned spending for fiscal year 2014.spending for key activities included actual spending and an estimated distribution , generated by fda , of personnel costs across activities within each individual ctp office . for our analysis , we included spending for the tobacco - related work of fda's office of regulatory affairs ( ora ) with ctp's compliance and enforcement activities , since ora assists ctp by conducting select activities .