we have the resources and the people . we need to combine them more effectively , to achieve unity of effort.” gao agrees with this comment , and we have noted several related suggestions below . as the committee is aware , gao has done extensive work on federal organizational structure and how reorganization can improve performance . the 9 / 11 commission has recommended major changes to unify strategic intelligence and operational planning with a national counterterrorism center and provide the intelligence community with a new national intelligence director . implementation cannot be assured , or corrective action taken , if we are not getting the results we want , without effective accountability and oversight . the focus for homeland security must be on constantly staying ready and prepared for unknown threats and paying attention to improving performance . in addition to continuing our ongoing work in major homeland security mission areas such as border and transportation security and emergency preparedness , gao can help the congress more effectively oversee the intelligence community , and any changes should consider , in our view , an appropriate role for the gao . with some exceptions , gao has broad - based authority to conduct reviews relating to various intelligence agencies . however , because of historical resistance from the intelligence agencies and the general lack of support from the intelligence committees in the congress , gao has done limited work in this community over the past 25 years . for example , within the past 2 years , we have done a considerable amount of work in connection with the fbi and its related transformational efforts . in addition , gao has recently had some interaction with the defense intelligence agency in connection with its transformation efforts . furthermore , gao has conducted extensive work on a wide range of government transformational and homeland security issues over the past several years . as always , we stand ready to offer gao's assistance in support of any of the congress' oversight needs . in conclusion , on the basis of gao's work in both the public and the private sector over many years , and my own change management experience , it is clear to me that many of the challenges that the intelligence community faces are similar or identical to the transformation challenges applicable to many other federal agencies , including gao . specifically , while the intelligence agencies are in a different line of business than other federal agencies , they face the same challenges when it comes to strategic planning and budgeting , organizational alignment , human capital strategy , and the management of information technology , finances , knowledge , and change . for the intelligence community , effectively addressing these basic business transformation challenges will require action relating to five key dimensions , namely , structure , people , process , technology , and partnerships . it will also require a rethinking and cultural transformation in connection with intelligence activities both in the executive branch and in the congress . with regard to the structure dimension , there are many organizational units within the executive branch and in the congress with responsibilities in the intelligence and homeland security areas .