trademark . any sign or any combination of signs capable of distinguishing the source of goods or services is capable of constituting a trademark . such signs — in particular , words ( including personal names ) , letters , numerals , figurative elements , and combinations of colors , as well as any combination of such signs — are eligible for registration as trademarks . patent . exclusive rights granted to inventions for a fixed period of time , whether products or processes , in all fields of technology , provided they are new , not obvious ( involve an inventive step ) , and have utility ( are capable of industrial application ) . “pirated copyright goods” refer to any goods that are copies made without the consent of the right holder or person duly authorized by the right holder . “counterfeit goods” refer to any goods , including packaging or bearing without authorization , a trademark that is identical to a trademark validly registered for those goods , or that cannot be distinguished in its essential aspects from such a trademark , and that , thereby , infringes the rights of the owner of the trademark in question . according to the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) , “counterfeit drugs” are defined under u.s. law as those sold under a product name without proper authorization , where the identity of the source drug is knowingly and intentionally mislabeled in a way that suggests that it is the authentic and approved product . cbp data show that between fiscal years 2004 and 2009 , the domestic value and number of u.s. seizures of counterfeit goods imported from other countries have fluctuated . these seizures have been concentrated among certain types of products . for example , seizures of footwear , wearing apparel , and handbags accounted for about 57 percent of the aggregate domestic value of goods seized in those 6 years . table 1 shows the percent of total domestic value for different types of commodities seized as well as the domestic value of all goods seized and total number of seizures . the value of wearing apparel and cigarette seizures generally declined , while the value of pharmaceutical seizures generally increased . several factors influence trends in seizure values . for example , values of seized goods can vary from year to year due to counterfeiters' responses to changes in marketplace demand or enforcement actions . for instance , in fiscal year 2006 , a federal enforcement investigation resulted in the seizure of 77 cargo containers of counterfeit nike air jordan shoes and one container of counterfeit abercrombie & fitch clothing . the estimated domestic value of these goods was about $19 million , representing about 12 percent of the total domestic seizure value that year . in addition , the level of federal border enforcement effort varies across ports , resulting in different seizure rates , which is discussed in a later section of this report . according to cbp data , seized counterfeit goods are dominated by products from china . during fiscal years 2004 through 2009 , china accounted for about 77 percent of the aggregate value of goods seized in the united states .