gao - 03-57 . washington , d.c.: february 11 , 2003 . dod was responsive to all three requirements . reliability rates of components and subsystems . the additional controls for the production commitment ( milestone c ) should ensure the capture of knowledge about the following: completion of production representative prototypes . availability of production representative prototypes to achieve reliability goal and demonstrate the product in an operational environment . collection of statistical process control data . demonstration that critical manufacturing processes are capable and in statistical control . because knowledge about technology , design , and manufacturing at critical junctures can lower dod's investment risk , decisions that do not satisfy knowledge - based criteria should be visible and justified . therefore , we also recommend that the secretary of defense document the rationale for any decision to move a program to the next stage of development without meeting the knowledge - based criteria , including those listed in the first recommendation . the responsible milestone decision authority should justify the decision in the program's acquisition decision memorandum and in a report to congress . dod provided us with written comments on a draft of this report . the comments appear in appendix iv . dod partially concurred with our recommendation that the secretary require additional controls for capturing knowledge at three key points: program launch , design readiness review for transitioning from system integration to system demonstration , and production . dod stated that it agrees in principle with the advantages of using knowledge - based controls at key points in the acquisition process to assess risk and ensure readiness to proceed into the next phase of the acquisition process . dod believes the current acquisition framework includes the controls necessary to achieve effective results , but it will continue to monitor the process to determine whether others are necessary to achieve the best possible outcomes . while we believe dod's effort to establish a solid framework for evolutionary acquisitions is a giant step forward , our work has shown that a disciplined application of controls in the process is needed to implement the framework if better acquisition outcomes are to be achieved . dod's policy does not include all the necessary controls to ensure a high level of product knowledge is attained and used for making decisions to move a program forward in the product development process . leading product developers use additional controls , as listed in our first recommendation , to achieve the knowledge necessary to reduce risk to reasonable levels at critical junctures before making additional significant investments in product development . simply monitoring the process may not be enough for dod to achieve the best outcomes . therefore , we are retaining our recommendation that the secretary require additional controls at three critical points in the acquisition process . dod also partially concurred with our recommendation that the secretary document in each program's acquisition decision memorandum and in a report to congress the rationale for any decision to move a program to the next stage of development without meeting the knowledge - based criteria , including those described in the first recommendation . dod agreed that it should record and be accountable for program decisions .