postal service . in reporting the questionnaire data , when we use the term “governmentwide” and the phrase “across the federal government,” we are referring to these 24 cfo act executive branch agencies , and when we use the terms “federal managers” and “managers,” we are referring to both managers and supervisors . the sample was drawn from the march 1999 office of personnel management's central personnel data file ( cpdf ) — the most recent version of the cpdf available when we began drawing our sample — using file designators indicating performance of managerial and supervisory functions . the questionnaire was designed to obtain the observations and perceptions of respondents on such results - oriented management topics as the presence , use , and usefulness of performance measures ; hindrances to measuring and using performance information ; agency climate ; information technology ; program evaluation ; and various aspects of the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) . most of the items on the questionnaire were closed - ended — that is , depending on the particular item , respondents could choose one of two or more response categories or rating the strength of their perception on a 5-point extent scale ranging from “to no extent” to “to a very great extent.” in most cases , respondents also had an option of choosing the response category “no basis to judge / not applicable.” about half of the items on the questionnaire were contained in a previous survey that was conducted between november 1996 and january 1997 as part of the work we did in response to a gpra requirement that we report on implementation of the act . this previous survey , although done with a smaller sample size of 1,300 managers , covered the same agencies as the 2000 survey , which was sent out between january and august , 2000 . individuals who did not respond to the initial questionnaire were sent up to two follow - up questionnaires . in some cases , we contacted individuals by telephone and faxed the questionnaire to them to expedite completion of the survey . the current survey was designed to update and further elaborate on the results of the previous survey . similar to the previous survey , the sample was stratified by whether the manager or supervisor was senior executive service ( ses ) or non - ses . the management levels covered general schedule ( gs ) , general management ( gm ) , or equivalent schedules at levels comparable to gs / gm - 13 through career ses or equivalent levels of executive service . stratification was also done by the 24 cfo act agencies , with an additional breakout of 4 selected agencies from their departments — forest service , health care financing administration , federal aviation administration , and internal revenue service . these four agencies were selected on the basis of our previous work identifying them as facing significant managerial challenges . aid ranked in the lowest quarter of the agencies for the percentage of managers who reported that they used performance information when allocating resources ( 32 percent ) .