we used these rates in our analyses . before using the rates , however , we reviewed the methodology nexcom used to develop them . we found that the methodology and costs included in the overhead rates appeared reasonable . when compared to aafes' overhead rates , nexcom's rates appeared small . this condition exists because the indirect method requires significantly fewer people to manage and oversee fast - food operations . for example , to support such operations , nexcom had to negotiate and oversee several contracts , while aafes had to manage all of the operations of about 170 restaurants . exchange officials identified a number of factors , other than profitability , that are important when deciding between the direct and indirect methods . as shown in table 6 , we grouped these factors into six categories: financial risk , customer service , employment opportunities , management control , operational risk , and investment opportunities . the relative importance of individual factors might vary depending on the circumstances involved in selecting an operating method for a planned restaurant . however , neither exchange used a standard approach or methodology to determine their relative importance or to evaluate them along with profitability considerations . indirect method minimizes financial risk: under the indirect method , the name - brand , fast - food company builds the restaurants and assumes the financial risk of recovering its capital investments and operating at a profit . the exchange service , in this situation , has no capital investment and generally receives a commission on restaurant sales , regardless of whether the restaurant makes a profit . under the direct method , the opposite is true . , mobile unit or kiosk ) . the opportunity cost ( or economic cost ) associated with alternative uses for invested capital of comparable risk . includes funds invested in buildings , equipment ( including periodic renovations and upgrades ) and inventory . the operation of either non - branded or branded food service staffed by an exchange service's direct hire associates . the exchange is responsible for providing / building and maintaining its own facilities , inventory , equipment , utilities , financial records , and personnel . method of measuring the cash inflows and outflows of a capital investment or project as if the flows occurred at a single point in time so that they can be appropriately compared . because the method considers the time value of money , it is usually the best method to use for evaluating long - term investment decisions . net profit less the opportunity cost , also referred to as the cost of capital , associated with invested capital . a restaurant chain , either nationally or regionally recognized , providing a standardized system of policies , procedures , marketing / advertising schemes , logos , trademark , source of supply , source of equipment , and access to the franchise contracts . the operation of either non - branded or branded food service by a concessionaire or third - party contractor via a contract with an exchange service . a term for the legally binding agreement between a franchisee and a franchiser .