a - 11 requirements . omb reported that some of the agencies were unable to determine the rate or amount of improper payments because of measurement challenges or time and resource constraints , which omb expects to be resolved in future reporting years . however , in the case of the hhs programs , the agency auditor recognized this lack of reporting as a reportable condition related to the reliability of the department's financial statements . in the component of its fiscal year 2005 audit report dealing with compliance with laws and regulations , the auditor reported that hhs potentially had not fully complied with ipia because nationwide improper payment estimates and rates for significant health programs were under development and the agency did not expect to complete the estimation process until fiscal year 2007 . also , as mentioned earlier and shown in appendix i , 8 of 33 agencies said they did not have programs susceptible to significant amounts of improper payments . however , certain programs associated with the government's response to mitigate the effects of hurricane katrina , one of the largest natural disasters in our nation's history , had material risks of improper payments . in order to respond to the immediate needs of disaster victims and to rebuild the affected areas , government agencies used streamlined eligibility verification requirements for delivery of benefits and expedited contracting methods in order to commit contractors to begin work immediately . these expedited processes can increase the potential for improper payments . further details are included in appendix i . regarding the reported $7 billion decrease in the governmentwide improper payment estimate for fiscal year 2005 , we determined that this decrease was primarily due to a $9.6 billion reduction in the department of health and human services's ( hhs ) medicare program improper payment estimate , which was partially offset by more programs reporting estimates of improper payments , resulting in a net decrease of $7 billion . based on our review , hhs's $9.6 billion decrease in its medicare program improper payment estimate was principally due to its efforts to educate health care providers about its medicare error rate testing program and the importance of responding to its requests for medical records to perform detailed statistical reviews of medicare payments . hhs reported that these more intensive efforts had dramatically reduced the number of “no documentation” errors in its medical reviews . the relevance of this significant decrease is that when providers do not submit documentation to justify payments , these payments are counted by hhs as erroneous for purposes of calculating an annual improper payment estimate for the medicare program . hhs reported marked reductions in its error rate attributable to ( 1 ) nonresponses to requests for medical records and ( 2 ) insufficient documentation submitted by the provider . we noted that these improvements partially resulted from hhs extending the time that providers have for responding to documentation requests from 55 days to 90 days . these changes primarily affected hhs's processes related to its efforts to perform detailed statistical reviews for the purposes of calculating an annual improper payment estimate for the medicare program .