( see fig . the long construction times increase the uncertainty that ship cost estimates — and budgets — must provide for . moreover , the total cost for a ship must be budgeted for in its first year of construction . provisions are made in the event cost growth occurs during construction . the navy's budgeting for cost growth has changed over the past 2 decades . during the early 1970s and through most of the 1980s , the navy used program cost reserves built into ship construction budgets and the ship cost adjustment process to manage cost growth . during the 1980s , the navy procured an average of 17 ships each year . in fiscal year 1988 , the navy removed program cost reserves from ship construction budgets and began exclusively using the ship cost adjustment process , shifting funding between shipbuilding construction programs underrunning cost to programs that were overrunning costs . following the end of the cold war , the navy decreased the procurement rate of ships to about 6 per year . beginning in fiscal year 1999 , cost increases could no longer be covered using the ship cost adjustment process because no shipbuilding program was under cost . in 2001 , the process was eliminated , which required the navy to fund cost growth through the current mechanism of prior year completion bills . the cost of building a ship can be broken down into four main components: labor , material , and overhead associated with the shipbuilders' contract for the basic ship , and navy - furnished equipment — that is , items purchased by the navy and provided to the contractor for installation on the ship . ( see table 2. ) the shipbuilding contract also includes profit ( referred to as fee ) . two broad categories of contracts are used to procure ships: fixed - price and cost - reimbursement . fixed price contracts provide for a firm price or an adjustable price with a ceiling price , a target price , or both . if the ceiling is reached the shipbuilder is generally responsible for all additional costs . cost reimbursement contracts provide for payment of allowable incurred costs , to the extent prescribed in the contract . if the ship cannot be completed within agreed upon cost limits , the government is responsible for the additional costs to complete . the level of knowledge , or certainty , in the cost estimates for a ship is key to determining which type of contract to use . contracts for the first ship of a new class are often negotiated as cost - reimbursable contracts because these ships tend to involve a high - level of uncertainty and , thus , high cost risks . cost reimbursement contracts were used to procure the san antonio and virginia class ships we reviewed . more mature shipbuilding programs , where there is greater certainty about costs , are typically fixed - price contracts with an incentive fee ( profit ) . fixed - price contracts were used to procure the arleigh burke and nimitz class ships we reviewed .