we disagree . first , in meetings to discuss the preliminary results of performance testing conducted at the nevada test site , dndo officials agreed with our understanding of the ability of asps and pvts deployed for primary screening to detect shielded nuclear materials . furthermore , contrary to the assertion that a complete analysis requires a comparison of asps to handheld identification devices , our presentation is consistent with dhs's primary screening criterion for detection of shielded nuclear materials , which only requires that asps be compared with pvts . finally , while we agree that the performance test results require a more complete analysis , dndo did not provide us with its final performance test report until early april 2009 , after dhs provided its comments on our draft report . in the absence of the final report , which dndo officials told us took longer than anticipated to complete , we summarized the preliminary results that dndo presented to us during the course of our review as well as to congressional stakeholders . with regard to asp software problems uncovered during field validation , we clarified our report in response to dhs's comment that the severity of the problems has not yet been determined . dhs stated that its preliminary analysis indicates the problems should be resolved by routine adjustments to threshold settings rather than presumably more significant software “revisions.” however , given the history of lengthy delays during asp testing , we believe that dhs's assessment of the severity of problems encountered during field validation may be overly optimistic . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretaries of homeland security and energy ; the administrator of nnsa ; and interested congressional committees . the report will also be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or aloisee@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . to evaluate the degree to which department of homeland security's ( dhs ) criteria for a significant increase in operational effectiveness address the limitations of the current generation of radiation detection equipment , we clarified the intent of the criteria through the domestic nuclear detection office's ( dndo ) written answers to our questions and through interviews with u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) officials . we also took steps to gain a fuller understanding of the strengths and limitations of the current - generation equipment , which the criteria use as a baseline for evaluating the effectiveness of advanced spectroscopic portals ( asp ) . in particular , we obtained copies of the department of energy ( doe ) threat guidance and related documents used to set polyvinyl toluene ( pvt ) thresholds for detection of nuclear materials .