allocations . usaid , state drl , and ned fund democracy assistance programs in countries throughout the world . usaid's and state drl's foreign assistance programs are funded under the foreign operations appropriation and tracked by state as part of gjd funding , while ned's core budget is funded under the state operations appropriation and is not tracked as part of gjd foreign assistance funding . u.s. agency for international development . in fiscal years 2006 through 2008 , usaid democracy programs operated in 88 countries worldwide . usaid's office of democracy and governance , based in washington , d.c. , supports usaid's democracy programs worldwide , but these programs are primarily designed and managed by usaid missions in the field . usaid democracy programs cover a large variety of issues including media , labor , judicial reforms , local governance , legislative strengthening , and elections . usaid programs are managed by technical officers , typically based in missions in the field , who develop strategies and assessments , design programs , and monitor the performance of projects by collecting and reviewing performance reports from implementing partners and conducting site visits , typically at least monthly . bureau of democracy , human rights and labor . state drl implements the human rights democracy fund , established in fiscal year 1998 , providing grants primarily to u.s. nonprofit organizations to strengthen democratic institutions , promote human rights , and build civil society mainly in fragile democracies and authoritarian states . in 2006 through 2008 , state drl's programs operated in 66 countries worldwide . according to state , state drl strives to fund innovative programs focused on providing immediate short term assistance in response to emerging events . in addition , state drl can also fill gaps in usaid democracy funding ( see app . ii ) . unlike usaid , state drl manages its democracy grant program centrally . state drl's washington - based staff monitor these grants by collecting and reviewing quarterly reports from grantees and conducting site visits , typically through annual visits to participating countries . national endowment for democracy . in 1983 , congress authorized initial funding for ned , a private , nonprofit , nongovernmental organization . ned's core budget is funded primarily through an annual congressional appropriation and ned receives additional funding from state to support congressionally directed or discretionary programs . the legislation recognizing the creation of ned and authorizing its funding , known as the ned act , requires ned to report annually to congress on its operations , activities , and accomplishments as well as on the results of an independent financial audit . the act does not require ned to report to state on the use of its core appropriation ; however , state requires ned to provide quarterly financial reporting and annual programmatic reporting on the use of the congressionally directed and discretionary grants it receives from state . ned funds indigenous partners with grants that typically last for about a year . ned monitors program activities through quarterly program and financial reports from grantees and site visits , performed on average about once per year , to verify program and budgetary information .