all instruments are scheduled to be delivered to the spacecraft by 2014 . also , the flight project completed a major design review for the jpss - 1 satellite's spacecraft . the jpss ground project has also made progress in developing the ground system components . however , the ground project experienced delays in its planned schedule due to issues with the availability of facilities required for hardware installation , software development , and testing . consequently , the program has replanned the ground project schedule and is merging the next two major software releases . as a result , any complications in the merged ground system upgrades could affect the system's readiness to support the jpss - 1 launch date . while noaa is moving forward to complete product development on the s - npp satellite and system development on the jpss - 1 satellite , the agency recently made major revisions to the program's scope and planned capabilities and is moving to implement other scope changes as it finalizes its plans pending coordination with congressional committees . we previously reported that , as part of its fiscal year 2013 budget process , noaa was considering removing selected elements of the program in order to reduce total program costs from $14.6 billion to $12.9 billion . by october 2012 , noaa had reduced the program's scope by , among other things , reducing the previously planned network of fifteen ground - based receptor stations to two receptor sites at the north pole and two sites at the south pole and increasing the time it takes to obtain satellite data and deliver it to the end user on jpss - 2 from 30 minutes to 80 minutes . more recently , as proposed by the administration , noaa began implementing additional changes in the program's scope and objectives in order to meet the agency's highest - priority needs for weather forecasting and reduce program costs from $12.9 billion to $11.3 billion . in this latest round of revisions , noaa revised the program's scope by , among other things , transferring requirements for certain climate sensors to nasa , creating a new polar free flyer program within noaa that would be responsible for missions supporting continued solar measurements and user service systems , and reducing the jpss program's mission life cycle by 3 years — from 2028 to 2025 . the changes noaa implemented over the last 2 years will have an impact on those who rely on polar satellite data . specifically , satellite data products will be delivered more slowly than anticipated because of the reduction in the number of ground stations , and military users may not obtain the variety of products once anticipated at the rates anticipated because of the removal of their ground - based processing subsystems . as noaa moves to implement these program changes , it will be important to assess and understand the impact the changes will have on satellite data users . according to our draft guidance on best practices in scheduling,success of a program depends , in part , on having an integrated and reliable master schedule that defines when and how long work will occur and how each activity is related to the others .