the documents were fragmented and outdated . further , many of these older documents referred to outdated laws , regulations , or organizations , raising questions about their current applicability . standards for internal control in the federal government state that the roles of those responsible for carrying out programs should be clearly outlined in policy , and gao has also reported that written guidance and agreements on collaboration are key features of successful cross - agency collaboration . the lack of current documentation related to gsa's delegation to va , alongside the limitations in nac and gsa communication , undermine a firm foundation on which to build collaboration . without a clear delineation of roles and responsibilities — and effective overall coordination — nac and gsa risk misunderstandings and missed opportunities to share information and tools that could improve nac's management of the va fss program . from 2015 until 2018 , senior va fss leadership positions were vacant , which affected va's fss program management and directly contributed to many of the challenges we identified above . see figure 3 . we found that the vha sales trends varied among our three selected schedules during this period , as shown in figure 4 . specifically , vha sales on the fss for medical equipment and supplies , the largest of the three , were generally flat . vha sales on the fss for patient mobility devices , which includes items such as wheelchairs , increased nearly 50 percent , while sales on the healthcare staffing schedule fell by more than 30 percent . nac does not have controls in place to ensure that vendors provide complete data in their sales reports . these sales reports — required per an fss contract clause — are nac's only means of tracking fss sales and related fees that finance the fss program . in fiscal year 2018 , vendors on va's nine schedules remitted $82 million in iff from customers to va's supply fund . figure 5 provides an overview of key steps in va's fss vendor sales report and iff collection process . like nac , gsa also depends on vendor - reported data to track its fss sales . however , we found that gsa takes additional steps for its fss program to ensure the completeness of vendor - reported data . gsa has internal controls to ensure data completeness , including a staff of 43 industrial operations analysts who implement gsa procedures to ensure that , among other things , vendors have sound sales data reporting processes . we did not evaluate gsa's use of these analysts , but , according to gsa fss officials , these analysts review vendor sales data , educate vendors about gsa's requirements , and conduct checks on vendor internal controls and compliance with gsa policies . having internal controls in place is essential to ensure completeness of vendor - reported sales data . in february 2019 , nac officials told us they had tried to use obligation data reported in fpds - ng to verify the completeness of vendor sales data . however , they found that fpds - ng did not contain a substantial portion of vendor sales .