b . data reliability: the data used in a study should be valid for the intended research purpose ; in other words , they represent what they purport to represent . documenting a study's analytical and decision - making process helps to ensure the accuracy , completeness , and credibility of study results . was the study plan followed ? were deviations from the study plan explained and documented ? b. assumptions: assumptions should be reasonable , consistent , appropriately varied , and explicitly identified in order to understand the context of the study's results . assumptions define the parameters for what will be included and how the study is executed . are the assumptions explicitly identified ? are the assumptions reasonable and consistent ? are the assumptions varied to allow for sensitivity analyses ? c. limitations and constraints: limitations and constraints , which are generally found in studies , should be identified and reasonably mitigated . research standards do not call for the elimination of all limitations , but do call for them to be identified , assessed , mitigated , and explained . were the data used sufficiently reliable for the study's purposes ? were any data limitations identified and was the effect of the limitations adequately explained ? table 1 summarizes our assessment of the extent to which the department of defense ( dod ) in its report on military health system modernization ( the study ) addressed each of the required nine elements listed in section 713 of the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2015 . some of the elements required that multiple items be addressed . we considered an element “addressed” if it included all of the items listed in the ndaa ; “partially addressed” if it included some , but not all , of the items ; and “not addressed” if it did not include any of the items . in addition to the contact named above , lori atkinson , assistant director ; rebekah boone ; patricia donahue ; mae jones ; linda keefer ; carol petersen ; adam smith ; sabrina streagle ; and adriel taslim made key contributions to this report . defense health care reform: actions needed to help ensure defense health agency maintains implementation progress . gao - 15-759 . washington , d.c.: september 10 , 2015 . defense health care reform: actions needed to help realize potential cost savings from medical education and training . gao - 14-630 . washington , d.c.: july 31 , 2014 . military health system: sustained senior leadership needed to fully develop plans for achieving cost savings . gao - 14-396t . were the models used to support the analyses appropriate for their intended purpose ? have they been described and documented adequately ? were any modeling limitations identified , explained , and justified ? were the data used valid for the study's purposes ? washington , d.c.: february 26 , 2014 . defense health care reform: additional implementation details would increase transparency of dod's plans and enhance accountability . gao - 14-49 . washington , d.c.: november 6 , 2013 . defense health care: additional analysis of costs and benefits of potential governance structures is needed . gao - 12-911 . washington , d.c.: september 26 , 2012 .