there are arguments for and against each of these options . for example , while using historical cost would make the charge congruent with accounting data ; the charge would not reflect the current cost of using capital and so might be less meaningful for evaluating costs . although using market rates would theoretically be the right measure for comparing the cost of using resources for federal versus private purposes , the fact that many government assets fill unique purposes means there is not a measure of market value for them . for example , some agencies occupy historic buildings , such as the old executive office building , for which a comparable market - based value would be difficult to determine . the third approach might be considered an agreeable middle ground , but applying depreciation rates poses problems since they are largely arbitrary . agreement on whether to apply treasury or market interest rates would be necessary . some agency officials and congressional staff suggested that any charges on existing capital should reflect the life - cycle costs of maintaining assets and , similar to a wcf , receipts collected should be made available for future maintenance and renovation costs . we have reported that repair and maintenance backlogs in federal facilities are significant and that the challenges of addressing facility deterioration are prevalent at major real property - holding agencies . however , research and discussions on caf design indicate that caf receipts could only go to treasury and not for future projects . officials were also skeptical about how to accurately charge for highly specialized capital . for example , ars has more than 100 laboratories located in various regions of the country , as well as abroad , which are designed to carry out mission responsibilities ranging from the study of crop production to human nutrition to animal disease control . the highly technical and diverse nature of its objectives requires capital assets that are suitable for varied climates , soils , and other agricultural factors , which pose unique and difficult challenges in establishing capital usage charges that would be viewed as acceptable by agency officials . if key players were able to agree on the method for calculating usage charges on existing capital assets , they would also have to examine the budgetary effects of such charges . budget scorekeepers — omb , cbo , and the budget committees — would need to develop additional scoring rules to clarify how the usage charges would be treated in the budget . unlike charges on new capital , there is no corresponding debt to repay . as a result scorekeepers would have to specify how to score the usage charges as they are transferred from the caf to treasury . although these charges would not change agency or government outlays or the deficit , they could require a permanent increase in agencies' total ba , which would require congress to consider adjustments of appropriations subcommittee allocations . oversight would be especially important for these transactions since caf collections would be greater than needed to repay treasury loans , creating a temptation to use accruing balances for other purposes .