other deductions . investors can generally deduct expenses incurred in the production of income , irs officials noted . that means that over the course of the madoff fraud , customers would have been able to reduce taxable income based on any expenses the madoff firm charged them . madoff insiders . the trustee told us that payments received by madoff insiders raise tax issues . in some cases , madoff made loans to immediate family , other relatives , and close associates . he often forgave such loans later , but the forgiven amounts were not reported to irs as income , the trustee said . in other cases , some people received large cash payments from madoff that were not reported as income . additionally , according to the trustee , some insiders periodically asked madoff to produce gains or losses on their accounts , presumably in order to offset income from non - madoff sources for tax purposes . timing . even if the government surrenders tax revenue as madoff customers realize tax relief , the u.s. government collected and had use of tax receipts for multiple years . meanwhile , as discussed earlier , taxpayers may have difficulty making full use of available benefits today . given time value of money , and difficulty in capitalizing on benefits , this is advantageous to the government , tax practitioners and others told us . while the use of nim or fsm to determine net equity produce different outcomes for customers , both would likely reduce tax collections for the u.s. treasury . under nim , net winners generally have their claims denied and are not eligible for reimbursement from the sipc fund . because sipc payments reduce the amount that a taxpayer would claim as a loss , these customers would then likely have correspondingly larger theft loss deductions . in turn , those higher deductions could cause revenue losses for the treasury that would not have been experienced if the trustee had used fsm , which would have provided higher sipc reimbursements . this can be seen in sipc estimates for coverage under the two methods . under nim , sipc estimates an outlay of $889 million for payment of sipc advances to madoff customers . if fsm had been used to value claims , sipc executives estimate that sipc reimbursements would have increased by an additional $1.2 billion to about $2.1 billion . according to irs officials , an increase in sipc coverage amounts — or any other coverage of losses — will correspondingly lower theft loss deductions . ultimately , though , the choice of either claims determination method creates the potential for loss in tax revenues , because both nim and fsm would create deductions against income by parties affected by the madoff liquidation . while using fsm might have lowered theft loss deductions , owing to the greater sipc reimbursements , it also would have caused greater demand on the sipc fund , according to sipc executives . as a result , sipc's broker - dealer members would have had to pay additional amounts to keep the fund at the level targeted by the sipc board , the executives said .