( see fig . nearly all school principals placed a major or moderate focus on three or more surveyed strategies in their school improvement efforts , and over 80 percent of principals placed a major or moderate focus on six or more strategies . however , as education's report on the survey data cautioned , the number of improvement strategies emphasized was not necessarily an indication of the intensity or quality of the improvement efforts . while nearly all principals responded that they used multiple improvement strategies , there were statistically significant differences in principals' responses across a range of school characteristics , including percentage of the school's students receiving free or reduced price lunch ( poverty ) , percentage of minority students , the school's location , and ayp status . what is known about instructional practices that are effective in improving student achievement ? to answer these questions , we analyzed data from two recent surveys of principals and teachers that were conducted by the rand corporation ( rand ) . the first survey , the nationally representative national longitudinal study of no child left behind ( nls - nclb ) , was sponsored by the u.s. department of education ( education ) and asked principals the extent to which their schools were focusing on certain strategies in their school improvement efforts . we conducted an analysis of the school year 2006-2007 survey data on school improvement strategies by controlling for school characteristic variables , such as the percentage of a school's students receiving free or reduced price lunch ( poverty ) ; the percentage of students who are a racial minority ( minority ) ; whether the school is in an urban , urban fringe or large town , or rural area ( school location ) ; and the school's ayp performance status . the second survey , a three - state survey sponsored by the national science foundation ( nsf ) , asked elementary and middle school teachers in california , georgia , and pennsylvania how their classroom teaching strategies differed due to a state math test . rand selected these states to represent a range of approaches to standards - based accountability and to provide some geographic and demographic diversity . using school year 2005-2006 data from the three - state survey , which is representative only of those three states individually , we measured associations between the teacher responses and the school characteristic variables . as part of these survey analyses , we reviewed documentation and performed electronic testing of the data obtained through the surveys and conducted interviews with the primary rand researchers responsible for the data collection and analysis . we determined the survey data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our study . to answer questions two and three , we conducted a literature review and synthesis . we supplemented our synthesis by interviewing prominent education researchers identified in frequently cited articles and through discussions with other knowledgeable individuals . we also reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations . we conducted our work from july 2008 to november 2009 in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that are relevant to our objectives .