fra agreed with our recommendations . most recently , in september 2018 , we testified on the status of railroads' implementation of ptc . as of june 30 , 2018 , many passenger railroads reported that they remain in the equipment installation and field - testing stages , which are early stages of ptc implementation . however , since we testified in march 2018 , railroads have made progress on equipment installation . based on our analysis of the 40 railroads' reported status as of june 30 , 2018 , about half of the railroads have completed equipment installation , and many others are nearing completion of this stage . specifically , 20 of the 29 passenger railroads reported being more than 90 percent complete with locomotive equipment installation . nearly two - thirds of passenger railroads that must install wayside equipment reported being more than 90 percent complete . one - third of passenger railroads are among those designated by fra as at - risk of both not meeting the end of 2018 implementation deadline and not completing the requirements necessary to qualify for an extension . specifically , in august 2018 , fra identified nine railroads — all commuter railroads — as at - risk , fewer than the 12 railroads fra had previously designated as at - risk in its june 2018 letters to railroads . since we reported in march 2018 , amtrak reported that it has initiated both field testing and rsd , but most commuter railroads reported slower progress with testing , especially with rsd . forty railroads are required to implement ptc . rsd testing: eight of 28 commuter railroads reported initiating rsd testing as of june 30 , 2018 ; this number represents two more commuter railroads than the six we previously reported as having entered rsd testing as of september 30 , 2017 . as noted earlier , unless a commuter railroad receives approval for using substitute criteria , the railroad must initiate rsd , a final stage of ptc testing , on at least one territory by december 31 , 2018 , to qualify for an extension . passenger railroad representatives reported that they continued to face many of the same challenges we have previously identified , including limited industry - wide availability of vendors and expertise and software defects . fra has additional oversight tools , which include use of its general civil penalty enforcement authority for failure to meet certain statutory ptc requirements . fra has used this authority in 2017 and 2018 to assess civil penalties , primarily against passenger railroads that failed to comply with the equipment installation milestones , the spectrum acquisition milestones , or both , that the railroads had established in their implementation plans for the end of 2016 and 2017 . as part of our body of work on ptc , we found that railroads face numerous ptc implementation challenges and made recommendations to fra to improve its oversight of implementation . specifically , in 2013 and 2015 we found that many railroads were struggling to make progress due to a number of complex and interrelated challenges , such as developing system components and identifying and correcting issues discovered during testing .