the board denied review . 1999 — eds submitted its permit application to the state for the planned waste treatment and storage facilities for the wells . mdeq officials found the application technically complete and arranged to obtain public comments on the draft permit . mdeq referred the permit application to a site review board - - - a 10-member board charged with investigating and deliberating on the impact of the proposed facility on a local community . the site review board held numerous open meetings and public hearings , receiving oral and written comments on many issues from local community officials , the public , eds , and mdeq . in march 2000 , the board voted to recommend that the mdeq deny the construction permit for several reasons , including an increase in traffic volumes , and the lack of need for the facility . the board did not find any fault with the technical aspects of the facility's design or operation . 2000 — during the site review board's deliberations , it was disclosed that the proposed storage and treatment facilities and wells were located in a protected wetlands area . eds applied for a wetlands construction permit during the site review board process . the permit was issued by the mdeq in june . the wetlands permit was challenged by the cities of romulus and taylor in a contested case hearing with mdeq that was subsequently dropped . 2001 — after determining that the site review board did not provide a defensible basis for denial , the mdeq issued a construction permit for the treatment and storage facility associated with the injection wells . the permit contained special conditions requiring eds to mitigate the legitimate concerns raised by the site review board in its recommendation for denial , including limiting the traffic volume and adding an emergency access road . the cities of romulus and taylor and wayne county appealed the permit decision to the wayne county circuit court , arguing that the mdeq should have followed the board's recommendation , that the facility is not needed , and that the facility should not be allowed in a wetland . the circuit court affirmed the mdeq decision . the case is currently under review by the michigan court of appeals , and as of may 2003 no decision has been issued . 2002 — a citizen filed a title vi complaint with epa's office of civil rights raising a number of issues , including the fact that the community was disproportionately exposed to pollution and other environmental dangers . epa's office of civil rights investigated the complaint but did not find any violations of title vi . 2003 — in january and april public hearings were held on the eds no - migration petition . obtaining approval of this petition is one of the final steps before operations begin . to determine the extent that epa and states address community concerns in issuing permits for deep injection wells , we obtained information on the criteria and processes from agency officials in the office of water , uic program , located in washington , d.c. , and from regional program officials located in chicago , illinois , and in dallas , texas .