( see fig . in a memo to agencies on the certification process , opm stated that senior executives who receive a fully successful or higher rating and are paid at a level consistent with their current responsibilities should receive a pay increase . according to an opm official , agencies are not required to give these executives pay increases , but opm considers fully successful to be a good rating and encourages agencies to recognize and reward executives performing at this rating level . at the selected agencies , the majority of eligible senior executives rated at fully successful received pay adjustments for fiscal year 2007 , as shown in figure 3 . unlike the bonus distributions by rating level , at some of the agencies , the highest - performing executives who received a rating of level 5 did not make up the greatest percentage of executives receiving pay adjustments with the largest increases on average . for example , at usaid , all eligible executives who received a level 3 rating received a pay adjustment , while about 92 percent of eligible executives rated at level 5 received an adjustment . for example , according to state's policy , an executive may request a higher - level review of the initial rating in writing prior to the prb convening at which time the initial summary rating , the executive's request , and the higher - level reviewing official's written findings and recommendations are considered . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have . for further information regarding this statement , please contact j. christopher mihm , managing director , strategic issues , at ( 202 ) 512- 6806 or mihmj@gao.gov or robert n. goldenkoff , director , strategic issues , at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or goldenkoffr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . individuals making key contributions to this statement include belva martin , assistant director ; amber edwards ; janice latimer ; meredith moore ; mary robison ; sabrina streagle ; and greg wilmoth . in november 2003 , congress authorized a new performance - based pay system for members of the senior executive service ( ses ) . with the performance - based pay system , senior executives are to no longer receive annual across - the - board or locality pay adjustments . agencies are to base pay adjustments for senior executives on individual performance and contributions to the agency's performance by considering the individual's accomplishments and such things as unique skills , qualifications , or competencies of the individual and the individual's significance to the agency's mission and performance , as well as the individual's current responsibilities . the system , which took effect in january 2004 , also replaced the six ses pay levels with a single , open - range pay band and raised the cap on base pay and total compensation . for 2008 , the caps are $158,500 for base pay ( level iii of the executive schedule ) with a senior executive's total compensation not to exceed $191,300 ( level i of the executive schedule ) .