for your state ? how are the providers included in the community resource list identified and updated ? individual responses are not included in order to preserve confidentiality of respondents . in your experience , how many sexual assault victims in your state ever had difficulty obtaining a safe exam ? number of respondents 2 4 7 25 12 15 individual responses are not included in order to preserve confidentiality of respondents . in general , how much of the department of the army training content do you use in the annual refresher sharp training given to units in your state ? response i only use the training content provided by the army i use some of the army training content , but supplement the content with some guard specific information or other content i do not use the army training content and instead develop my own guard - specific training content other ( please specify below ) . individual responses are not included in order to preserve confidentiality of respondents . how much of a challenge are the following aspects of the annual unit refresher sharp training for the units in your state ? what suggestions , if any , do you have to improve the annual unit refresher training for guard members in your state ? individual responses are not included in order to preserve confidentiality of respondents . section h: challenges related to sexual assault in the army national guard 38 . how much of a challenge is it for you and your collateral duty personnel to find geographically accessible medical and mental health care for sexual assault victims in your state ? if yes to question 39 , what was the nature of the complaints you have heard about the quality of medical and mental health care for sexual assault victims in your state ? individual responses are not included in order to preserve confidentiality of respondents . how much of a challenge are the following aspects of assisting a sexual assault victim ? individual responses are not included in order to preserve confidentiality of respondents . how likely , if at all , is local or state law enforcement to do the following ? individual responses are not included in order to preserve confidentiality of respondents . please provide any final thoughts you have on ways to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the sharp program in the national guard , or on how to better address the problem of sexual assault in the national guard , or in the army or dod overall . individual responses are not included in order to preserve confidentiality of respondents . to assess the extent that the army national guard and the army reserve face any implementation challenges in their programs to prevent and respond to sexual assault involving their members ( objective 1 ) , we reviewed the department of defense's ( dod ) , the department of the army's , and the army national guard's sexual assault prevention and response guidance .