examiners . for instance , fort carson's ides process was particularly hampered by a lack of mental health specialists ; in contrast , va officials serving the fort polk pilot site said perform specialty medical exams but did not have enough examiners to complete general medical exams . the 8 pilot sites that met the 45-day goal for completing single exams include 2 air force sites , 5 army sites , and 1 navy site that met the 45-day goal for servicemembers in both the navy and marine corps . one additional site ( camp pendleton ) met the 45-day goal for navy members but did not meet it for marine corps members . the navy peb determines fitness decisions for servicemembers in the marine corps . va rating staff: officials at the baltimore rating office — one of the two va offices that conduct disability ratings for the ides pilot — expressed significant concerns that they were understaffed , in part due to staff turnover . dod and va data show that , overall , the va rating offices are not meeting the agencies' goal to complete ratings within 15 days , taking 39 days on average for active duty servicemembers and 42 days for reserve component members . we could not determine case processing times at each individual va rating office , since dod and va's weekly monitoring reports do not provide processing times for the rating phase by office . the weekly reports also do not provide data on caseloads at each office . although the baltimore office currently has fewer rating staff than seattle , va officials said that it has prepared ratings for the majority of ides pilot cases , based on the way in which va has allocated cases between the two offices . the baltimore office handles cases for the air force , navy , marines , and 5 of the 15 army pilot sites , while the seattle office conducts ratings for the remaining 10 army pilot sites . va officials said that to address staffing shortages in baltimore , they have assigned staff from other va offices to assist the baltimore office . va case managers: dod and va have set a target for each va case manager to handle no more than 30 cases at a time , but two sites we visited — fort carson and fort stewart — appeared to be far from these targets . at fort carson , three va case managers told us they were handling about 900 cases when we visited in april 2010 , for a caseload ratio of roughly 1:300 . at the time of our visit in june 2010 , fort stewart had over 750 active cases with two va case managers , for a caseload ratio of approximately 1:375 . although local officials we spoke with at both sites told us that the numbers of va case managers were insufficient , an official at va's central office told us that va bases staffing of case managers on the number of new ( not pending ) cases each month , and the agencies' data indicates the average number of new cases per va case manager has been about 25 at each site .