critical functions . the 2011 ofpp policy letter describes critical functions that , when contracted for , pose a risk that the agency could lose control of its mission and operations . among other things , the policy established the criteria for identifying critical functions that are internally unique to each agency based upon their mission and operations . section 2 . this section includes a checklist for functions that the far and omb have identified as being closely associated with inherently governmental functions , such as conducting market research or drafting statements of work . if program officials identify any functions that are closely associated with inherently governmental in the proposed requirement , the job aid includes a narrative section where the program official is expected to input information on the nature of the work to be performed by the contractor and how heightened management attention will be given . section 3 . this section requires program officials to consider whether the proposed requirement is necessary for the agency to effectively perform and maintain control of its mission , which would designate the requirement as critical . agencies are allowed to contract for critical functions so long as the program official certifies that the agency has sufficient internal capacity to undertake the work if , for any reason , the contractor is unable to provide the service . special interest functions are not required to be identified in the job aid . the job aid concludes with the program official's signature and is eventually forwarded to the contracting officer as part of the overall procurement package prior to soliciting for the proposed requirement . the job aid was put in place following the march 2019 decommissioning of dhs's prior tool — the bwat . the bwat was used to implement dhs's balanced workforce strategy , which focuses on achieving the appropriate mix of federal and contractor personnel . this strategy was established in october 2009 to meet the statutory requirements in the 2009 omnibus appropriations act . the 2009 omnibus appropriations act directed most federal agencies — including dhs — to devise and implement guidelines and procedures to ensure that , on a regular basis , consideration is given to using federal employees to perform new functions , and functions that are performed by contractors but can be performed by federal employees . the balanced workforce strategy established processes to enable dhs to achieve the appropriate mix of federal employees and contractors to accomplish the department's mission , while minimizing risk to dhs's missions from an overreliance on contractors . dhs implemented this strategy through the bwat — an online questionnaire completed by individual program offices for certain service contracts . the function of the bwat was to ensure the proposed service functions are not inherently governmental , and to identify whether the functions are closely associated with inherently governmental , critical , or special interest , among others . in addition , the bwat recommended the ratio of federal employees to contractors needed to oversee those services . this analysis was then approved by the program and reviewed by the contracting officer as part of the procurement package .