safeguard sensitive data . document results of pilot program . document risks or costs of ffrdc access to sensitive data . gain analytic value from ffrdc access to sensitive data . demonstrate benefits to government from sharing sensitive data . inform future actions for making ffrdc access to sensitive data permanently available . however , dod has not fully addressed the other leading practices . specifically , we found that the laboratories and personnel office does not have: a plan that ( 1 ) includes an assessment methodology to ensure dod is collecting the correct information to evaluate whether the pilot has met the department's goals and ( 2 ) defines how dod will use the information collected to evaluate the implementation and performance of the pilot program , when the evaluation will take place , and by whom ; a plan for identifying or documenting lessons learned ; and a plan for gathering input from stakeholders , such as dod sponsors , ffrdcs , and officials from dod's data repositories , for the pilot program's evaluation . according to officials involved in its implementation , dod did not consider creating such plans when developing the pilot program . the pilot program guidance , however , stated that information collected would be used for the department to assess the ongoing efficacy of the pilot program and gao's evaluation . these officials explained that , when the pilot's guidance was formulated , the department was in the process of reorganizing the former acquisition , technology , and logistics office and they pointed out that gao was to do the assessment of the pilot program . they said the reason the program collected information — such as quarterly reports — was to inform our review . thus , they had no plan to assess the information collected and no plans to talk to stakeholders or to collect and share lessons learned . while our review occurred during pilot implementation , an evaluation of the pilot conducted by dod after more projects are completed would provide an opportunity to identify lessons learned and gather valuable input from stakeholders — such as the offices that manage the data repositories and the sponsors requesting the projects . we found cases where ffrdc researchers had problems accessing data and where gathering this input from stakeholders involved with pilot projects would have been useful for dod . for example , some ffrdc researchers described barriers when trying to gain access to certain government - and department - wide databases . in one case , project air force researchers reported not being able to access information in the electronic document access database and various databases containing contractor performance information because researchers lacked military or government email addresses . further , some of the databases that ffrdc researchers and a dod official said would be useful are not owned by dod . the two remaining projects are on hiatus or removed . dod officials and representatives from the four completed projects shared with us the following benefits: systems and analyses center assessment of the u.s. munitions defense industrial base capacity . portions of the research required access to sensitive data about the availability and production levels of manufacturing parts for a large number of contractors and suppliers .