( palmetto ) . these documents are listed in appendix i . the mma also required gao to evaluate and report on cms's contracting reform plan no later than 6 months after the date that cms's report was received . does the plan describe the functions that macs will perform , such as developing local coverage decisions , determining payment amounts , making payments , educating beneficiaries , and communicating with providers ? does the plan provide information on functions that will be assigned to non - mac contracts ? is the plan clear in defining the roles of macs and other contractors that conduct program integrity functions , so that program integrity efforts are not duplicative ? does the plan explain how macs and other contractors will interface and coordinate their different program integrity activities ? does the plan provide information on how macs will deal with chain providers , which is a concern for those with establishments in multiple mac jurisdictions ? does the plan address the establishment and definition of performance measures for macs ? does the plan provide clear , transparent , and consistent policies and processes that provide a basis for the planning , award , administration , and oversight of procurement efforts ? to conduct this evaluation , we consulted cms to determine the documents included in its plan for contracting reform . appendix i lists the documents that were identified by agency officials as included in cms's contracting reform plan , including its report to congress , that were provided to us through june 3 , 2005 . we developed evaluation criteria to assess the extent to which cms's plan provides an appropriate framework to implement medicare contracting reform . to develop these criteria , we analyzed the statutory provisions added by section 911 of the mma , documents and related information prepared to help cms plan for contracting reform , and gao guidance on assessing federal agencies' procurement functions . we also reviewed gao's guidance on changing the approach through which mission - critical work is accomplished . these documents are listed in appendix ii . the evaluation criteria we developed address contracting reform planning and implementation , contracting reform management and oversight , and cms's contracting strategy for macs and are listed in appendix iii . we used these criteria to evaluate cms's plan . in addition to this assessment , we also conducted interviews with officials at cms headquarters and regional offices concerning the process for developing the plan , the implementation schedule , the challenges that cms faces in implementing contracting reform , lessons learned that have prepared cms for moving to the mac environment , and the risks and benefits involved in the transition to mac contracting . does the plan provide an approach for ensuring that the agency has the right staff in the right numbers with the right skills in the right places to accomplish its mission effectively ? does the plan provide information on the jurisdictional rollout plan , and how this timeline might be affected by voluntary contractor withdrawals ? does the plan discuss the strategy for combining part a and part b and associated implications or risks ? does the plan address the acquisition process for new contracts ?