, capability gaps ) . in february 2012 , we identified multiple factors that contributed to the risk of fema potentially funding unnecessarily duplicative projects across four of the largest grant programs — the urban areas security initiative , the state homeland security program , the port security grant program , and the transit security grant program . these factors include overlap among grant recipients , goals , and geographic locations , combined with differing levels of information that fema had available regarding grant projects and recipients . specifically , we found that fema made award decisions with differing levels of information and lacked a process to coordinate application reviews . ( 2 ) to what extent has fema made progress measuring preparedness by assessing capabilities ? my statement is based on reports and testimonies on dhs and fema grant management and preparedness assessment that we issued from july 2005 through march 2013 . more information about the scope and methodology of our prior work can be found in those reports . to update this work , we analyzed documentation such as dhs's national preparedness report issued in may 2013 and the dhs fiscal year 2014 budget - in - brief , and interviewed and obtained updated information on preparedness grants and capability assessment from fema officials in june 2013 . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . over the past decade , the federal government has expanded financial assistance to a wide array of public and private stakeholders for preparedness activities through various grant programs administered by dhs through its component agency , fema . my testimony today addresses the following questions: ( 1 ) to what extent has fema made progress in managing four of the largest preparedness grant programs ? through these grant programs , dhs has sought to enhance the capacity of states , localities , and other entities , such as ports or transit agencies , to prevent , respond to , and recover from a natural or man - made disaster , including terrorist incidents . four of the largest preparedness grant programs are the urban areas security initiative , the state homeland security program , port security grant program , and the transit security grant program . the urban areas security initiative provides federal assistance to address the unique needs of high - threat , high - density urban areas , and assists the areas in building an enhanced and sustainable capacity to prevent , protect , respond to , and recover from acts of terrorism . the state homeland security program provides funding to support states' implementation of homeland security strategies to address the identified planning , organization , equipment , training , and exercise needs at the state and local levels to prevent , protect against , respond to , and recover from acts of terrorism and other catastrophic events .