abandoned calls . the telecommunications vendor under contract with uscis is to collect information on the number of calls abandoned by customers after getting through the interactive voice response system and waiting for a csr to answer , that is , the number of times that customers hang up the telephone while waiting for a csr . the performance standard stated in the prs for this measure involves two factors: half - hour increments and how frequently callers abandon their calls . the standard is that for 85 percent to 95 percent of the half - hour increments measured , 1 percent to 2 percent of the calls are expected to be abandoned before a csr answers . ( 2 ) how were these performance measures used to evaluate the contractor's performance ? ( 3 ) what actions , if any , did uscis take or plan to take to strengthen call center operations ? to address these objectives , we obtained and analyzed information from uscis officials in washington , d.c. , from contractor officials in arlington , virginia , and at one of four contractor - operated call centers . at these locations , we interviewed officials and collected and analyzed pertinent documentation , including descriptions of monitoring and evaluation programs , contract requirements for call center operations , and summaries of call center evaluation results . we assessed the reliability of telephone call volume data provided to uscis by a telecommunications vendor , as well as uscis and contractor staffing data . to carry out our data reliability assessments , we ( 1 ) reviewed information about the data , systems that produced the data , and data quality control procedures , and ( 2 ) interviewed uscis and contractor officials knowledgeable about the data as necessary . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for purposes of this report . we conducted our work between may 2004 and may 2005 in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards . ( see app . i for details about our scope and methodology. ) the homeland security act of 2002 established uscis within dhs . uscis is responsible for several functions transferred on march 1 , 2003 , from the former immigration services division of the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) under the department of justice . these functions include providing services or benefits to facilitate entry , residence , employment , and naturalization of legal immigrants ; processing applications for u.s. citizenship / naturalization ; and rendering decisions about immigration - related matters . the uscis information & customer service division is responsible for operating the national customer service center ( ncsc ) , which was established in 1997 to provide nationwide assistance by telephone to customers calling about immigration services and benefits . when a customer calls the ncsc toll - free number ( 1-800-375-5283 ) , the call is received by the interactive voice response system . the system features automated , self - service options 24-hours a day , 7 days a week . if the system cannot address a customer's concerns or needs or if a customer requests live assistance , then the call is generally routed to one of the four ncsc contract call centers , known as tier 1 .