bop has some challenges in preparing for pandemic influenza . for example , social distancing measures to protect correctional workers are difficult to implement at the facility level . bop officials said that there are many situations in which close contact is inevitable between correctional workers and inmates and where personal protective equipment , such as gloves and masks , would not be feasible . a unique pandemic planning challenge facing federal correctional workers is the maintenance of an effective custodial relationship between them and the inmates in federal prisons . according to bop officials , this relationship depends on communication and mutual trust , as correctional workers in federal prisons do not carry weapons or batons inside the cellblocks . rather , they use verbal methods of communication to keep order . bop officials at united states penitentiary leavenworth said that they would not allow a situation where correctional workers wear n95 respirators or surgical masks but the inmates do not . despite the challenges bop faces with pandemic influenza planning , the bureau has advantages , which are unique to its facilities . every correctional facility is a closed and self - contained system , and each facility is somewhat self - sufficient , maintaining a 30-day supply of food , water , and other necessities for any type of contingency . correctional facilities also have well - tested experience in emergency and health hazard planning and management and infection control , which provides them with a solid foundation to build on for pandemic influenza preparedness . additionally , correctional facilities generally have strong ties with their local communities , important because pandemic influenza will be largely addressed by the resources available to each community it affects . table 1 shows the survey responses . given the potential severity of a pandemic , it is important that employees understand the policies and requirements of their agencies and the alternatives , such as telework , that may be available to them . many employees and their supervisors will have questions about their rights , entitlements , alternative work arrangements , benefits , leave and pay flexibilities , and hiring flexibilities available during the turmoil created by a pandemic . therefore , it is important that each agency implement a process to communicate its human capital guidance for emergencies to managers and make staff aware of that guidance . twenty - one of the 24 pandemic coordinators surveyed reported making information available to their employees on how human capital policies and flexibilities will change in the event of a pandemic outbreak . three agencies — doc , gsa , and ssa — reported that they have not . of the agencies that reported making information available , two had done so indirectly . hud stated that it shared information with unions , and treasury reported that it briefed its human capital officers on the human capital policies and flexibilities available to address pandemic issues .