im . further , in 2012 , congress directed ex - im to improve and clarify its due diligence procedures.expected to have the revised procedures completed by the summer of 2013 . in response , ex - im officials said they ex - im restructures transactions with credit weaknesses to help prevent defaults and increase recoveries on transactions that do default . according to ex - im , restructuring can involve substantial revision of transaction terms and conditions . for example , in 2012 , ex - im restructured a defaulted project finance transaction into a direct loan with the implicit backing of a foreign government . restructuring can also involve the addition of credit enhancements such as extra collateral or third - party guarantees . according to ex - im , the agency restructures as many as eight transactions per year . concentration risk . risk stemming from the composition of a credit portfolio . concentration risk comes into being through an uneven distribution of credits within a portfolio . ex - im faces three types of concentration risk: industry concentration . the risk that events could negatively affect not only one obligor but also many obligors in the same industry simultaneously . the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes , people , and systems , or from external events . in 1990 , to more accurately measure the cost of federal credit programs , congress enacted fcra , which requires agencies that provide domestic or international credit , including ex - im , to estimate and request appropriations for the long - term net losses , or subsidy costs , of their credit activities . credit programs incur subsidy costs when estimated payments by the government ( such as loan disbursements or claims paid on defaulted loans ) exceed estimated payments to the government ( such as principal repayments , fees , interest payments , and recoveries ) , on a net present value basis over the life of the direct loan or loan guarantee , excluding administrative costs.when the present value of estimated payments by the government exceeds the present value of estimated payments to the government ( collections ) . when credit programs have a positive subsidy cost , they require appropriations . conversely , negative subsidy programs are those in which the present value of estimated collections is expected to exceed the present value of estimated payments . credit programs have a positive subsidy fcra requires that agencies have budget authority to cover credit subsidy costs before entering into credit transactions . for their annual appropriation requests , agencies estimate credit subsidy costs by cohort . to estimate their subsidy costs , credit agencies estimate the future performance of direct loans and loan guarantees . agency management is responsible for accumulating relevant , sufficient , and reliable data on which to base these estimates . to estimate future credit performance , agencies generally have models that include assumptions about defaults , prepayments , recoveries , and the timing of these events and are based on the nature of their credit programs . in addition to assumptions based on agencies' programs , agencies also must incorporate economic assumptions included in the president's budget for credit subsidy calculations .