washington . d.c.: august 2 , 2007 . preliminary information on rebuilding efforts in the gulf coast . gao - 07-809r . washington , d.c.: june 29 , 2007 . gulf coast rebuilding: preliminary observations on progress to date and challenges for the future . gao - 07-574t . washington , d.c.: april 12 , 2007 . impact of hurricanes gustav and ike . hurricanes gustav and ike made landfall in the gulf coast this month , resulting in federal major disaster declarations for 95 counties in texas , louisiana , and alabama ( see fig . gustav made landfall near cocodrie , louisiana , as a category 2 hurricane on september 1 , 2008 . ike made landfall as a category 2 hurricane near galveston , texas , on september 13 , 2008 . these hurricanes have caused widespread damage to affected gulf coast states . for example , the state of louisiana has confirmed 10 gustav - related deaths . recent press accounts have attributed the death of about 50 people in the united states to hurricane ike . further , hurricanes gustav and ike have significantly disrupted utility service as well as oil and natural gas production in the gulf coast . specifically , gustav caused power outages for over 1.1 million louisiana and mississippi customers , while over 2.2 million customers in texas lost power after ike made landfall . the hurricanes have also affected oil and natural gas production in the gulf coast . most of the refineries in gustav's path were affected , resulting in a 100 percent reduction in crude oil production . almost all refineries in ike's path shut down , halting crude oil production in the area by 99.9 percent . over half of the 39 major natural gas processing plants in the affected areas have ceased operations as a result of hurricanes gustav and ike , reducing the total operating capacity of the region by 65 percent . given the recent landfall of these hurricanes , comprehensive damage assessments from government agencies were not available at the time of this report's issuance . impact of the 2008 midwest floods . heavy rainfall across much of the northern half of the great plains during early june 2008 resulted in river flooding . this flooding became increasingly severe as heavy rain continued into the second week of june and rising rivers threatened dams and levees and submerged large areas of farmland along with many cities and towns . as a result , the president issued federal major disaster declarations for counties in seven states: illinois , indiana , iowa , missouri , minnesota , nebraska , and wisconsin ( see fig . the flooding resulted in widespread damage for some communities in these states . for example , the rivers in cedar rapids , iowa , crested over 30 feet , flooding 10 square miles of the city and displacing over 18,000 people and several city facilitates , including the city hall , police department , and fire station . washington , d.c.: april 16 , 2007 . department of agriculture , commodity credit corporation: 2006 emergency agricultural disaster assistance programs . gao - 07-511r . washington , d.c.: april 16 , 2007 .