gao - 08-1057 . washington , d.c.: september 15 , 2008 . terrorism insurance availability: initial results on availability of terrorism insurance in specific geographic markets . gao - 08-919r . washington , d.c.: july 11 , 2008 . they also provided technical comments that were incorporated where appropriate . naic provided written comments on a draft of this report , which have been reprinted in appendix ii . in their comments , naic stated that the report was materially accurate and they agreed with our discussion on proposed policy proposals for expanding nbcr coverage in the commercial property / casualty market . however , naic reported a philosophical difference of opinion with comments in the draft report about the ability of workers' compensation insurers to charge risk - based premiums for attacks involving nbcr weapons . naic stated that our draft report contained references that implied that state insurance regulators , due to voter and legislative pressure , keep premium rates artificially low for workers' compensation insurers rather than relying on actuarial science . naic disputed what it characterized as our implied contention and suggested that the recent profitability of the insurance industry indicates that premiums have not been suppressed by regulatory actions . we made clarifications in the draft to address certain naic comments , such as more fully describing the surcharges that workers' compensation insurers may levy for covering losses from terrorist attacks , including those involving nbcr weapons . however , the draft report in no way meant to imply that state insurance regulators succumb to voter and legislative pressures in approving rates , and simply reported that workers' compensation insurers and some regulators we contacted for both our september 2006 report and this report said that they did not believe the permissible surcharges would be sufficient to cover the potential losses associated with an nbcr attack . given that nbcr risks may not fully satisfy the principles of insurability , as we said in our september 2006 report , statements by representatives of workers' compensation insurers that question whether the permitted surcharges are sufficient to cover potential losses do not appear inherently unreasonable . as discussed in the final report , the permitted surcharge in many states is the same for conventional terrorist attacks and for those involving nbcr weapons and insurers generally are not permitted to levy higher surcharges for employers they perceive to be at higher risk of attack . furthermore , we note that while naic reports that workers' compensation insurers have been profitable over the past several years , this does not mean that any premiums collected from this surcharge would be sufficient to cover the losses associated with a future nbcr attack . naic also commented on statements in the draft report regarding the ability of group life insurers to manage exposures to nbcr risks . specifically , naic said that the competitive nature of group life insurance markets has more of an impact on group life insurers' decisions to provide nbcr coverage in their policies than any regulatory constraints . naic stated that if one group life insurer were to exclude coverage for nbcr risks , and other group life insurers did not exclude such coverage , the insurer excluding nbcr risks would be at a competitive disadvantage .