direct . hud headquarters and field staff identified grantees that demonstrated a need for support in specific nsp program areas or exhibited capacity concerns in meeting the obligation deadline . technical assistance providers conducted needs assessments for direct assistance for 98 grantees during late 2009 and early 2010 . as of august 2010 , 59 grantees had requested direct assistance , 58 of which received it . on - call remote . as of august 2010 , technical assistance providers had received 93 requests for on - call remote technical assistance and responded to 84 of those requests ( with 27 completed and 57 in progress ) . hud officials said they received approximately 3 to 4 on - call remote technical assistance requests weekly . technical assistance providers also facilitated nsp problem - solving clinics that were open to all grantees and field staff . web - based . hud officials said that technical assistance providers had established the nsp resource exchange web site as a place for grantees to submit technical assistance requests and share knowledge . the web site also has a “frequently asked questions” link that is regularly updated with answers to questions from grantees that can be searched by topic . according to hud , technical assistance providers answered 2,389 out of 2,544 nsp questions submitted between april and august 2010 . hud officials said that nsp 1 grantees mostly requested technical assistance in two major areas: ( 1 ) program design and ( 2 ) financial underwriting skills . in terms of program design , hud staff said that some grantees had selected unsuitable nsp 1 approaches for their local housing markets . for example , some grantees had planned to implement strategies for selling homes or increasing home ownership in what were primarily rental markets . in another example , one grantee was initially not planning to use nsp 1 funds for demolition , even though , according to hud staff , demolition was an appropriate use of nsp 1 funds given the grantee's local housing market conditions . grantees also requested technical assistance to enhance their knowledge of property financing . hud set up accounts in drgr for each technical assistance provider to track the use of technical assistance funds and the performance of grantees receiving the assistance . hud staff told us they plan to use this information to assess whether the technical assistance improved grantees' performance . hud staff also said they will conduct post - technical assistance monitoring to assess grantees' compliance with nsp 1 requirements and determine if additional assistance is necessary . additionally , hud officials said that the agency is collecting feedback on the quality of technical assistance at training events and through the nsp resource exchange web site , among other means . hud officials said they would use this feedback to determine potential needs for nsp 2 and 3 , and to help determine whether current technical assistance providers should continue to participate in hud programs . given the critical role that hud assigned to technical assistance for mitigating program risks , it will be important for hud to follow through with these planned assessments to ensure that the assistance had the intended effect .