disposal availability for llrw is also a concern in some foreign countries . specifically , 29 other countries generate electricity from 331 nuclear power reactors , and many others generate llrw from industrial , academic , and medical uses of radioactive material . like the united states , these countries face llrw disposal challenges . our testimony today is based on two reports: ( 1 ) our june 2004 report , which examined the adequacy of llrw disposal availability for class a , b , and c wastes , and ( 2 ) our march 2007 report , which examined the approaches foreign countries use to manage their llrw . to prepare this testimony we relied on data from our two reports and updated information on domestic llrw disposal availability and volumes . estimates of disposal volumes and capacity came from the operators that we interviewed for our june 2004 report . we updated the information in a llrw database through discussions with a cognizant doe official . information on disposal availability for foreign countries came directly from survey information that we used in preparing the 2007 . information on italy came from survey data and supplemental reports . we conducted the work in the prior reports we used in preparing this testimony and the work we conducted in updating llrw disposal information in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . this has extended by 13 years the time when this facility will be expected to reach its capacity . it is important to note , however , that our june 2004 analysis and our updated analysis of the availability of disposal capacity for class a , b , and c wastes was based on the generation of llrw only in the united states and did not consider the impact on domestic capacity of importing foreign countries' llrw . ten of the 18 countries we surveyed for our march 2007 report have disposal options for llrw similar to u.s. class a and b waste and most of c waste , and 6 other countries have plans to build such facilities . only 3 countries indicated that they have a disposal option for llrw similar to greater - than - class c waste . however , almost all of the countries that do not provide disposal for llrw provide centralized storage facilities for this waste . only italy reported that it had no disposal or central storage facilities for its llrw , although it does have plans to develop a disposal site for radioactive waste from its decommissioned nuclear power plants and from other nuclear processing facilities . italy initially expected this disposal site to be operational by 2010 , but local governments' resistance to the location of this disposal site has delayed this date . our march 2007 report also identified a number of llrw management approaches used in other countries that may provide lessons to improve the management of u.s. radioactive waste . these approaches include the use of comprehensive national radioactive waste inventory databases and the development of a national radioactive waste management plan . eleven of the 15 countries without disposal facilities for at least some higher - activity llrw provide central storage facilities for this material .