the statements were fabrications . allegedly , mr. frankel actually used the company's assets to ( 1 ) return phony profits to the company , ( 2 ) purchase additional insurance companies — a necessary step to continue the fraud , and ( 3 ) support his own lavish lifestyle . ultimately , taxpayers , other insurers , and certain policyholders will bear the losses resulting from the scam . the first round accreditations for tennessee and mississippi occurred in september 1994 and december 1994 , respectively . after the $200 million theft became public in may 1999 , naic delayed its second round accreditation review for tennessee , scheduled for september 1999 , at the request of the tennessee state auditors because of their ongoing review of the tennessee insurance department triggered by the theft . in march 2000 , tennessee's accreditation was suspended for failing the financial analysis portion of the review . six months later , at tennessee's request , naic conducted an additional accreditation review that resulted in reaccreditation of the state in september 2000 . naic also conducted a reaccreditation review of mississippi after the $200 million theft became public , resulting in reaccreditation of mississippi in december 2000 . among other weaknesses in state regulatory oversight it exposed , the theft uncovered weaknesses in chartering and change in ownership approvals , a key phase of oversight for preventing undesirable individuals from controlling insurance companies and insurer involvement in questionable business strategies . the theft also showed that financial losses associated with risks heightened by such weaknesses in oversight could be material , leading to insurer failures and hundreds of millions of dollars in lost insurer assets . because the accreditation reviews discussed in this report involved states closely involved with the scandal , an overview of our findings regarding regulatory oversight weaknesses is included in table 1 . the report included recommendations to help prevent or detect similar investment scams in insurance companies by proposing the adoption of appropriate asset custody arrangements , improved asset verification procedures , and the sharing of confidential regulatory information across industries and agencies . in addition to the above recommendations emanating from the frankel matter , this report also contained a recommendation designed to broaden and help sustain cooperation among regulators of different financial services sectors . naic and three affected states also conducted parallel reviews of the scam and disclosed similar weaknesses along with recommendations for corrective actions . in july 2001 , we provided a status report on corrective actions that naic , tennessee , mississippi , and missouri have taken or are taking to address recommendations contained in our september 2000 report to address the regulatory oversight weaknesses . although the market for insurance is national in scope , with many companies selling insurance in multiple , if not all , states , the state - by - state system of insurance solvency regulation has traditionally been uneven . regulatory capacity has varied across states , and laws , regulations , and practices have lacked uniformity . during the 1980s and early 1990s , a number of insurance companies became insolvent , focusing attention on the weaknesses of state insurance regulation and leading to speculation that the federal government would take over regulatory responsibility .