we also interviewed firstnet and commerce officials . to obtain stakeholder views on all our objectives — particularly the challenges firstnet faces — we selected and contacted 33 stakeholders , including public safety , state and local government , and tribal associations and organizations ; the department of homeland security , the federal communications commission , and the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) and the national telecommunications and information administration ; and state government and public safety officials . we selected these stakeholders to obtain a variety of viewpoints from a cross section of interests and geographic locations ; their views are not generalizable . further details on our scope and methodology are included in our report . the work on which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in our june 2017 report , we found that firstnet has conducted key efforts to establish the network , namely releasing the request for proposal for the network in january 2016 and awarding the network contract to at&t in march 2017 . as the contractor , at&t will be responsible for the overall design , development , production , operation , and evolution of the network , as well as the marketing , product management , sales , distribution , and customer care . further , we found that firstnet has established a framework to meet the financial requirements established in the 2012 act , as depicted in figure 1 . this framework focuses on leveraging firstnet's spectrum through the use of payments and fees with the aim of ensuring that the network is financially sustainable over the life of the contract and that firstnet sustains self - funding operations . by establishing a single , dedicated network for public safety use , firstnet's network is expected to foster greater interoperability and meet public safety officials' reliability and other needs . however , the actual use ( or “adoption” ) of the network by public safety users will be voluntary . state officials we contacted were generally satisfied with firstnet's efforts to engage them . however , tribal stakeholders we contacted expressed concern with firstnet's efforts to consult with tribes per the 2012 act's requirements . in particular , four of the five tribal organizations we contacted said that firstnet has not fully engaged in effective communication or has relied on state points of contact too much as opposed to engaging directly with tribes ; the other tribal organization was not aware of firstnet or its mission at all . further , tribes noted that individuals with first - hand knowledge of tribes' experiences are not able to represent tribal views directly among firstnet's key decision makers . firstnet has stated that , indeed , the 2012 act requires that it consult with tribes through state points of contact .