therefore , we have no information on the potential effectiveness of this mechanism . congress has considered reauthorizing tira , and we have strongly urged that any reauthorization of tira continue to contain language requiring a specific annual appropriation for gao before we are required to undertake independent evaluations of major rulemakings . such an expansion of gao's current lines of business without additional dedicated resources would pose a serious problem for us , especially in light of what will likely be increasing budgetary constraints in the years ahead . it would also likely serve to adversely affect our ability to provide the same level of service to the congress in connection with our existing statutory authorities . members of congress seldom have attempted to use this disapproval process . over the past decade , 37 joint resolutions of disapproval have been introduced regarding 28 rules . only once has congress used this disapproval process to nullify a rule , when it disapproved the department of labor's rule on ergonomics in 2001 . gao's only stated role under cra is to provide congress with a report on each major rule concerning gao's assessment of the promulgating federal agency's “compliance with the procedural steps” required by various acts and executive orders governing the regulatory process . these include preparation of a cost - benefit analysis , when required , and compliance with the regulatory flexibility act , the unfunded mandates reform act of 1995 ( umra ) , the administrative procedure act ( apa ) , the paperwork reduction act , and executive order 12866 . gao's report must be sent to the congressional committees of jurisdiction within 15 calendar days of the publication of the rule or submission of the rule by the agency , whichever is later . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . however , the cra states that it shall apply notwithstanding any other provision of law . agencies and gao have provided congress a considerable amount of information about forthcoming rules in response to cra . the limited number of cra joint resolutions introduced might suggest that this information generates little additional oversight of rulemaking . cra contains a broad definition of the term “rule,” including more than the usual notice and comment rulemakings published in the federal register under apa . under cra , “rule” means the whole or part of an agency statement of general applicability and future effect designed to implement , interpret , or prescribe law or policy . for example , in 1996 we concluded that a memorandum issued by the secretary of agriculture in connection with the emergency salvage timber sale program constituted a rule under cra and should have been submitted to congress and gao before it could become effective . still , as i noted in my testimony before this subcommittee last november , efforts to enhance presidential oversight of agencies' rulemaking appear to have been more significant and widely employed in recent years than similar efforts to enhance congressional oversight .