unavoidability . according to ftc staff , when considering the substantive terms and conditions of franchise contracts , unavoidability is the most difficult standard to satisfy . franchises are discretionary purchases . that is , no aspiring entrepreneur is forced to purchase a franchise in order to be in business . moreover , franchising is only one method of entering into a business . franchising also covers a wide variety of economic sectors , and for the most part , there is competition in each sector . therefore , the market offers many choices for anyone wishing to operate a business . according to ftc staff , under these circumstances , existing franchisees would be hard - pressed to establish that contractual provisions they voluntarily read , agreed to , and signed were somehow unavoidable . the ftc staff added that proving this is an even more daunting task , because prospective franchisees are required to receive a disclosure document at least 10 business days before they sign the franchise agreement or pay any fee . presumably , every prospective franchisee has the opportunity to ( 1 ) review the disclosure document before signing the contract ; ( 2 ) seek legal , accounting , or marketing counsel ; and ( 3 ) speak to both former and current system franchisees . in short , according to ftc staff , it is not ftc's role to second - guess a prospective franchisee's wisdom in signing a particular franchise agreement , as long as the prospective franchisee is forewarned about the legal consequences of his or her actions . according to ftc staff , isolated instances of miscellaneous relationship issues cannot justify a more widespread investigation of relationship issues , let alone substantive rulemaking that addresses franchise contracts . the staff added that before ftc could consider developing a rule that addresses the substantive terms of private franchise contracts , it would need not only evidence of substantial injury , but also sufficient information that would enable ftc to weigh the alleged injury against any countervailing benefits to the public at large or to competition . in addition , ftc staff noted that ftc would need evidence showing that franchisees cannot reasonably avoid the alleged injury . the staff further stated that while franchisees and their advocates suggest that economic harm to individual franchisees may result from some franchisor practices , they have not shown to date that such injury is substantial and not outweighed by countervailing benefits . further , ftc staff told us that in at least some instances , prospective franchisees could avoid injury by comparison shopping for a franchise system that offers more favorable terms and conditions and by considering alternatives to franchising as a means of business ownership . absent evidence on widespread franchise relationship abuses , ftc believes the prudent approach is to continue to investigate instances of such abuses , where they occur , under ftc's current unfairness authority . according to ftc staff , application of ftc's unfairness jurisdiction in a franchise matter is most likely to occur in a situation in which a franchisor attempts to unilaterally modify a contract or breach a contract with franchisees . they noted that in most instances , such conduct is unavoidable .