va has done this successfully in some areas . in 2015 , gao found that va had implemented several key strategic sourcing practices , including performing spend analyses and tracking cost avoidance the largest savings came from pharmaceutical purchasing , where va reported $1.4 billion in cost avoidance in fiscal year 2015 alone , but va also realized some strategic sourcing savings on medical supplies . however , va does not know how much of its contract spending remains outside of strategic sourcing efforts , which could lead to va paying higher prices than it could otherwise obtain . medical supplies are one area where strategic sourcing efforts have lagged . as discussed above , the mspv program does not ensure that supplies are consistently purchased through va's favorably - priced national contracts , and many purchases were instead made directly from federal supply schedules . for example , in 2015 , the choice act independent assessment team conducted an analysis which found that within one visn , a single item — a disposable blood pressure cuff — was purchased from six different vendors at significantly different prices , despite the fact that a national contract was in place . according to va policy , use of a national contract is mandatory when one is in place for a given type of supply , but va does not have a process in place to monitor visn and medical center compliance with this requirement . gao has also previously reported that visns and medical centers have fallen short in complying with vha policies regarding the standardization of medical supplies . if va was able to realize savings of 10 percent on its fiscal year 2015 mspv spending , it could save about $46 million annually . va estimated that it saved approximately $103 million through the use of national medical surgical contracts in fiscal year 2015 . the planned changes to the mspv program , discussed above , may help increase the percentage of supplies purchased via standardized national contracts once fully implemented , but it is too soon to evaluate their success . there are opportunities to better apply strategic sourcing principles at the regional level , as well . within vha , each of the 19 visns is responsible for a regional network of multiple medical centers and clinics . individual medical centers within each visn procure many goods and services separately , despite the fact that their requirements are similar . there are opportunities to consolidate these requirements — such as security services , elevator maintenance , and eyeglasses for patients — to realize both cost savings and greater efficiency in awarding and administering contracts . we found efforts underway to consolidate requirements at the regional level , but local autonomy and limited planning capacity pose obstacles . for instance , one visn we visited recently began an initiative to consolidate requirements for purchases made by all of its medical centers , especially services . visn managers explained that they began with the easiest requirements , such as security guard services and elevator maintenance . they issued a draft memorandum with plans to broaden this approach to most purchases . neither version is comprehensive .