distribution of assets . either the account owner or the custodian can initiate a distribution of account assets . account owners can submit a distribution request to the custodian . the custodian follows the account owner's directions to distribute account assets to the account owner either in cash or other in - kind distribution . what is a solo 401 ( k ) plan ? while employer - sponsored plans generally have multiple employees participating in their plans , a solo 401 ( k ) plan — also called an individual 401 ( k ) , a one - participant plan , self - employed 401 ( k ) , or self - directed 401 ( k ) plan — are qualified retirement plans designed for the self - employed or a small business owner with no employees ( beyond themselves and their spouse ) . the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act of 2001 included reforms that generally provided small business owners with no employees and the self - employed the same advantages of a conventional 401 ( k ) plan , such as employee deferrals , loan features , and roth contributions . solo 401 ( k ) sponsors select plan investment options and may contribute to the plan both as plan sponsor and plan participant up to a combined $54,000 per account ( or $60,000 if age 50 or older ) in tax year 2017 . in addition , plan sponsors may elect to maintain exclusive authority and discretion to manage and control plan assets without involving a third - party . to qualify for preferential tax treatment . the most common ira types are: ( 1 ) traditional iras ( which allow eligible individuals to make tax - deductible contributions and accumulate tax - deferred investment earnings ) ; and ( 2 ) roth iras , ( which allow eligible individuals to make after - tax contributions and accumulate investment earnings tax - free ) . 401 ( k ) plans have become the most common employer - sponsored retirement savings vehicle in the united states . created by the revenue act of 1978 , 401 ( k ) plans typically allow participants to specify the size of their contributions and direct those contributions , as well as any made by their employer , to one or more investments among the options that the employer has preselected as offering effective diversification across broad asset classes . investment options generally include mutual funds , company stock , and money market funds . dol's employee benefits security administration ( ebsa ) is responsible for , among other things , administering and enforcing the fiduciary , reporting , and disclosure provisions of title i of erisa . self - employed individuals or owners of small businesses with no employees may sponsor a 401 ( k ) plan , known as a solo 401 ( k ) plan . to set up a solo 401 ( k ) plan , individuals must adopt a written plan document , arrange a trust for the plan's assets , develop a recordkeeping system , and provide plan information to employees eligible to participate .