( see app . i for more information on program characteristics of the selected states. ) for these states , we collected and reviewed relevant documents for fiscal years 2011 and 2012 , including state contracts with limited benefit plans , and findings from reviews conducted on limited benefit plans . we also interviewed officials from the selected states and external stakeholders , including the national quality forum and the national association for mental illness , to collect information on the steps states have taken to facilitate the coordination of mental and physical health care services . some of these reviews identified needed improvements ; for example , in a 2012 review of one limited benefit plan in florida , the state found that the plan needed to establish a process for providing medicaid beneficiaries immediate access to psychiatric services upon their release from a jail or juvenile detention facility to ensure prescribed medications were available . michigan officials reported that their reviews occurred biennially and , in part , assessed limited benefit plans' capacity to coordinate physical and mental health services for medicaid beneficiaries . some of these reviews identified needed improvements ; for example , in a 2011 review of one limited benefit plan , the state was unable to find evidence of communication and coordination between a psychiatric hospital and a medicaid beneficiary's primary care physician or health plan and recommended that the limited benefit plan devise a coordination plan . in 2011 and 2012 , kansas conducted an onsite review of the one limited benefit plan that state contracted with to examine plan guidelines used to identify and authorize the coordination of care for beneficiaries with high needs , including those with certain mental health diagnoses . in regard to care coordination , the state found that the limited benefit plan met its contractual requirements and had an acceptable process to identify medicaid beneficiaries with high physical and mental health needs , and provided these beneficiaries with ongoing care coordination between their mental health providers and other providers and entities delivering treatment and service . state reviewers also found that the plan had coordinated its activities with other social service , disability , and welfare systems , including the state's criminal justice and disability agencies . independent assessments are federally required reviews through which states operating medicaid managed care programs under section 1915 ( b ) waivers must evaluate and maintain data regarding the cost - effectiveness of their programs , the effect of the programs on beneficiaries' access to services , and the quality of services provided under the program . at a minimum , a state is required to conduct an independent assessment for its first two waiver periods . of the four states , kansas was the only state required to conduct an independent assessment during the time period of our review because it began providing mental health services through a contract with a limited benefit plan under a waiver in 2007 . kansas' 2009 assessment found that a small percentage of medicaid beneficiaries enrolled in the limited benefit plan received care coordination , and recommended that the state should increase the share of beneficiaries receiving these services . the 2011 assessment found improvement in the state's care coordination .