additionally 10 u.s.c . § 2330a ( f ) requires the secretaries of the military departments and heads of the defense agencies to develop a plan , including an approval process and enforcement mechanism , to provide for the use of the inventory of contracted services to implement the requirements of 10 u.s.c . § 129a , to ensure the inventory is used to inform strategic workforce planning , such as the strategic workforce plan ( as required by 10 u.s.c . § 115b ) , and to determine the appropriate workforce mix necessary to perform its mission . however , the extent to which the military departments have developed the required plans and accompanying approval process and enforcement mechanism varies . some military department officials indicated that they are in the final stages of developing a plan to integrate the required information , and other military department officials stated that they plan to move forward once better information on contractors required by the inventory of contracted services becomes available . for example , army manpower officials stated that the army had conducted analyses that could support the required plan . regarding the required enforcement mechanism and approval process , an army official stated that the army has established its panel for the documentation of contractors review process , which requires commands to fill in a pre - award contract approval form in order to justify a request to procure services . this form asks executives to certify that contracted services do not include inherently governmental functions , among other things . in addition , the official stated that the army's annual inventory of contracted services , and its inventory review process , the panel for the documentation of contractors , are intended to inform strategic workforce planning , provide information for in - sourcing decisions , and to the extent possible , inform budget requests . air force manpower officials stated that while the air force lacks a single plan , a number of separate efforts are moving towards the required elements of the plan . the officials stated that the air force plans to modify its manpower data system to accommodate the important contractor information captured in and required by the inventory of contracted services , and then define the utilization , approval and enforcement process in an air force instruction . navy manpower officials stated that the navy has authorized the establishment of a total force integration board , including multiple stakeholders , to address all required elements . marine corps personnel officials stated that the marine corps is awaiting guidance from the department of the navy on a proposed plan and the related enforcement mechanism . dod clearly identifies the core mission areas of the armed forces , which cover broad areas of military activity that the department is statutorily required to identify , but given the wide range of missions and responsibilities of its various components , dod has not developed a list of “core or critical functions” for the department as a whole , nor is it required to do so .