iii ) . we also received technical comments from cms and three of the six states ( arizona , montana , and new mexico ) , which we incorporated as appropriate . in written comments , cms noted that it was pleased that our findings highlight a number of activities that cms engages in with ihs and commented that the report reinforces the benefit of the multiple processes cms has put in place in working with ihs and the tribes . cms acknowledged that it is working to improve its process for identifying whether proposed regulatory changes would affect ihs - funded facilities and the populations they serve . cms noted that its regulations also affect programs directly operated by tribes , which have broader authority than ihs in operating programs and facilities such as nursing homes . we agree with cms about the potential impact of its regulations on tribally operated programs and facilities , and we encourage the agency to consult with tribes when developing its regulations as required by executive order and hhs's tribal consultation policy . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issue date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the administrator of the centers for medicare & medicaid services and the director of the indian health service . we will also provide copies to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . other barriers were similar to those faced by other populations . for example , similar to low - income populations , american indians and alaska natives have experienced transportation and financial barriers , as well as barriers related to limits on access to communication devices , such as telephones and regular mail delivery . while similar to the barriers faced by other populations , some officials believed that there are some distinct aspects to the barriers faced by american indians and alaska natives . for example , application processes , such as the medicaid requirement to provide documentation of u.s. citizenship , may be especially difficult for american indians and alaska natives as this population was traditionally not born in a hospital . as a result , some officials reported that some american indians and alaska natives , particularly those who are elderly , do not have an official record of their birth . efforts to enroll eligible american indians and alaska natives in medicare and medicaid generally have focused on providing assistance with the application process . specifically , almost all of the ihs - funded facilities we visited offered patients assistance with applying for medicare and medicaid . the assistance included helping complete and submit applications , collecting and possibly certifying required documentation , translating application information into tribal languages , and offering these services through home visits . facility staff generally identified patients needing application assistance through their patient registration process , which is the process through which patients sign in for their medical appointments .