modification . it then gradually increases by increments of no more than 1 percent per year ( interest rate step - ups ) until it reaches the cap , which is the freddie mac primary mortgage market survey rate at the time of the evaluation for the modification . the interest rate is then fixed at that rate for the remaining loan term . in contrast , under hamp tier 2 the interest rate is based on the weekly freddie mac primary mortgage market survey rate at the time of the modification and remains fixed for the life of the loan . servicers are not required to reduce interest rates below 2 percent . interest rate reduction is one step in the hamp tier 1 standard modification waterfall . under the waterfall , servicers must first capitalize accrued interest and certain expenses paid to third parties and add this amount to the loan balance ( principal ) amount . next , servicers must reduce the interest rate until the 31 percent dti target is reached or the interest rate is reduced to 2 percent . if the interest rate reduction does not result in a dti ratio of 31 percent , servicers must then extend the maturity and / or amortization period of the loan up to 40 years . finally , if the target dti ratio is still not reached , the servicer must forbear , or defer , principal until the payment is reduced to the 31 percent target , subject to an excessive forbearance cap . the mortgage holder / investor absorbs the reduced payment until 38 percent dti is reached , and treasury and the lender then share payment reductions until 31 percent dti is reached . period of least 3 months before a loan is permanently modified and any government payments made . borrowers who redefault on a permanent hamp loan modification — that is , who miss three consecutive mortgage payments — no longer qualify for borrower incentives under the program . in addition , the servicer and investor do not continue to receive incentives for that loan . borrowers who experience a subsequent hardship after receiving a hamp tier 1 modification or who redefault on a hamp tier 1 modification may be eligible for a hamp tier 2 modification under certain conditions . these include having undergone a change in circumstances that show a clear need for the program ( such as default or imminent default ) . the second lien modification program ( 2mp ) . according to treasury , 2mp is designed to work in tandem with hamp modifications to provide a comprehensive solution to help borrowers afford their mortgage payments . when a borrower's first lien is modified under hamp and the servicer of the second lien is a 2mp participant , that servicer must offer modification and / or full or partial extinguishment of the second lien . treasury provides incentive payments to second - lien mortgage holders , including in the form of a percentage of each dollar in principal reduction on the second lien . treasury has doubled the incentive payments offered to second - lien mortgage holders for 2mp permanent modifications that include principal reduction and have an effective date on or after june 1 , 2012 .