outcome measures . doe has not developed results - oriented outcome measures for productivity , cost , or safety under its reform effort . instead , doe's reform effort has focused on output - oriented measures , such as the number of directives cancelled or revised , and not on outcome measures , such as specific improvements in productivity or cost savings . doe indicated that the reform is expected to result in more than a 50 percent reduction in the number of directives but has not explained how this reduction will improve productivity , reduce costs , or maintain or improve safety . doe's focus on output - oriented measures such as the number of directives reduced does not align with its own guidance on performance measures . doe's guidance states that there is a danger when performance measures become numerical quotas because the setting of numerical goals and quotas does nothing to accomplish process improvements . for safety performance , doe has measures that it uses to monitor safety problems at its sites . however , according to doe officials , the department has not developed a plan showing how it could use these measures , if at all , to evaluate the benefits of its reform effort . effectiveness evaluation . doe did not develop a strategy for evaluating the effectiveness of its reform effort and therefore is not collecting the results - oriented performance data necessary to identify benefits achieved or areas where further changes are needed . to date , doe officials have only provided anecdotes on the benefits the reform is expected to achieve . for example , in response to written questions we provided to the department , doe's office of health , safety , and security stated that it expects measurable productivity improvements because it significantly streamlined the requirements for contractor oversight systems , which provide information on safety performance and other management issues . some officials at doe sites we visited , however , stated that doe's reform effort may not produce any productivity or safety improvements and may have little impact on the way they conduct their work . for instance , doe and contractor officials at doe's hanford site told us that , while they are still working on implementing the revised directives at their site , they have neither seen any changes in project safety performance , nor do they expect to see any changes in the future as a result of the reform effort . additionally , as discussed previously , doe has launched an initial study of selected directives to determine how changes to these directives have impacted mission work , schedule , and costs , among other things . however , without results - oriented performance data , it will be difficult for doe to identify benefits achieved by the reform effort . doe's reform effort did not fully address safety concerns that we , doe's office of inspector general , and the safety board have repeatedly identified in three key areas — ( 1 ) quality assurance , ( 2 ) safety culture , and ( 3 ) federal oversight .