the recommendations were not implemented . however , in july 2007 , state named an ambassador to direct civilian capacity - building programs , including usaid efforts . shifting priorities also have affected u.s. capacity development efforts , particularly in response to continued security problems . in early 2007 , the u.s. mission refocused its capacity development program as part of the surge strategy associated with the administration's new way forward . rather than focusing on 12 civilian and security ministries , state and dod targeted 6 key ministries ( interior , defense , planning , finance , oil , and electricity ) and focused on short - term improvements to address immediate problems with budget execution , procurement , and contracting . accordingly , u.s. capacity development efforts shifted from long - term institution building to immediate efforts to help iraqi ministries spend their capital budgets and deliver better services to the iraqi people . improvements were expected by september 2007 . u.s. efforts to develop iraqi ministerial capacity face four key challenges that pose a risk to their success and long - term sustainability . first , iraqi government institutions have significant shortages of personnel with the skills to perform the vital tasks necessary to provide security and deliver essential services to the iraqi people . when the coalition provisional authority ( cpa ) removed ba'athist party leaders and members from upper - level management in government , universities , and hospitals in 2003 , most of iraq's technocratic class was forced out of government . a september 2006 u.s. embassy assessment noted that the government had significant human resource shortfalls in most key civilian ministries . the majority of staff at all but 1 of the 12 ministries surveyed was inadequately trained for their positions , and a quarter of them relied heavily on foreign support to compensate for their human and capital resource shortfalls . the lack of trained staff has particularly hindered the ability of ministries to develop and execute budgets . for example , in 2006 , the iraqi government spent only 22 percent of its capital budget . for example , u.s. efforts are to be coordinated with the iraqi government and the international donor community through the capacity development working group . however , the group did not meet for about a year after forming in late 2005 and did not meet from february through may 2007 . current u.s. efforts to build the capacity of the iraqi government involve multiple u.s. agencies working with iraqi counterparts on many issues . gao , for example , is working with the iraqi board of supreme audit to enhance its auditing skills and capacity . however , u.s. efforts to improve the capacity of iraq's ministries must address significant challenges if they are to achieve their desired outcomes . u.s. efforts lack an overall strategy , no lead agency provides overall direction , and u.s. priorities have been subject to numerous changes . finally , u.s. efforts confront shortages of competent personnel at iraqi ministries , and sectarian ministries contend with pervasive corruption . the risks are further compounded by the ongoing violence in iraq as u.s. civilian advisors have difficulties meeting with their iraqi counterparts and skilled iraqi professionals leave the country .