( fig . 1 depicts the zpic zones and corresponding geographic areas. ) varying levels of fraud risk prevail across the zones . for example , zone 7 includes an area known to be at high risk of fraud , while zone 2 covers a geographically large and predominantly rural area that may be at a lower risk of fraud . the zpics include about 510 data analysts , investigators , and medical record reviewers . data analysts use automated tools to analyze data on claims , providers , and beneficiaries in their efforts to identify fraud , support investigations , and search for new fraud schemes . investigators examine fraud leads by performing a range of investigative actions , such as provider reviews and interviews with beneficiaries and providers . the medical record reviewers examine medical records and provide clinical knowledge needed to support analysts' and investigators' work . as a result of their analyses and investigations , zpics may refer to law enforcement and initiate administration actions against providers suspected of fraud . specifically , if the contractors uncover suspected cases of fraud , they refer the investigation to the hhs office of inspector general ( oig ) for further examination and possible criminal or civil prosecution . zpics also initiate a range of administrative actions , including revocations of providers' billing privileges and payment suspensions , which allow cms to stop payment on suspect claims and prevent the payment of future claims until an investigation is resolved . they initiate administrative actions by recommending the actions to cms and coordinating with the macs to carry them out . for example , zpics recommend payment suspensions to cms and , if cms approves , the macs implement the suspension . table 1 describes the types of administrative actions zpics can recommend against providers . while cms had the authority to impose payment suspensions prior to ppaca , the law specifically authorized cms to suspend payments to providers pending the investigation of credible allegations of fraud . cms is required to consult with the hhs oig in determining whether a credible allegation of fraud exists . definition provider - specific prepayment edits are used to identify claims for medical review . beneficiary - or provider - specific prepayment edits are used to prevent payment for non - covered , incorrectly coded , or inappropriately billed services . a provider's medicare billing privileges are terminated . payment suspension medicare payments to a provider are suspended , in whole or in part . medicare payments received by a provider are in excess of amounts due and payable . cpi directs and monitors their activities . these contractors identify claims and provider billing patterns that may indicate fraud and investigate leads from a variety of sources , including complaints and tips lodged by beneficiaries . zpics operate in seven geographical zones across the country , and each zpic is responsible for conducting program integrity activities in its geographic jurisdiction . in cases of suspected fraud , zpics can recommend the implementation of prepayment edits that apply to specific providers and automatically deny claims or flag claims for prepayment review . in these cases , prepayment edits are considered by cms to be administrative actions .