as discussed above , this information was not complete . as discussed in our report , cms was able to provide us with cciio - related obligation and expenditure amounts from appropriation accounts that exclusively funded cciio - related activities . for these accounts , we were able to assess completeness by comparing the amounts provided to summary totals in higlas . however , for appropriation accounts that funded both cciio - related and non - cciio - related activities , cms utilized a time - consuming manual process to extract the obligation and expenditure activity from higlas , and the accounting code structure did not allow cms to provide related higlas summary totals . statement of federal financial accounting standards no . 4 , managerial cost accounting standards and concepts , and statement of federal financial accounting concepts no.1 , objectives of federal financial reporting , highlight the importance of reliable and timely information to key stakeholders , such as managers , executives , and congress , to support informed resource allocation decisions and assessments of program performance and the need for it to be verifiable . in addition , standards for internal control in the federal government requires that internal control be clearly documented and that the documentation be readily available for examination . this concept also applies to other forms of financial management information . standards for internal control in the federal government also recognizes that information should be recorded and communicated to management and others in a form and within a time frame that enables them to carry out their internal control and other responsibilities . we also found that cms also did not have policies and procedures that required documented review and approval of the information provided in response to nonroutine requests to help ensure the reliability of financial management information . although cms officials informed us that the cciio - related financial management information we were provided was subject to multiple levels of review and approval before we received it , including review by subject matter experts , its review and approval of the cciio - related information provided to us were not documented . consequently , we were unable to independently verify that these reviews and approvals had taken place . our concern also applies to cms's status of funds report , which is a standard quarterly report that cms uses to assist in making budgetary and spending decisions . according to cms , this report was also prepared using a similar largely manual process , and review and approval of this report were also not documented . such reviews and approvals are important internal control activities that can help provide reasonable assurance that information is reliable . standards for internal control in the federal government requires that internal control be clearly documented and that the documentation be readily available for examination.approval of financial management information increases the risk that these procedures may not be performed effectively and that as a result significant errors may not be prevented or be detected and corrected in a timely manner , adversely affecting the reliability of the information provided to key stakeholders .