gao - 08-316r . washington , d.c.: january 23 , 2008 . defense acquisitions: improved management and oversight needed to better control dod's acquisition of services . gao - 07-832t . washington , d.c.: may 10 , 2007 . military operations: high - level dod action needed to address long - standing problems with management and oversight of contractors . gao - 07-145 . washington , d.c.: december 18 , 2006 . the following are examples of negative impacts that have occurred at deployed locations . on january 23 , 2008 , we issued a report on the army's equipment maintenance contract in kuwait and concluded that the army did not always follow key principles included in the army quality program . this instruction specifies the use of performance information to perform root - cause analysis and foster continuous improvement . in addition , the battalion's july 2006 draft maintenance management plan requires that contractor performance data should be analyzed to help identify the cause of new and / or recurring quality problems and evaluate the contractor's performance . however , we found that the army did not begin to track contractor pass / fail rates until july 2007 . according to army quality assurance officials , this metric was not tracked and monitored because they did not have sufficient quality assurance staff to perform such an analysis . by not tracking and monitoring the percent of equipment submitted for army acceptance that failed quality assurance inspection , the army did not know the extent to which the contractor was meeting the specified maintenance standard requirements nor could it identify problem areas in the contractor's processes and initiate corrective action . furthermore , our analysis of army data found that for five types of vehicles inspected by quality assurance personnel between july 2006 and may 2007 , 18 percent to 31 percent of the equipment presented to the army as ready for acceptance failed government inspection . in addition , some equipment presented to the army as ready for acceptance failed government inspection multiple times , sometimes for the same deficiencies . when the army inspected equipment that did not meet standards , it was returned to the contractor for continued repair . our analysis of army data found that since may 2005 an additional 188,000 hours were worked to repair equipment after the first failed government inspection , which translates into an additional cost of approximately $4.2 million . in july 2004 , we reported that the air force had used the air force contract augmentation program ( afcap ) contract to supply commodities for its heavy construction squadrons because it did not deploy with enough contracting and finance personnel to buy materials quickly or in large quantities . additionally , the u.s. agency for international development has used the contract to provide disaster relief and humanitarian assistance supplies . in some cases , the contractor simply bought the supplies and delivered them to the customer under cost - plus award fee task orders . we noted that the contractor had received more than $2 million in award fees since february 2002 for these commodity supply task orders .