drilling . according to blm officials , blm frequently uses rangeland drills to seed . for example , following the flat top , coffee point , and tin cup wildfires , which burned about 117,000 acres of the big desert in idaho , blm approved $1.5 million to drill and aerially seed the burnt acreage . for seeding a mixture of wheatgrass , ricegrass , needlegrass , wildrye , and rice hulls , the local office decided to use a rangeland drill because the terrain was relatively flat and could be easily drilled . according to blm , if blm had not seeded , the lack of remaining seed could have impaired the land's recovery and , in the long term , reduced species diversity and degraded habitat conditions for all wildlife species that used the big desert . figure 1 depicts blm seeding with a rangeland drill . interior agencies also frequently repaired or installed fencing following wildland fire , primarily to protect burnt rangelands from cattle grazing to allow for regeneration . under interior policy , blm can exclude burnt lands from grazing that are recovering from wildfire for a minimum of 2 years . of interior's 266 plans , 171 included fencing at a cost of $9.7 million . most of this cost — about $8.1 million — was for fencing on blm lands . this is illustrated by the following examples: after the west mona fire burned more than 22,500 acres in utah , blm approved a $1.7 million plan , which included about $241,000 to remove about 28 miles of fencing that was destroyed by the fire , construct 34 miles of new protective fence , repair 11 miles of existing fence , and install 6 cattleguards . the new fencing was to be installed after the area was seeded . the fencing was to protect the burnt and seeded areas from livestock grazing for 2 years . after the abert fire burned 10,000 acres in oregon , blm approved a $61,000 plan that included about $10,500 for fencing . much of the burnt acreage , before the fire , consisted mainly of sagebrush and native bunch grasses . blm concluded that the majority of the burnt area retained sufficient native seeds and plant material in the soil for it to recover naturally . however , to help ensure natural vegetative recovery , blm concluded that the burnt area needed to be protected from livestock grazing for at least 2 years . figure 2 shows blm grazing lands that were burnt and will require new fencing to exclude cattle . reforestation , while not frequently used , was fairly costly . reforestation was used in 24 of the 266 plans , for a cost of $6.6 million , or an average of about $275,000 per treatment . the only other treatment that was comparable in cost was seeding , which averaged about $248,000 per treatment . reforestation was generally approved for funding to control the spread of invasive species or to reduce wind and water erosion . for example , the fish and wildlife service developed a $181,500 plan to treat the ash meadows national wildlife refuge in nevada following a fire that burned about 658 acres .