those challenges notwithstanding , the capacity issue remains . the future is likely to hold new challenges for cms . for example , the agency may be expected to oversee a prescription drug benefit administered by third parties . as we reported to this committee last year , the administration of a drug benefit would entail numerous challenges , as the strategies now used by the private sector are not readily adaptable to medicare because of its public sector obligations . the number of prescriptions for medicare beneficiaries could easily approach the current number of claims for all other services , or about 900 million annually . of equal concern is the sparseness of hcfa's senior ranks . the recent change from hcfa to cms reflects more than a new name . it consolidates major program activities: the center for medicare management will be responsible for the traditional fee - for - service program ; the center for beneficiary choices will administer medicare's managed care program . we believe that this new structure could improve efforts to more efficiently manage aspects of medicare . at least two other factors weaken agency focus . first , the frequent turnover of the administrator has complicated the agency's implementation of long - term medicare initiatives or pursuit of a consistent management strategy . the maximum term of a hcfa administrator is , as a practical matter , only as long as that of the president who appointed him or her . historically , their actual tenure has been even shorter . in the 24 years since hcfa's inception , there have been 21 administrators or acting administrators , whose tenure has been , on average , about 1 year . over 15 percent of the time , hcfa has had an acting administrator . these short tenures have not been conducive to carrying out strategic plans or innovations an administrator may have developed for administering medicare efficiently and effectively . its corps of senior executives is smaller than that of most other civilian agencies having significantly smaller annual expenditures . in fiscal year 1999 , hcfa had 49 senior executive officials to manage medicare , medicaid , and schip ( among other programmatic responsibilities ) and nearly $400 billion in expenditures . while some tasks at hcfa are contracted out — thus providing hcfa with purchased executive expertise — contractors' objectives may not be fully aligned with those of the agency . indeed , the critical need to oversee contractors effectively to ensure that they are fulfilling their responsibilities has been repeatedly demonstrated . in addition to leadership constraints , the agency's capacity is limited relative to its multiple , complex responsibilities . inadequate information systems and human capital hobble hcfa's ability to carry out the volume of claims administration , payment and pricing , and quality oversight activities demanded of the agency . ideally , program managers should be able to rely on their information systems to create a feedback loop that allows them to monitor performance , use the information to develop policies for improvement , and track the effects of newly implemented policies . in reality , most of the information technology hcfa relies on is too outdated to routinely produce such management information .