information on the effects of illegal activities . agencies collect some information on the effects of illegal activities on natural and cultural resources and on public and employee safety . as mentioned earlier , at several units we visited , officials said they had documented damage to specific locations from dumping of trash and hazardous materials , marijuana cultivation , timber theft , and unauthorized ohv use . but according to agency officials , information on effects is not systematically collected and is instead collected mainly for specific reasons , as when it is needed as evidence in criminal investigations . as a result , the agencies generally lack consistent quantitative or qualitative information on the effects of illegal activities . senior agency law enforcement officials said that while available information — such as quantities of trash dumped or acres of vegetation damaged to cultivate marijuana — helps them understand the effects of illegal activities on resources at specific locations , they do not believe it is feasible to quantify the effects of all illegal activities across the country . law enforcement plans for individual units and for regions or states . the refuge system includes about 585 refuges . individual refuges known as stand - alone refuges report directly to one of eight regional offices , or refuges may be grouped with others into a complex under a common manager , who in turn reports to a regional office . the national park service manages the 393 units of the national park system to conserve the scenery , natural and historic objects , and wildlife of the system so that they will remain unimpaired for the enjoyment of this and future generations . individual park units have varied designations corresponding to the natural or cultural features they are to conserve , including national parks , monuments , lakeshores , seashores , recreation areas , preserves , and historic sites . the agency has established seven regional offices . to respond to and investigate illegal activities occurring on the lands they manage , the agencies employ uniformed law enforcement officers who patrol federal lands , respond to illegal activities , and conduct routine investigations . in addition , the agencies have investigative special agents who investigate serious crimes in more detail . in this report we use the term “law enforcement officer” to include both uniformed law enforcement officers and investigative special agents , unless noted otherwise . in each of the four agencies , different officials make decisions about law enforcement resource needs . the forest service's law enforcement and investigations program is “straightlined,” meaning that law enforcement officers in the field report to law enforcement officials at a regional office , who in turn report to law enforcement officials at agency headquarters in washington , d.c . the forest service has a budget line item for law enforcement , and within budget constraints , its director of law enforcement and investigations has authority to make decisions about the number of uniformed officers and investigative agents to employ and where to assign them .