established a government decontamination service in 2005 . this organization was created out of recognition that it would not be cost - effective for each entity — national , regional , and local government — to maintain the level of expertise needed for cleaning up chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear materials , given that such events are rare . the government decontamination service provides advice and guidance to local governments , maintains and builds a framework of specialized analysis and environmental cleanup contractors , and advises the national government regarding response capabilities . this service implemented its responsibilities by assisting the city of westminster respond to the analysis and environmental cleanup needs following the november 2006 polonium poisoning of alexander litvinenko . developed online national recovery guidance in 2007 . this guidance reinforces and updates the early emergency response and recovery guidance by establishing , among other things , a recovery planning process during the response phase so that the potential impacts of early advice and actions are explored and understood for the future recovery of the affected areas . moreover , the guidance — reviewed every 3 months and updated as necessary — emphasizes the need for training recovery personnel on essential roles , responsibilities , and procedures to test competencies , as well as to design and conduct recovery exercises . updated the recovery handbooks for radiation incidents in 2008 and 2009 . the handbooks are intended to aid decision makers in developing recovery strategies for contaminated food production systems , drinking water , and inhabited areas following the release of radioactive materials into the environment . the handbooks were first published in 2005 in response to the chernobyl nuclear power plant accident . the current handbooks include management options for application in the prerelease , emergency and longer - term phases of an incident . sources of contamination considered in the handbooks include nuclear accidents , radiological dispersion devices , and satellite accidents . the handbooks are divided into several independent sections comprising supporting scientific and technical information , an analysis of the factors influencing recovery , compendia of comprehensive , state - of - the - art datasheets for around 100 management options , guidance on planning in advance , a decision - aiding framework comprising color - coded selection tables , look - up tables and decision trees , and several worked examples . the handbooks can also be applied for training purposes and during emergency exercises . finally , according to united kingdom officials , the 2006 polonium incident in london showed the value of recovery planning . in particular , through this incident , united kingdom officials gained an appreciation for the need to have an established cleanup plan , including a process for determining cleanup levels , sufficient laboratory capacity to analyze a large quantity of samples for radiation , and procedures for handling the radioactive waste . furthermore , they found that implementing cleanup plans in the polonium poisoning incident and testing plans in the november 2008 recovery exercise have helped the united kingdom to better prepare for larger rdd or ind incidents . appendix iii contains a more thorough review of the approach to recovering from rdd and ind incidents in the united kingdom .