before arrival . before arrival in the united states , state provides education on fgm / c to both refugees and visa recipients . according to an official from state's bureau of population , refugees , and migration , refugees receive a hard copy of the u.s. government fact sheet on female genital mutilation or cutting along with the letter that informs them that their refugee status is approved . during the cultural orientation process , one fact sheet is provided per family for all african nationalities . the fact sheet was last updated in june 2014 through an interagency effort led by uscis . ( see appendix ii for a copy of the fact sheet. ) in addition , the official said fgm / c is often covered during the 2 to 5 day cultural orientation process , which has sessions where they discuss frequently asked questions , as well as u.s. law . the official explained that refugees are not required to participate in cultural orientation , but it is highly encouraged . dhs , in cooperation with state , is also required by law to make information available to individuals who are issued immigrant visas or nonimmigrant visas about the health consequences of fgm / c and the legal consequences of involvement in the practice in the united states . in addition , the law instructs the agencies to limit the provision of the information to individuals from countries where fgm / c is “commonly practiced.” state has taken the lead in implementing this requirement , and according to the agency's foreign affairs manual , the bureau of consular affairs should emphasize making this information available to iv recipients compared to niv recipients . as such , iv recipients who applied in countries where fgm / c is commonly practiced are directly provided a hard copy of the fact sheet at the time of their in - person interview . niv recipients , however , are not provided a hard copy of the fact sheet during their interview ; instead , consular affairs has made the fact sheet indirectly available to them by displaying it in the posts' visa section waiting area . figure 3 is a photograph of the fact sheet displayed at the post in tanzania . according to state data , from fiscal year 2012 to 2015 , about 200,000 iv recipients and over 1 million niv recipients applied through countries where fgm / c is commonly practiced . therefore , only about one in six visa recipients in these countries would have been directly provided information about fgm / c by receiving a hard copy of the fact sheet during the interview ; the remaining recipients would have been informed if they independently found and reviewed the fact sheet in the post waiting area . state officials could not determine why the agency initially decided not to provide a hard copy of the fact sheet to niv recipients . however , officials stated that niv recipients are expected to be in the united states on a short - term , temporary basis .