irs assessed a tfrp against the owner . the business reported that it paid the owner a six figure income and that the owner had borrowed nearly $1 million from the business . the business also made a down payment for the owner's boat and bought several cars and a home outside the country . the owner allegedly has now relocated his cars and boat outside the united states . this contractor went out of business in 2003 after state tax authorities seized its bank account . the business transferred its employees to a relative's business , which also had unpaid federal taxes , and submitted invoices and received payments from dod on a previous contract through august 2003 . case # 2 - this engineering research contractor received nearly $400,000 from dod during 2002 . at the time of our audit , the contractor had not remitted its payroll tax withholdings to the federal government since the late 1990s . in 1996 , the owner bought a home and furnishings worth approximately $1 million and borrowed nearly $1 million from the business . the owner told our investigators that the payroll tax funds were used for other business purposes . case # 3 - this aircraft parts manufacturer did not pay payroll withholding and unemployment taxes for 19 of 20 periods through the mid - to late 1990s . irs assessed a tfrp against several corporate officers , and placed the business in the fplp in 2000 . this business claims that its payroll taxes were not paid because the business had not received dod contract payments ; however , dod records show that the business received over $300,000 from dod during 2002 . the study was not completed at the time of our audit . in earlier reviews , we estimated irs could use the levy program to potentially recover hundreds of millions of dollars in tax debt . although the levy program could provide a highly effective and efficient method of collecting unpaid taxes from contractors that receive federal payments , irs policies restrict the number of cases that enter the program and the point in the collection process they enter the program . for each of the collection phases listed below , irs policy either excludes or severely delays putting cases into the levy program . phase 1: notify taxpayer of unpaid taxes , including a demand for payment letter . phase 2: place the case into the automated collection system ( acs ) process . the acs process consists primarily of telephone calls to the taxpayer to arrange for payment . phase 3: move the case into a queue of cases awaiting assignment to a field collection revenue officer . phase 4: assign the case to field collections where a revenue officer attempts face - to - face contact and collection . as of september 30 , 2002 , irs listed $81 billion of cases in these four phases: 17 percent were in notice status , 17 percent were in acs , 26 percent were in field collection , and 40 percent were in the queue awaiting assignment to the field .