report no . december 6 , 2006 . the use of rfid for human identity verification . report no . december 6 , 2006 . framework for privacy analysis of programs , technologies , and applications . citizenship and immigration services . figure 1 details the structure of the dhs privacy office . when the privacy office was initially established , it had 5 full - time employees , including the chief privacy officer . since then , the staff has expanded to 16 full - time employees . the privacy office has also hired private contractors to assist in meeting its obligations . as of february 2007 , the privacy office had 9 full - time and 3 half - time contractor staff in addition to its full - time employees . the first chief privacy officer served from april 2003 to september 2005 , followed by an acting chief privacy officer who served through july 2006 . in july 2006 , the secretary appointed a second permanent chief privacy officer . in 2004 , the chief privacy officer established the dhs data privacy and integrity advisory committee , which is to advise the secretary and the chief privacy officer on “programmatic , policy , operational , administrative , and technological issues within dhs” that affect individual privacy , data integrity , and data interoperability . the advisory committee is composed of privacy professionals from the private sector and academia and is organized into three subcommittees ; data integrity and information protection , privacy architecture , and data acquisition and use . to date , the advisory committee has issued reports on several privacy issues , such as use of commercial data and radio frequency identification ( rfid ) technology , and has made related policy recommendations to the department . the advisory committee's charter requires that the committee meet at least once a year ; however , thus far it has met quarterly . the advisory committee meetings , which are open to the public , are used to discuss progress on planned reports , to identify new issues , to receive briefings from dhs officials , and to hold panel discussions on privacy issues . the privacy office is responsible for ensuring that dhs is in compliance with federal laws that govern the use of personal information by the federal government . among these laws are the homeland security act of 2002 ( as amended by the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ) , the privacy act of 1974 , and the e - gov act of 2002 . based on these laws , the privacy office's major responsibilities can be summarized into four broad categories: ( 1 ) reviewing and approving pias , ( 2 ) integrating privacy considerations into dhs decision making , ( 3 ) reviewing and approving public notices required by the privacy act , and ( 4 ) preparing and issuing reports . section 208 of the e - gov act is designed to enhance protection of personally identifiable information in government information systems and information collections by requiring that agencies conduct pias .