we disagree . to address the director's concerns , we grouped her concerns into four general categories as discussed below . the director stated that a fair comparison cannot be made between pips ( opm's investigative database ) and jpas ( dod's clearance database that also includes investigative timeliness data ) . as our scope and methodology section makes clear , we did report information from opm and dod databases , but the focus of our report was not a comparison of databases . while we did present timeliness findings based on the two databases , we did not perform comparisons — a condition that would have required us to report statistics on the same population for the same time period . and ( 2 ) how complete is the documentation of the processes used to determine whether industry personnel are eligible for a top secret clearance ? this report supplements the information we provided to you recently in congressional hearings that examined various aspects of dod's personnel security clearance program ( see the list of related gao products at the end of this report ) . the scope of our work emphasized the analysis of information on top secret clearances awarded to industry personnel , but we also gathered additional information on other levels of clearances and clearance requests from other types of personnel in order to provide a broader context for understanding our primary findings . for both key questions , we reviewed laws , executive orders , policies , and reports related to the timeliness and completeness of security clearance investigations and adjudications for industry personnel as well as servicemembers and civilian governmental employees . those sources provided the criteria used for assessing timeliness and documentation completeness , as well as identified causes for and effects from delayed clearances and incomplete investigative and adjudicative reports . additional insights about causes of and effects from delayed clearances and incomplete investigative and adjudicative reports were obtained from interviews with and documentary evidence from personnel associated with a variety of governmental offices: ousd ( i ) , disco , doha , other dod adjudication facilities that make clearance determinations for servicemembers and dod civilians ; dod's personnel security research center ; the defense security service's training academy that offers adjudicator training ; and opm . nongovernmental organizations supplying information on conditions , causes , and effects included officials representing two of opm's investigations contractors and technology associations whose member organizations require clearances for their industry personnel employees . for the timeliness question , our analyses of conditions included a review of computerized data abstracted from dod's joint personnel adjudication system ( jpas ) and statistical reports on timeliness that opm produced for dod . the abstract was for the population of 1,685 industry personnel granted an initial top secret clearance and 574 industry personnel granted a top secret clearance update by disco during january and february 2006 . the clearance investigations for those 2,259 industry personnel were started at various times prior to the adjudications . while we found problems with the accuracy of some of the jpas data , we determined they were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report .