investigation and prosecution . the final element of an effective fraud prevention system is the aggressive investigation and prosecution of individuals who commit fraud against the federal government . however , sba currently does not have an effective process for investigating fraud and abuse within the hubzone program . to date , other than the firms identified by our prior investigation , the sba program office has never referred any firms for debarment and / or suspension proceedings based on findings from its program eligibility reviews . by failing to hold firms accountable , sba has sent a message to the contracting community that there is no punishment or consequences for committing fraud or abusing the intent of the hubzone program . sba has taken some enforcement steps on the 10 firms that we found did not meet hubzone program requirements as of july 2008 . according to sba , as of january 2009 , 2 of the firms have been removed from the program and 2 others are in the process of being removed . however , sba's failure to examine some of the most egregious cases we previously identified has resulted in an additional $7.2 million in hubzone obligations and about $25 million in hubzone set - aside or price preference contracts to these firms . in the written statement for the july 2008 hearing , the acting administrator of sba stated that sba would take “immediate steps to require site visits for those hubzone firms that have received hubzone contracts and will be instituting suspension and debarment proceedings against firms that have intentionally misrepresented their hubzone status.” however , as of february 2009 , according to sba's dynamic small business web site , 7 of the 10 firms that we investigated were still hubzone certified . sba has removed 2 firms from the hubzone program and is in the process of providing due process to 2 additional firms to determine whether they should be removed . sba officials stated that no action will be taken on 3 firms because sba's program evaluations concluded that these firms met all the eligibility requirements of the hubzone program . we attempted to verify sba's work , but were not provided with the requested documentation to support its conclusion that the firms moved into compliance after our july 2008 testimony . sba officials said that they have not yet performed program evaluations for 3 of the most egregious firms because they are experiencing technical problems with sba's caseload system . as such , these 3 firms remain eligible to receive hubzone set - aside contracts . sba is also pursuing suspension and debarment actions for 7 of these firms , and the department of justice is considering civil actions in 5 of the 10 cases . we will be referring all the cases we identified to sba for further action . in our report , we also recommended that the administrator of sba expeditiously implement our june 2008 recommendations and take the following four actions: consider incorporating a risk - based mechanism for conducting unannounced site visits as part of the screening and monitoring process .