linking courses . several of the colleges we visited are trying to enhance the learning environment by giving students a small classroom experience that will provide them greater opportunities to connect with faculty and their peers , not unlike the experience they would have had in high school . for example , texas a & m university at corpus christi , a hispanic serving institution , requires all full - time , first - year students to enroll in learning communities — clusters of three or four classes in which the course content is linked . students are typically enrolled in a large lecture course with 150 or more students and two other courses with 25 or fewer students from the lecture course . in addition to covering course content , instructors help students learn how to succeed in their first year of college , helping with topics such as study skills on an as needed basis . portland state university provides its students smaller learning communities in the freshman and sophomore years through its university studies program . according to officials there , the university developed the program in 1994 to address disappointing retention rates from the freshman to sophomore year . officials told us that , because few students live on campus , the university has to create opportunities for students to connect to the campus via the classroom . the required freshman and sophomore courses are comprised of 35-40 students who meet as a whole with faculty and in smaller mentor sessions , led by upper - level or graduate students . officials told us they think the upper - level students who serve as peer mentors for the freshman classes are particularly helpful for many first - generation college students who attend the university and may find college more difficult to navigate . officials at both universities reported positive outcomes for these learning programs . specifically , at texas a & m students withdrew from the large lecture courses at lower rates and had higher grades in these courses when taken as part of the learning community . they also attributed retention rates for first - year minority students that are on par with other first - year students to the learning communities . at portland state , officials attributed increases in retention from the freshman to sophomore year , as well as from the sophomore to junior year , to its university studies program . using service learning . connecting classroom learning to the community is another approach colleges are taking to enhance the learning experience and create a sense of belonging . the regional ecosystem applied learning corps was established in 1997 through partnership between southern oregon university in ashland , oregon , and community and government organizations . this americorps program engages students in the classroom and through community - based projects dealing with land management issues . one student , who went to college directly from high school but left after 2 years , told us that the regional ecosystem applied learning corps played a large part in his decision to finish his bachelor's degree because it allowed him to connect his studies to the community while working .