3 and fig . thirty - eight states at the secondary level reported that they face great or very great challenges in collecting data on student technical skill attainment , while , similarly , 14 said they face challenges collecting data on student placement . the results were similar at the postsecondary level: 39 states reported great or very great challenges with the technical skill attainment measure and 11 cited a similar level of difficulty with student placement . states reported that the technical skill attainment measure at the secondary and postsecondary levels was most challenging to implement because of costs and the states' ability to collect accurate and complete student data . specifically , states reported that the costs of state - developed assessments and third - party technical assessments — such as those for industry certifications — are high and often too expensive for many districts , institutions , or students . several state cte directors commented in our surveys that their perkins funds are inadequate to pay for these assessments and additional funds would be necessary to cover the costs . another cte director stated that economically disadvantaged students cannot afford the cost of assessments . in addition to challenges due to cost , states are limited in their ability to access accurate and complete data . for example , a state official said that washington state does not have data - sharing agreements with assessment providers to receive the results of student assessments . as a result , the state will have to rely largely on students to self - report the results of their assessments , which raises concerns of data quality . challenges such as these likely contribute to some states' use of other data — such as gpa or program completion — to collect and report information for this key student performance measure . some states also reported difficulty collecting data on cte students after they leave the school system . states at the secondary and postsecondary levels reported that their greatest challenge with the student placement measure is collecting data on students that are employed out of state . as we previously reported , state wage records , such as unemployment insurance data , track employment - related outcomes only within a state , not across states . a number of states commented in our surveys on challenges in tracking students because of the lack of data sharing across states . we found that states face challenges in tracking students employed out of state regardless of the method they most commonly use to collect student placement data . thirty - eight states at the secondary level will use student survey data from the state , school district , or a third party to track student placement and report to education , while 41 states at the postsecondary level will rely on state wage record data , despite potential gaps in student data ( see fig . states also cited other challenges in obtaining data on student placement for cte students . at the secondary level , states reported that their next greatest challenge is linking secondary and postsecondary data systems in order to track students that pursue higher education after graduation .