ii. ) the commercial reprocessing era at west valley left behind major environmental , safety , and health risks from multiple types of nuclear contamination at the site , including high - level wastes , radioactive buried wastes , and environmental contamination . specific on - site radiation risks that were generated then and still exist include the following: the reprocessing building — significantly contaminated with strontium - 90 and cesium - 137 ( both potentially carcinogenic radionuclides ) — and four adjacent single - shell underground storage tanks encased in concrete vaults . these tanks originally contained about 600,000 gallons of liquid , high - level wastes generated during reprocessing . a 5-acre , nrc - licensed waste disposal area , used from 1966 to 1986 . this area contains several types of buried wastes resulting from the reprocessing era , such as about a third of a cubic meter of spent fuel from hanford's n - reactor ; this spent fuel was buried instead of being reprocessed because the outer layer of a fuel assembly was ruptured . a storage pool originally containing several hundred spent nuclear fuel assemblies , and now containing 125 assemblies . groundwater contamination under the reprocessing building , in the form of a plume of strontium - 90 that first developed during 1968 to 1971 and was identified in 1994 . contamination in the form of cesium - 137 in surface soils on - and off - site , resulting from airborne releases , identified as principally occurring in 1968 . the releases were caused by ventilation failures in the plant's main stack . the cesium contamination levels are only slightly distinguishable from background radiation levels . the contamination extends about 3.7 miles northwest from the plant stack into heavily wooded off - site areas . an inactive 15-acre , state - licensed and - managed commercial low - level radioactive waste disposal facility . this facility , which operated from 1963 to 1975 , contains , among other wastes , highly radioactive wastes from naval and commercial reactors and nuclear fuel processing facilities that are buried in trenches , as shown in figure 2 . the west valley demonstration project act , enacted to assist in the cleanup of the facility , was signed into law in october 1980 . the act required doe to , among other things , ( 1 ) solidify and develop suitable containers for the site's high - level radioactive wastes ; ( 2 ) transport the solidified waste to a permanent repository ; and ( 3 ) dispose of the low - level and transuranic wastes created during the project . in cooperation with the state's energy research and development authority , doe took control of project operations in 1982 . the west valley act and an implementing cooperative agreement divided projected operating costs between doe ( 90 percent ) and the state ( 10 percent ) . west valley nuclear services , inc. ( now under washington group international , inc. ) was awarded the solidification project contract and remains the primary contractor . in carrying out its responsibilities under the act , doe has constructed the solidification facility and conducted solidification operations — referred to as vitrification .