cms gave the auditors guidance . it is important to note that the audit guidance includes procedures to verify information used in the projection or estimation of costs submitted in the bids , not actual results or costs each year , as the bids do not report actual costs . according to our analysis of available cms data , cms did not meet the statutory requirement to audit the financial records of at least one - third of the participating ma organizations for contract years 2001 through 2005 , nor has it done so yet for the 2006 bid submissions . we performed an analysis to determine whether cms had met the requirement because cms could not provide documentation to support the method it used to select the acrs and bids for audit , nor did cms document whether or how it met the one - third requirement for contract years 2001 through 2006 . our analysis shows that between 18.6 and 23.6 percent , or fewer than one - third , of the ma organizations ( as defined by the number of contracts each year ) for contract years 2001 through 2005 were audited each year . similarly , we determined that only 13.9 percent of the ma organizations and prescription drug plans with approved bids for 2006 were audited , as of the end of our review . table 2 summarizes our analysis . regarding contract years 2001 through 2004 , cms officials told us that they did not know how the ma organizations were selected for audit , and the documentation supporting the selections was either not created or not retained . for contract year 2005 audits , cms officials told us that the selection criteria included several factors . they said that the criteria considered included whether the ma organization had been audited previously and whether it had significant issues . with respect to contract year 2006 , cms officials acknowledged the one - third requirement , but they stated that they did not intend for the audits of the 2006 bid submissions to meet the one - third audit requirement . such an extended cycle for conducting these reviews greatly limits their usefulness to cms and hinders cms' ability to recommend and implement timely actions to address identified deficiencies in the ma organizations' and prescription drug plans' bid processes . in its audits for contract years 2001-2005 , cms did not consistently ensure that the audit process provided information needed for assessing the potential impact of errors on beneficiaries' benefits or payments to the ma organizations . the auditors reported findings ranging from lack of supporting documentation to overstating or understating certain costs , but did not identify how the errors affected beneficiary benefits , copayments , or premiums . in addition , although the auditors categorized their results as findings and observations , with findings being more significant , depending on their materiality to the average payment rate reported in the acr , the distinction between findings and observations , was based on judgment , and therefore varied among the different auditors . in our 2001 report , we reported that cms planned to require auditors , where applicable , to quantify in their audit reports the overall impact of errors .