gao - 06-580 . may 31 , 2006 . information sharing: dhs should take steps to encourage more widespread use of its program to protect and share critical infrastructure information . gao - 06-383 . washington , d.c.: april 17 , 2006 . these recommendations are still relevant today . a departmentwide information technology ( it ) governance framework — including controls ( disciplines ) aimed at effectively managing it - related people , processes , and tools — is vital to dhs's transformation efforts . these controls and disciplines include having and using an enterprise architecture , or corporate blueprint , as an authoritative frame of reference to guide and constrain it investments ; defining and following a corporate process for informed decision making by senior leadership about competing it investment options ; applying system and software development and acquisition discipline and rigor when defining , designing , developing , testing , deploying , and maintaining systems ; establishing a comprehensive information security program to protect its information and systems ; having sufficient people with the right knowledge , skills , and abilities to execute each of these areas now and in the future ; and centralizing leadership for extending these disciplines throughout the organization with an empowered chief information officer . in early 2006 , we testified on dhs's progress regarding its it management controls . at the time , we reported that dhs had made efforts during the previous 3 to 4 years , to establish and implement it management controls and disciplines , but progress in these key areas had been uneven , and more remained to be accomplished . specifically , dhs had made improvements in its enterprise architecture by establishing departmentwide technology standards . it had also developed and initiated the implementation of a plan to introduce a shared services orientation to the architecture , particularly for information services , such as data centers and e - mail . in addition , to strengthen it investment management , dhs established an acquisition project performance reporting system , aligned its investment management cycle and associated milestones with the department's annual budget preparation process , and linked investment management systems to standardize and make consistent the financial data used to make investment decisions . further , to develop more effective information security management , dhs completed a comprehensive inventory of its major information systems and implemented a departmentwide tool that incorporates the guidance required to adequately complete security certification and accreditation for all systems . we have ongoing work that will update the status of dhs's it management controls . despite these efforts , dhs must do more before each of these management controls and capabilities is fully mature and institutionalized . for example , our reviews of key nonfinancial systems shows that dhs has not consistently employed reliable cost - estimating practices , effective requirements development and test management , meaningful performance measurement , strategic workforce management , and proactive risk management , among other recognized program management best practices . in addition , dhs has not fully implemented a comprehensive information security program ; and goals related to consolidating networks and e - mail systems , for example , remain to be fully accomplished .