other states may not do so . maryland and north carolina carry out some environmental activities even before the first phase , such as considering whether environmental impacts are likely when they develop their state transportation improvement plan . further , attention to environmental impacts may occur even after fhwa and permit agencies approve the project if the environmental analysis is challenged in court . stakeholders with different primary interests or responsibilities typically had divergent views about aspects that unduly add time to environmental reviews . ( see table 5. ) the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . you can print these documents in their entirety , including charts and other graphics . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . the list contains links to the full - text document files . to have gao e - mail this list to you every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to gao mailing lists” under “order gao products” heading . the national historic preservation act . section 106 of the national historic preservation act requires that federal agencies consider the effect that a project may have on a property ( eg , districts , sites , buildings , structures , and objects ) that is included in , or eligible for inclusion in , the national register of historic places . the endangered species act of 1973 . section 7 of the endangered species act requires federal agencies to ensure that actions they authorize , fund , or carry out are not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of threatened or endangered species ( including fish , wildlife , and plants facing extinction ) or result in the destruction or adverse modification of critical habitat for these species . in some cases , fhwa and state departments of transportation work with the fish and wildlife service , national marine fisheries service , and state resource agencies to ensure compliance with the act . environmental review of federally funded highway projects typically begins when state departments of transportation , in consultation with fhwa , determine that a proposed project may or will affect the quality of the environment .