dhs concurred with the recommendation in this report . regarding the status of our recommendations listed in appendix i , fps commented that it is actively pursuing initiatives and implementing measures to address the nine recommendations that we reported as not implemented . fps agreed with this recommendation but has not yet implemented it . we have reported on several issues related to locating fps within dhs's immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) . for example , we reported in 2008 that some of fps's operational and funding challenges stemmed from it being part of ice . in october 2009 , to enable fps to better focus on its primary facility protection mission , the secretary of homeland security transferred fps from ice to the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) . according to dhs , transferring fps to nppd will enhance oversight and efficiency while maximizing the department's overall effectiveness in protecting federal buildings across the country . we are reviewing the transition of fps into nppd and will provide congress with a final report in 2011 . fps has yet to fully ensure that its recent move to an inspector - based workforce does not hinder its ability to protect federal facilities . in 2007 , fps essentially eliminated its police officer position and moved to an all - inspector - based workforce . the committee , however , has yet to announce an anticipated date for issuance of this guidance . in response to our many recommendations , fps has a number of ongoing improvements that , once fully implemented , should enhance its ability to protect the over 1 million federal government employees and members of the public who visit federal facilities each year . in addition , fscs have a significant role in ensuring the effective protection of federal facilities ; however , they face a number of issues in carrying out their security responsibilities . for example , they have operated without any procedures since their creation in 1995 , and efforts to develop guidance are incomplete . without specific guidance or procedures , fscs have operated in an ad hoc manner , and there is a lack of assurance that federal facilities under the control and custody of gsa are effectively protected by fps . moreover , no actions have been taken on these issues since we identified them in our november 2009 report . as such , these weaknesses continue to result in ad hoc security and increased risk at some federal facilities . therefore , we are making a recommendation for the secretary of dhs to address this matter . gao recommends that the secretary of dhs direct the under secretary of nppd and the director of fps to work in consultation with gsa and isc to develop and implement procedures that , among other things , outline the fscs' organizational structure , operations , decision - making authority , and accountability . we provided a draft of this report to dhs for review and comment . we believe our characterization of fps's efforts to address our recommendations reflects the data provided by fps .