dol had no comments . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of the treasury , the secretary of health and human services , the secretary of labor , the commissioner of social security , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact elizabeth curda at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or curdae@gao.gov or james cosgrove at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or cosgrovej@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . in addition to the contact named above , mark glickman ( assistant director ) , gregory giusto ( assistant director ) , paul schearf ( analyst - in - charge ) , christie enders , and samuel gaffigan made key contributions to this report . additional assistance was provided by bill boutboul , juana collymore , robert dacey , alex galuten , yvette gutierrez , janice latimer , emei li , sheila r. mccoy , art merriam , mimi nguyen , stacy ouellette , oliver richard , joseph silvestri , dawn simpson , ardith spence , almeta spencer , frank todisco , and walter vance . most americans have a stake in the financial condition of the trust funds . at the end of 2018 , approximately 176 million people contributed to the social security and medicare trust funds through payroll taxes , about 63 million people received social security benefit payments , and about 60 million people were covered by medicare . information on the financial condition of the trust funds can be used by policymakers , agencies , researchers , and the public to understand the programs' finances and evaluate any policy changes to the programs . boards of trustees manage the social security and medicare trust funds and report annually to congress on their financial status , under the social security act , which requires the boards of trustees to provide the reports ( trustees reports ) to congress each year by april 1 . the boards have six trustees: four from federal agencies and two who are members of the public , when confirmed . the boards issue one report on social security and one on medicare . given the importance of these programs and the responsibility of congress to oversee them , you asked us to review the timeliness of the reports . this report ( 1 ) describes how the boards develop the annual social security and medicare trustees reports , and ( 2 ) examines the extent to which the boards have provided the trustees reports to congress by the april 1 deadline since 1995 , and what factors account for any delays .