resources . our preliminary analysis indicates that , in cases where the ct bureau funded u.s. government agencies on cve or ctf programming , the funding mechanism was clear and laid out in the interagency agreements . some agency officials told us that these agreements provide a standard process for providing funding from the ct bureau to other agencies . written guidance and agreements.shows that many of the agencies we spoke with had formal interagency agreements with the ct bureau on cve - or ctf - related programming or activities . the agreements described , among other things , the service to be provided , roles and responsibilities of each party , method and frequency of performance reporting , and accounting information for funding of the service provided . we found that most of the state bureaus we spoke with that coordinate with the ct bureau on cve and ctf programs did not have written agreements laying out the terms of the collaboration , but several state officials said that formalized agreements were not necessary because collaboration between bureaus within state is routine and the ct bureau has been effective in sharing information pertaining to the cve program . thank you again for the opportunity to assist with the oversight of state's bureau of counterterrorism . chairman poe , ranking member keating , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . for further information regarding this statement , please contact charles michael johnson , jr. , director , international affairs and trade at ( 202 ) 512-7331 or johnsoncm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included jason bair , assistant director ; andrea riba miller , analyst - in charge ; and esther toledo . technical support was provided by ashley alley , mason calhoun , tina cheng , david dayton , martin de alteriis , and sarah veale . appendix i: organizational chart of the department of state bureau of counterterrorism , as of may 2015 this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . leadership . our preliminary analysis shows that for cve and to some extent ctf , officials at state and other u.s. government agencies were generally aware of the agency or individual with leadership responsibility for the particular counterterrorism program . officials in state's regional bureaus stated that they are generally aware of when the ct bureau would have the lead on counterterrorism issues versus the regional bureaus . in addition , officials noted that they receive relevant and timely information on cve - related programming from the bureau .