transmission pipelines . transmission pipelines carry hazardous liquid or natural gas , sometimes over hundreds of miles , to communities and large - volume users ( eg , factories ) . for natural gas transmission pipelines , compression stations located periodically along the pipeline maintain product pressure . similarly , pumping stations along hazardous liquid transmission pipelines maintain product flow . transmission pipelines tend to have the largest diameters and pressures of the three types of pipelines , generally ranging from 12 to 42 inches in diameter and operating at pressures ranging from 400 to 1440 psi . phmsa's regulations cover all hazardous liquid and natural gas transmission pipelines . gas distribution pipelines . natural gas distribution pipelines transport natural gas from transmission pipelines to residential , commercial , and industrial customers . these pipelines tend to be smaller , sometimes less than 1 inch in diameter , and operate at lower pressures — 0.25 to 100 psi . gathering pipelines . gas gathering pipelines collect natural gas from production areas , while hazardous liquid gathering pipelines collect oil and other petroleum products . these pipelines then typically transport the products to processing facilities , which in turn refine the products and send them to transmission pipelines . unlike the other types of pipelines , many of these pipelines have not been subject to phmsa regulation because they are generally located in rural areas , are smaller in diameter than transmission pipelines ( traditionally about 2 to 12 inches ) , and operate at lower pressures , ranging from about 5 to 800 pounds per square inch ( psi ) . in our january 2013 report , we concluded that phmsa has an opportunity to improve incident response times by developing a performance - based approach for pipeline operators to improve incident response times . we have also previously concluded that a performance - based approach — including goals and associated performance measures and targets — can allow those being regulated to determine the most appropriate way to achieve desired outcomes . while phmsa has established a national goal for pipeline operators to respond to incidents in a “prompt and effective” manner , it has not linked performance measures or targets to this goal . defining performance measures and targets for incident response can be challenging , but we identified a potential strategy for phmsa to move toward a more quantifiable , performance - based approach to improve incident response based on nationwide incident response data . for example , phmsa could evaluate nationwide data to determine response times for different types of pipeline ( based on location , operating pressure , and pipeline diameter , among other factors ) . first , though , phmsa must improve the data it collects on incident response times . these data are not reliable both because operators are not required to fill out certain time - related fields in the reporting form and because operators told us they interpret these data fields in different ways . consequently , we found that some pipeline operators did not consistently report the date and time for when the incident was identified or for when operator resources arrived on the site of the incident .