chrysler . in may 2011 , chrysler repaid its outstanding tarp loans , 6 years ahead of schedule . chrysler returned more than $11.1 billion of $12.4 billion committed to chrysler through principal repayments , interest , and cancelled commitments . treasury has fully exited its investment in chrysler group under tarp . gm . on december 9 , 2013 , treasury fully exited its investment in gm . treasury completed its fourth and final pre - arranged trading plan for the sale of its remaining 31.1 million shares . treasury recovered a total of $39.7 billion from its original investment of $51.0 billion in gm . chrysler financial . in july 2009 , chrysler financial repaid its $1.5 billion in tarp loans plus around $7 million in interest . chrysler financial has since ceased operations . also through aifp , treasury provided $17.2 billion of assistance to ally financial , a large financial holding company , whose primary business is auto financing . to provide this assistance , treasury purchased senior equity , mandatory convertible preferred shares , and trust preferred securities , some of which treasury ultimately converted into common shares . by december 2010 , treasury held common shares totaling 74 percent of ally financial as well as $5.9 billion in mandatory convertible preferred shares . treasury retained this level of ownership through the third quarter of 2013 . then , in late 2013 , three key regulatory and legal developments helped treasury accelerate the wind down of its investments in ally financial ( see text box ) . as a result , in november 2013 , ally financial made cash payments totaling $5.9 billion to repurchase all remaining mandatory convertible preferred shares outstanding and terminate an existing share adjustment provision . additionally , ally financial issued $1.3 billion of common equity to third - party investors , reducing treasury's ownership share from 74 to 63 percent . the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) did not object to ally financial's resubmitted capital plan , allowing ally financial to complete the private placement of common shares valued at $1.3 billion , which it had announced in august 2013 . the private placement , intended in part to help finance the repurchase of the $5.9 billion remaining treasury - owned mandatory convertible preferred shares , was completed in november 2013 , and the treasury shares were repurchased . in december 2013 , the bankruptcy of ally financial's subsidiary rescap was substantially resolved . the final bankruptcy agreement included a settlement that the bankruptcy court judge had approved in june 2013 . it released ally financial from any and all legal claims by rescap and , with some exceptions , all other third parties , in exchange for $2.1 billion in cash from ally financial and its insurers .