number of institutionalized individuals . on the basis of information from different sources , we estimate that the total number of people with disabilities who are being served in different types of institutional settings is at least 1.8 million . this figure includes about 1.6 million people in nursing facilities , 106,000 in institutions for the mentally retarded or developmentally disabled , and 57,000 in state and county facilities for the mentally ill . number at risk of institutionalization . the number of people who are living in the community but at risk of institutionalization is difficult to establish . in an earlier study we estimated that , nationwide , 2.3 million adults of all ages lived in home or community - based settings and required considerable help from another person to perform two or more self - care activities . more difficult to estimate is the number of disabled children at risk of institutionalization . the demographics associated with the increasing number of aging baby boomers will likely drive the increased demand for services in a wide range of long - term care settings . although a chronic physical or mental disability may occur at any age , the older an individual becomes , the more likely a person will develop disabling conditions . for example , less than 4 percent of children under 15 years old have a severe disability , compared with 58 percent of those 80 years and older . the baby boom generation — those born between 1946 and 1964 — will contribute significantly to the growth in the number of elderly individuals with disabilities who need long - term care and to the amount of resources required to pay for it . the oldest baby boomers , now in their fifties , will turn 65 in 2011 . in 2000 , about 13 percent of our nation's population was composed of individuals aged 65 or older . by 2020 , that percentage will increase by nearly one - third to about 17 percent — one in six americans — and will represent nearly 20 million more seniors than there are today . by 2040 , the number of seniors aged 85 and older will more than triple to 14 million ( see fig . an estimated 60 percent of the disabled elderly living in communities now rely exclusively on their families and other unpaid sources for their care . because of factors such as the greater geographic dispersion of families and the large and growing percentage of women who work outside the home , many baby boomers may have no option but to rely on paid long - term care providers . a smaller proportion of this generation in the future may have a spouse or adult children to provide unpaid care and therefore may have to rely on more formal or public services . medicaid is by far the largest public program supporting long - term care.states administer this joint federal - state health financing program for low - income people within broad federal requirements and with oversight from the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) , the agency that administers the program at the federal level .