we are not making recommendations in this report . dod and the department of the interior were provided copies of the draft report . neither dod nor the department of the interior provided written comments . the department of the interior provided technical comments that were incorporated , as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics , the secretary of the interior , the director of the united states geological survey , the secretary of commerce , the chairman of the securities and exchange commission , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or at makm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . the house armed services committee report on a bill for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 included a provision for gao to examine the global tantalum supply chain . these attributes make it a valuable material for use in numerous military applications such as capacitors used in electronics equipment including computers , turbine engines for aircraft , and the linings of missile warheads . it is also used in numerous commercial consumer products such as mobile phones , personal computers , chemical processing equipment , heat exchangers , anti - lock brake systems , and airbag activation systems . it is possible to substitute other materials for tantalum , but substitutions usually result in a loss of performance . worldwide tantalum supply begins with mining tantalum ore — a concentration of tantalum - containing minerals , such as tantalite , microlite , and wodginite — that is economically feasible to mine . ore is the principal raw material from which tantalum is derived , and can be mined through industrial operations which may be mechanized or through artisanal mining operations , which are characterized by a lack of mechanization . the ore is further processed into tantalum concentrate by physically removing unwanted materials . tantalum is also derived from synthetic concentrates , where tantalum is extracted from slags , for example , from processing tin concentrates or other forms of industrial processing . these concentrates can be chemically processed into tantalum salts , tantalum oxides , or other marketable tantalum materials such as tantalum powder , metal , and alloys , which are then further manufactured into end - products . figure 1 shows details of the tantalum supply chain . the usgs collects , monitors , and analyzes information about natural resource conditions , issues , and problems , including those related to tantalum , to provide information to various government agencies , including dod .