we have begun doing this work for the committee . the division agreed with the recommendation . in march 2004 , the ig issued a report on its work to determine whether the fdic adequately followed up on bsa violations reported in examinations of fdic - supervised financial institutions to ensure that they take appropriate corrective action . among the ig's findings was that , in some cases , bsa violations were repeatedly identified in multiple examination reports before bank management took corrective action or fdic took regulatory action to address the repeat violations . we are reviewing the reliability of the data systems used by banking regulators to track bank examinations , including bsa compliance examinations . we plan to obtain information on the bank examinations performed by each banking regulator over the past 4 years and then select a random sample to determine whether and the extent to which a bsa review was conducted or curtailed and the bases for these decisions . we also are obtaining information from the banking regulators on the number of bsa examinations done over the past 4 years and the number and nature of violations they identified . we plan to select and analyze samples of their bsa examinations and supporting workpapers to secure , in part , information on violations identified and the areas of operation covered during the examinations . in general , the major objectives of our review are to determine: 1 . how do the regulators' risk - focused examinations of depository institutions assess bsa and aml program compliance ? to what extent do the banking regulators identify bsa and aml program violations and take supervisory actions for such violations ? how consistent are bsa examination procedures and interpretation of bsa violations across the banking regulators ? as part of our review , and considering the igs' findings , we are examining the relevant bsa amendments and banking statutes , regulations , and policies that address the authorities under which the regulators and treasury take supervisory action for bsa violations and violations of their aml program rules . we are reviewing current examination guidance and procedures that the regulators use for determining compliance with the bsa , and related requirements used during their regular and targeted examinations . what resources do the federal banking regulators have for conducting examinations of bsa and patriot act compliance ? additionally , we plan to track supervisory actions taken by the regulators to correct the violations they identified . our analyses in this area will include assessing the regulators' examination procedures for bsa and aml compliance and the nature of violations and corresponding supervisory actions . we will also try to ascertain the implications of “risk - focused” examinations for bsa compliance and to determine whether and to what extent the regulators curtail such compliance reviews in their examinations . we will also review the examinations in our sample to determine the extent to which the examinations reviewed policies and procedures and then tested transactions to see if the policies and procedures were implemented appropriately . we will also determine the extent to which banking regulators vary in the way they conduct their bsa examinations , cite banks for violations , and take enforcement actions .