after action reports . diils facilitators prepare after action reports for certain events to record a summary of the assistance they provided , outcomes of the training , any challenges they encountered , and further actions to be taken . diils officials stated that after action reports provide continuity and capture lessons learned for diils facilitators who will be traveling to those countries in the future . according to diils officials' estimates , due to limited staff resources , facilitators had completed only a little more than half of the after action reports required during fiscal years 2013 through 2016 , an issue we discuss later in this report . photographs in figure 5 show classroom voting technology that diils facilitators use to assess training participants' understanding in real time , a typical post - course student feedback survey , and diils facilitators soliciting student participation and feedback during a training session in uganda . officials from the five geographic combatant commands we spoke with as well as other dod and state officials and foreign partners who participated in diils's events lauded diils for its high - quality expertise and assistance . u.s. southern command officials noted that its service components — army , navy , air force , and marines — provide rule of law assistance when diils cannot provide it . however , according to these officials , the training its service components provide generally lacks the same level of expertise as the training provided by diils . to address our objectives , we analyzed documents and data and interviewed officials from dod and the department of state ( state ) , including diils , the defense security cooperation agency ( dsca ) , and the office of the under secretary of defense for policy , as well as in - country dod security cooperation and state officials , diils training facilitators , and foreign partner officials . we focused on rule of law assistance that diils provided and excluded rule of law assistance provided by other dod entities , the u.s. agency for international development , and the departments of homeland security and justice . we also excluded state assistance not covered under title 22 , such as assistance provided by state's bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs . to examine the extent to which diils has provided rule of law assistance to foreign partners and assessed its quality for fiscal years 2013 through 2016 , we reviewed relevant authorities and identified the processes that dod and state have in place to plan rule of law assistance . we focused on diils and the primary processes used to implement ( 1 ) core rule of law training , determined through a series of interagency working groups ; ( 2 ) defense institution - building assistance , determined by the office of the under secretary of defense for policy and state's bureau of political - military affairs in coordination with dod ; and ( 3 ) statutorily required human rights training , delivered pursuant to the authority to build the capacity of foreign security forces as part of dod's global train and equip program . we also analyzed event data from diils for fiscal years 2013 through 2016 .