science . the recovery act included a $1.6 billion appropriation for doe's office of science ( science ) . nearly all $1.6 billion appropriated has been apportioned by omb to doe without restriction , and the secretary of energy has announced priorities for $1.2 billion of these funds , including: $248 million for major construction , modernization , infrastructure improvements , and needed decommissioning of facilities at national laboratories ; $330 million for operations and equipment procurement and installation at major scientific user facilities ; $277 million for competitive research collaborations on transformational basic science needed to develop alternative energy sources ; $90 million for core scientific research grants to be awarded to graduate students , postdocs , and ph.d. scientists across the nation for applications of nuclear science and technology , and for alternative isotope production techniques ; and $215 million to accelerate construction of two experimental facilities . science has obligated $342 million to support various approved construction , infrastructure improvement , and facility decommissioning projects at national laboratories , as well as procurement and installation of experimental equipment and instrumentation . table 3 describes science's recovery act projects at its national laboratories , including those for which funding has already been obligated . advanced research projects agency – energy ( arpa - e ) . the recovery act appropriated $830 million to noaa for construction and procurement related to r&d - related activities , including support for research operations and facilities ; construction and repair of facilities , ships and equipment ; and research to address gaps in climate modeling and to establish climate data records for research into the cause , effects , and ways to mitigate climate change . noaa has issued a competitive solicitation for up to $170 million in grants for shovel - ready projects to restore marine and coastal habitats . applications were due on april 6 , 2009 . a noaa official told us that noaa is working with omb to draft solicitations and other contract - related documents so the agency can quickly issue recovery act contract solicitations once its program plans are approved . the recovery act appropriated $3 billion to nsf for r&d - related activities , including competitive research grants ; major research instrumentation and equipment procurement and facilities construction ; academic research facilities modernization ; and education and human resources . nsf officials believe their recovery act funds can be obligated quickly once program plans are approved because , for example , $2 billion of the $3 billion will fund proposals that nsf's independent expert review panels have already deemed of merit but that nsf was not previously able to fund . specifically , nsf officials have stated that these grants will be awarded by september 30 , 2009 , and nsf expects its recovery act funds will allow the agency to support an additional 50,000 investigators , post - doctoral fellows , graduate and undergraduate students , and teachers throughout the nation .