the 2002 performance plan still does not do so . however , they noted that the fiscal year 2000 performance report did not respond to some of the inspector general's management challenges primarily because these challenges were identified in a november 30 , 2000 , letter . key contributors to this report were richard cheston , alan stapleton , elizabeth johnston , and sandy joseph . the following table discusses the major management challenges confronting the national science foundation ( nsf ) , including the governmentwide high - risk areas of strategic human capital management and information security , identified by our january 2001 high - risk update and nsf's office of inspector general ( ig ) in november 2000 . the first column of the table lists the management challenges identified by our office and nsf's ig . the second column discusses nsf's progress , as discussed in its fiscal year 2000 performance report , in resolving these challenges . the third column discusses the extent to which nsf's fiscal year 2002 performance plan includes performance goals and measures to address each of these challenges . we found that while the fiscal year 2000 performance report discussed nsf's progress in resolving most of its major challenges , it did not discuss nsf's progress in resolving the following challenges: ( 1 ) addressing strategic human capital management issues regarding strategic human capital planning and organizational alignment , leadership continuity and succession planning , and creating results - oriented organizational cultures ; ( 2 ) developing appropriate data security controls to reduce the ever increasing risk of unauthorized access ; ( 3 ) developing a more coherent award administration program that ensures that grantees comply with nsf's award requirements ; ( 4 ) ensuring that nsf grantees meet their cost - sharing obligations ; and ( 5 ) providing the science , operations , and logistics support needed to manage the u.s. antarctic program . of nsf's 10 major management challenges , its fiscal year 2002 performance plan ( 1 ) had goals and measures that were directly related to 5 of the challenges ; ( 2 ) had goals and measures that were indirectly applicable to 1 challenge ; ( 3 ) had no goals and measures related to 1 challenge but discussed strategies to address it ; and ( 4 ) did not have goals , measures , or strategies to address 3 challenges . pricewaterhousecoopers found no basis for questioning the integrity of the results . nsf can improve its future reports in several ways . the results of the independent committees' reviews would benefit from more detailed information , such as including all of the areas of emphasis and the results . in addition , last year , we noted that the 1999 performance report did not describe nsf's financial role in the examples of scientific successes presented . such information , we said , would help to judge the extent of nsf's role in achieving these successes . nsf officials maintain that determining nsf's financial role in these successes would be extremely difficult and would take a considerable effort . nsf officials told us that the successes they identified for this outcome were primarily due to nsf awards .