these are shown in table 1 . in the past , we have reported and testified that the forest service's ( 1 ) unreliable financial data hampers the agency's and the congress' decision - making ability , ( 2 ) lack of accountability exposes the agency to mismanagement and misuse of its assets , and ( 3 ) autonomous field structure hampers efforts to achieve financial accountability . in january 1999 , due to the longstanding serious accounting and financial reporting problems , we designated forest service financial management as a high - risk area . we continued to designate financial management at forest service as high - risk in our 2003 report . since 1997 , the ig and independent auditors have continued to report instances of noncompliance with certain federal financial accounting and information system requirements and internal control weaknesses related to forest service financial computer systems . the forest service , a component of usda , uses and depends on many financial management systems and services provided by usda , including the usda national finance center ( nfc ) . therefore , efforts to improve controls over certain financial management computer systems and internal controls over accounting processes must be made in cooperation with usda and nfc . for example , the forest service uses the usda foundation financial information system as its standard accounting system . in addition , nfc maintains and controls entry of many forest service transactions into ffis . nfc also reports expenditures and collections it processes on the forest service's behalf to treasury . ffis also depends on and receives data from feeder systems used by the forest service to record its transactions . many of the forest service's longstanding problems with regard to its accounting and information systems are a result of outdated technology of the financial feeder systems that transfer accounting data to ffis . to address each of our objectives , we analyzed prior ig , consultant , and independent auditor reports including the audit report on the forest service's fiscal year 2002 financial statements that described several financial management weaknesses and their effect on the forest service's ability to properly account for assets worth billions of dollars entrusted to its care . further , we examined the forest service's financial management policies , procedures , and processes , including completed , ongoing and planned activities and related implementation schedules to determine the forest service's progress , plans , and milestones for addressing financial management problems . we attended a forest service budget and finance planning conference and a financial statement training session conducted by the usda cfo to gain a further understanding of forest service efforts to improve its financial statement compilation processes and overcome other financial management challenges . we analyzed reported financial management problems against the corrective actions taken to determine the remaining challenges . further , we discussed the remaining challenges and the status of improvement efforts with officials from usda and the forest service office of the chief financial officer , the usda ig , and independent contractors working for the forest service . we also visited and interviewed financial management staff at five forest service field locations .