gao - 07-882r . washington , d.c.: june 25 , 2007 . ( see app . ii for a list of the types of suds that have been listed by reprocessing establishments. ) while definitive information on the size of the reprocessed sud market is not available , representatives of the reprocessing industry estimate that 3 of the 11 registered reprocessing establishments ( 2 of which are owned by the same firm ) account for the vast majority of the total reprocessing business in the united states . what is known about the extent to which the safety of reprocessed suds compares favorably or unfavorably with the safety of similar original suds ? to address these questions , we examined and evaluated available information on the sud reprocessing industry in the united states and fda's oversight of this industry . in conducting our work , we ( 1 ) reviewed available data on the types and characteristics of , fda guidance and standards pertaining to , and fda inspection reports on , sud reprocessing establishments ; ( 2 ) reviewed fda - generated data and analyses on reported adverse events involving reprocessed suds ; ( 3 ) interviewed fda officials , representatives of the device reprocessing and manufacturing industry , including professional associations representing device manufacturing establishments and the association of medical device reprocessors ( amdr ) , which represents two firms that operate three large reprocessing establishments in the united states , and officials representing provider associations and medical facilities of the departments of veterans affairs and defense ; ( 4 ) reviewed relevant statutes , regulations , and federal register notices ; and ( 5 ) conducted a literature search of peer - reviewed periodicals and reviewed other information to determine what is known about the safety of reprocessed suds . in some cases , fda data were not available or sufficiently reliable to allow us to develop detailed information or perform analyses . for example , we determined that fda's data were not sufficiently reliable to determine the number of domestic establishments reprocessing suds prior to july 2007 or the number of foreign establishments reprocessing suds . as a result , we were unable to analyze trends in the number of reprocessing establishments or the types of devices they were reprocessing since 2000 and we were limited to reporting on domestic reprocessing establishments . also , neither industry nor fda representatives were able to provide comprehensive information on the size of the reprocessed suds market in the united states — in terms of volume and value — compared to the overall u.s. market for medical devices . see appendix i for additional information on our methodology and data limitations . we conducted our work between november 2006 and january 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( fdca ) , fda is responsible for reviewing the safety and effectiveness of medical devices before they go to market ( premarket review ) and ensuring that they remain safe and effective afterwards ( postmarket oversight ) . manufacturers intending to sell medical devices in the united states , including reprocessed suds , must register with fda and provide information listing the devices they intend to market .