most of these positions are at the midlevel . state listed 36 hard - to - fill positions in 2009 , 74 in 2010 , and 55 in 2011 . other common types of overseas lna assignments for civil service employees include positions in aip countries , developmental opportunities , and positions requiring specific expertise . rules governing lnas are covered in the foreign affairs manual ( 3 fam 2290 ) and federal law ( 22 u.s.c . higher percentages of positions in the near east ( 22.3 percent ) and south and central asia ( 24.2 percent ) were left vacant compared with other regions , and positions in aip countries were much more likely to be vacant than those in non - aip locations ( 39.5 percent vs. 11.4 percent ) . in the last two columns of table 3 , we show the odds on positions being vacant , and odds ratios that indicate the proportional differences in those odds across the different categories of positions . the odds on positions being vacant are calculated by dividing the percentage of positions that are vacant by the percentages that are filled , within each of the categories of the different positions . for entry - level positions , for example , we divide 14.9 by 85.1 to obtain 0.18 , which indicates that 0.18 positions were vacant for every one that was filled or , alternatively , that 18 were vacant for every 100 that were filled . similar calculations for midlevel and upper - level positions yield slightly smaller odds ( equal to 0.17 and 0.14 , respectively ) , and odds that differ quite substantially across other categories of positions , such as those with the greatest hardship ( 0.26 ) versus least hardship ( 0.12 ) , and those in south and central asia ( 0.32 ) versus the western hemisphere ( 0.13 ) . the odds ratios in the final column of table 3 indicate the proportional differences in the odds of positions remaining vacant across the categories of each of the position characteristics . locally employed staff serve overseas . foreign service employees serving abroad fall into two broad categories — generalists and specialists . generalists help formulate and implement the foreign policy of the united states and are grouped into five career tracks: consular , economic , management , political , and public diplomacy . specialists serve in 18 different skill groups to support overseas posts worldwide or in washington , d.c . these skill groups are grouped into eight major categories: administration , construction engineering , facility management , information technology , international information and english language programs , medical and health , office management , and security . state typically hires foreign service employees at the entry level . among foreign service generalists , the entry - level consists of three position grades — 06 , 05 , and 04 . midlevel positions include grades 03 , 02 , and 01 , and senior - level positions include career minister , minister counselor , and counselor positions . officers compete annually for promotion to the next higher grade . it typically takes about 4 to 5 years for an officer to move through the entry - level grades to a midlevel grade .