( see app . in zambia , more sexually active women who were surveyed in 1998 reported having ever used a condom than in a similar survey in 1992 , and in 1998 , fewer married men in zambia's capital city reported having had extramarital sex than in a survey conducted 8 years earlier . condom social marketing , which relies on increasing the availability , attractiveness , and demand for condoms through advertising and public promotion , is another intervention that usaid supports at the country level . we therefore modified our report to add a specific reference to usaid's initiation of a policy in january 2001 that extends a waiver of the “buy american act” requirements to allow for the purchase of hiv products manufactured offshore . in addition to mr. hutton , david bernet , leslie bharadwaja , aleta hancock , lynne holloway , jessica lucas , rona mendelsohn , and tom zingale made key contributions to this report . the first copy of each gao report is free . additional copies of reports are $2 each . a check or money order should be made out to the superintendent of documents . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . the agriculture sector has also been affected by the epidemic . agriculture , the biggest sector in most african economies , accounts for a large portion of economic output and employs the majority of workers . however , as farmers become too ill to tend their crops , agricultural production declines for the country . for example , according to unaids , in côte d'ivoire , many cases of reduced cultivation of crops such as cotton , coffee , and cocoa have been reported . likewise , in zimbabwe , agricultural output has fallen by 50 percent over a 5-year period during the late 1990s , due in part to farmers becoming sick and dying from aids . in addition , the cost of doing business in africa has increased in many sectors of the economy due to hiv / aids . the epidemic's costs to employers include expenditures for medical care and funeral expenses . a 1999 report prepared for usaid found that because of the increased levels of employee turnover due to hiv / aids , employers also are experiencing greater expenses due to the recruitment and training of new employees . according to the united nations international labour office , to combat increased costs , some employers in sub - saharan africa have begun to hire or train two or three employees for the same position because of the concern that employees in key positions may get sick and die from aids . while international organizations have worked to stem the spread of the disease , funding constraints , cultural and social traditions , the low socioeconomic status of women , weak health care infrastructure , difficulty reaching men in uniform , and the slow response of national governments have impeded their efforts . in 2000 , unaids estimated that at least $3 billion is needed annually for hiv prevention and care in sub - saharan africa .