it can begin at any age . some work units have implemented the program , while others have not . hours reduction allowed: participants typically work 60 percent of full time . length of phased retirement: ( no response ) knowledge transfer: there is an expectation that participants will mentor or train staff , but there is no formal knowledge transfer program . effect on health care benefits: if the worker is more than 60 percent time , the employer provides a subsidy so that the health insurance rates for phased retirement participants are the same as if they were working full time . however , employer - provided health benefits end at age 65 — the age at which workers become eligible for medicare . effect on pension benefits: there is no db plan . the employer provides a dollar - to - dollar match for the dc plan . since it is not based on a proportion of the worker's salary , the match remains unchanged regardless of participation in phased retirement . features of phased retirement: basics: in this formal phased retirement program , workers are allowed flexibility within the program's basic rules . workers can retire fully at any point during phased retirement . cited benefits / advantages: phased retirement helps avoid a retirement “cliff.” instead , it is a ramp from 100 percent time to 0 percent time . additionally , phased retirement allows the employer to hire new workers at a lower cost . eligible workers: must be at least age 55 and an eligible worker for at least seven years . hours reduction allowed: the phasing worker and his or her supervisor negotiate the workload . length of phased retirement: phasing may last one to five years . knowledge transfer: knowledge transfer and mentoring is done on a case - by - case basis . effect on health care benefits: the employer provides a subsidy so that the health insurance rates for phased retirement participants are the same as if they were working full time . effect on pension benefits: there is no db plan . the dc plan contribution formula does not change with phased retirement , but the amount of pay upon which the contribution is based changes in proportion to the worker's reduced salary . features of phased retirement: basics: in this formal phased retirement program , a workers' unit must determine that participation can be accommodated given staffing levels in that unit . cited benefits / advantages: phased retirement helps the employer retain specialized or knowledgeable workers and uses these workers to bridge the gap between experienced and inexperienced workers . it also helps with workforce planning . eligible workers: all who meet basic requirements of at least age 55 , worked at least 10 years with the employer , have worked a certain number of hours in one of the three prior calendar years and per pay period are eligible to apply . each request is approved or rejected on a case - by - case basis . the supervisor and a human resources representative discuss the request with the employee . a primary consideration is whether phased retirement for this worker can be accommodated given staffing levels in the worker's unit .