gao - 05-572t . washington , d.c.: april 20 , 2005 . va disability benefits and health care: providing certain services to the seriously injured poses challenges . gao - 05-444t . washington , d.c.: march 17 , 2005 . the privacy rule does not define public benefits . in the second example , the privacy rule explicitly permits the disclosure of individually identifiable health data by dod to va upon the separation or discharge of a servicemember in order to determine eligibility for va benefits . dod views “upon the separation or discharge” as referring to the separation process that varies by servicemember , but which begins with the decision by dod that the servicemember will separate . according to va officials , the hipaa privacy rule would allow dod to share data sooner than the decision by dod that the servicemember will separate . however , dod is reluctant to provide individually identifiable health data to va until dod is certain that a servicemember will separate from the military . dod is concerned that va's outreach to servicemembers who are still on active duty could work at cross - purposes to the military's retention goals . according to dod officials , it would be premature for va to begin working with servicemembers who may eventually return to active duty . va contends that dod could define the specific point of separation or discharge earlier in the process . in commenting on our january 2005 report , va said that a memorandum of understanding was then being negotiated that would allow va to obtain from dod the servicemember's medical information prior to discharge from military service . va added that its office of general counsel was confident that there are exceptions in the privacy rule that would permit military service medical information to be disclosed for va benefits purposes and that it had pressed the case with dod's general counsel . as of may 17 , 2005 , the memorandum of understanding between dod and va has not been finalized . despite being unable to agree on an exchange of individually identifiable health data , dod and va are currently reviewing a draft memorandum of understanding . dod and va officials told us they believe that the memorandum of understanding will move the two departments closer to a data sharing agreement . however , we found that the draft memorandum of understanding restates many of the legal authorities contained in the privacy rule for the use and disclosure of individually identifiable health data . for example , the draft memorandum of understanding does not specify that individually identifiable health data of oef / oif servicemembers shall be disclosed and restates that data will be shared upon separation or discharge without further defining the specific point during the separation or discharge process when data can be shared . as a result , even if the memorandum of understanding is finalized , dod and va will still not have a data sharing agreement that specifies what types of individually identifiable health data can be exchanged and when the data can be shared . mr. chairman , this completes my prepared remarks . dod has also supported transition assistance in various ways .