this same assessment was echoed in the 1997 state of the lakes report . meanwhile the ijc agreed that the nine desired outcome areas recommended by the task force would help assess overall progress . it recommended that solec , during the conference in 2000 , establish environmental indicators that would allow the ijc to evaluate what had been accomplished and what needed to be done for three of the nine indicators — the public's ability to eat the fish , drink the water , and swim in the water without any restrictions . other governmental and nongovernmental organizations fund restoration activities . for example , individual municipalities , township governments , counties , and conservation districts are involved in various restoration activities . restoration of the great lakes basin is a major endeavor involving many environmental programs and organizations . the magnitude of the area comprising the basin and the numerous environmental programs operating within it require the development of one overarching strategy to address and manage the complexities of restoring the basin's environmental health . the great lakes region cannot hope to successfully receive support as a national priority without a comprehensive plan for restoring the great lakes . the ijc , however , recognized that sufficient data were not being collected throughout the great lakes basin and that the methods of collection , the data collection time frames , the lack of uniform protocols , and the incompatible nature of some data jeopardized their use as indicators . in lieu of such a plan , organizations at the binational , federal , and state levels have developed their own strategies for the great lakes , which have inadvertently made the coordination of the various programs operating in the basin more challenging . the great lakes basin needs a comprehensive strategy or plan similar to the plans developed for other large ecosystem restoration efforts , such as those for the south florida ecosystem and the chesapeake bay . a new agreement with the same name was reached in 1978 and amended in 1983 and 1987 . the agreement prescribes prevention and cleanup measures to improve environmental conditions in the great lakes . the agreement obligates the international joint commission ( ijc ) , an international body , to assist in and report on the implementation of the agreement . the clean water act directs epa to lead efforts to meet the goals of the great lakes water quality agreement and establishes glnpo within epa , charging it with , among other things , cooperating with federal , state , tribal , and international agencies to develop action plans to carry out the responsibilities of the u.s. under the agreement . glnpo is further responsible for coordinating the agency's actions both in headquarters and in the regions to improve great lakes' water quality . in addition to glnpo , numerous federal , state , binational , and nonprofit organizations conduct activities that focus on improving the overall great lakes basin environment or some specific environmental issue within the basin . about 200 programs — 148 federal and 51 state — fund restoration activities within the great lakes basin .