i would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have . in several instances patients cancelled multiple times . in 4 of the cases vamc staff closed the consults without the patients being seen ; in the other 6 cases vamc staff rescheduled the appointments for times that exceeded the 90-day timeframe . vamc officials cited increased demand for services , patient no - shows , and cancelled appointments , among the factors that hinder their ability to meet vha's guideline for completing consults within 90 days . several vamc officials also noted a growing demand for both gastroenterology procedures , such as colonoscopies , as well as consultations for physical therapy evaluations , combined with a difficulty in hiring and retaining specialists for these two clinical areas , as causes of periodic backlogs in providing these services . officials at these facilities indicated that they try to mitigate backlogs by referring veterans to non - va providers for care . while officials indicated that use of non - va care can help mitigate backlogs , several officials indicated that non - va care requires more coordination between the vamc , the patient , and the non - va provider ; can require additional approvals for the care ; and also may delay obtaining the results of medical appointments or procedures . in addition , wait times are generally not tracked for non - va care . as such , officials acknowledged that this strategy does not always prevent delays in veterans receiving timely care or in completing consults . our ongoing review also has identified one consult for which the patient experienced delays in obtaining non - va care and died prior to obtaining needed care . in response , vha officials stated that they implemented more reliable measures of patient wait times for primary and specialty care . in this case , the patient needed endovascular surgery to repair two aneurysms – abdominal aortic and an iliac . according to the patient's medical record , the timeline of events surrounding this consult was as follows: september 2013 – patient was diagnosed with two aneurysms . october 2013 – vamc scheduled patient for surgery in november , but subsequently cancelled the scheduled surgery due to staffing issues . december 2013 – vamc approved non - va care and referred the patient to a local hospital for surgery . late december 2013 – after the patient followed up with the vamc , it was discovered that the non - va provider lost the patient's information . the vamc resubmitted the patient's information to the non - va provider . february 2014 – the consult was closed because the patient died prior to the surgery scheduled by the non - va provider . according to vamc officials , they conducted an investigation of this case . they found that the non - va provider planned to perform the surgery on february 14 , 2014 , but the patient died the previous day . additionally , they stated that according to the coroner , the patient died of cardiac disease and hypertension and that the aneurysms remained intact .