viii . we were asked to provide information on ( 1 ) how key provisions of the trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) reform act have affected program services , ( 2 ) what have been the challenges in implementing the taa reform act's new provisions , ( 3 ) whether demand for taa training has changed , and how states are meeting this demand , and ( 4 ) what is known about what the taa program is achieving . to address these questions , we conducted a web - based survey of all 50 state workforce agencies that administer the taa program and puerto rico . we conducted site visits to 5 states — maine , north carolina , pennsylvania , texas , and washington — and interviewed state and local officials in each state . we reviewed data and documents from the u.s. department of labor ( labor ) and other sources . we also interviewed officials from labor , the afl - cio , the national association of state workforce agencies , and the congressional research service . to collect broad information on taa reform act implementation and states' management of their training funds , we surveyed state officials from the 50 states and puerto rico in march , 2004 . washington , d.c. was not surveyed because it did not have a taa program . this structured survey was administered via e - mail and the internet and had a 98 percent response rate , including responses from all 50 states . the survey was designed to obtain information on the following: labor and state efforts to reach out to new categories of eligible workers such as secondary workers , the effect of new training enrollment deadlines on services to participants , and obstacles that states faced in implementing new provisions in the taa reform act , including the health coverage tax credit and the wage insurance provision . the survey also included questions on other sources of funds used to support services for taa participants and the extent to which states collect outcome data that is more up to date and accurate than the data required by labor . because this was not a sample survey , there are no sampling errors . however , the practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce other errors , commonly referred to as nonsampling errors . for example , difficulties in how a particular question is interpreted , in the sources of information that are available to respondents , or in how the data are entered into a database or were analyzed can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results . we took steps in the development of the questionnaire , the data collection , and the data analysis to minimize these nonsampling errors . for example , gao survey specialists designed the questionnaire in collaboration with gao staff with subject matter expertise . then , the draft questionnaire was pretested with three state officials to ensure that the questions were relevant , clearly stated , and easy to comprehend . when the data were analyzed , a second , independent analyst checked all computer programs . since this was a web - based survey , respondents entered their answers directly into the electronic questionnaire .