we disagree . while we do not question the department's comment about the relationships among the strategies , we believe that this element of our recommendation is needed because its intent is to recognize these relationships by promoting collaboration and ensuring linkages among the various strategies . third , dod stated that it nonconcurs with the element relating to component architecture alignment with incremental versions of the bea . according to dod , this element has been implemented both in policy and execution to comply with legislative requirements , to include dod's development and use of the architecture compliance and requirements traceability tool . it also added that the departments of the air force , army , and navy have mandated the use of this tool to assess compliance of their systems and architectures with the bea . we disagree . the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2005 includes a requirement for ensuring that all business systems in excess of $1 million be certified as being in compliance with the bea ; the architecture traceability tool provides a mechanism for asserting only system compliance and not component architecture compliance . in addition , according to officials from the air force and army , while they are encouraging the use of the tool for assessing compliance of their systems with the bea , they have not mandated its use and are not using it to assess compliance of their architectures with the bea . moreover , officials from the air force further stated that they have not mandated the use of this tool because it does not provide the capability to map the air force architecture with the bea . while we recognize dod's efforts to align programs to the bea , our recommendation focuses on the lack of a discussion in the bma federation strategy on how component architectures ( military departments and defense agencies ) will be linked to the bea , including the lack of component architecture alignment guidance , criteria , and tools . fourth , the department stated that it partially concurs with the element relating to the identification and management of shared services . according to dod , each mission area or component is responsible for identifying its own services requirements , and the asd ( nii ) / cio is responsible for defining the overall approach to how these services will be managed . as such , the department recommends that our recommendation be directed to the asd ( nii ) / cio . we agree on the need for guidance describing how shared services will be identified and managed ; however , our recommendation is not intended to dictate who should develop the policies or guidance for managing shared services within a federated environment . rather , it is focused on developing plans that describe how the bma will adopt and implement the policies and guidance relating to service orientation . as stated in the report , this is important because a key aspect of the bma federation strategy is to reuse and leverage both enterprise - level and component - level systems and applications . fifth , dod stated that it nonconcurs with the element relating to milestones .