nrc has agreed to do so . in conclusion , the safe operation of the nation's nuclear power facilities has always been of fundamental importance and has received even more emphasis recently as the nation faces an expected resurgence in the licensing and construction of new nuclear reactors to help meet our growing electricity needs . our assessment of the rop has found that nrc has made considerable effort to continuously improve its oversight activities and to prompt industry to make constant management improvements . however , while the current oversight process appears logical and well - structured , nrc recognizes the need to make further improvements in such areas as the timeliness of its significant determination process and the redefinition of some performance indicators . regulating the often complex and intangible aspects of safety culture is clearly challenging . while nrc had taken some concrete actions to incorporate safety culture into the rop and now has a structured process in place through its inspection program , we recommended that nrc continue to act to improve its safety culture efforts . nrc plans to evaluate the effectiveness of its current actions at the end of this year before considering any further implementation of our recommendations . we continue to believe that nrc needs to give this issue attention in further revising the rop so that it can better identify and address early indications of declining safety performance at nuclear power facilities . no red indicators have ever been reported . for varying periods from 2001 through 2005 , on the combined basis of inspection findings and performance indicators , nrc has subjected more than 75 percent of the reactor units to oversight beyond the baseline inspections . while most reactors received the lowest level of increased oversight through a supplemental inspection , five reactors were subjected to nrc's highest level of oversight . reactor units in this category were generally subjected to this higher oversight for long periods due to the more systemic nature of their performance problems . currently , 1 unit is receiving the highest level of oversight by nrc , and 10 units at 6 facilities are receiving the second level of oversight . nrc inspectors at the facilities we reviewed indicated that when a reactor unit's performance declines it is often the result of deficiencies or ineffectiveness in one or more of the three cross - cutting areas — problem identification and resolution , human performance , and a safety - conscious work environment . nrc inspectors cited examples of possible cross - cutting issues: ( 1 ) a facility does not have an effective corrective action program that appropriately identified and resolved problems early ; ( 2 ) a facility employee has not followed correct maintenance procedures , and nrc made a finding associated with the human performance area ; and ( 3 ) facility management is complacent by not paying attention to detail or adhering to procedures . our examination of rop data found that all reactor units that nrc subjected to its highest level of oversight had findings related to one or more of these substantive cross - cutting issues .