ministerial meetings . arctic ministers meet biennially to set the council agenda for the coming 2 years . the foreign ministers of the eight arctic states typically serve as the arctic ministers . according to senior state officials , the u.s. secretary of state serves as the u.s. arctic minister during the 2-year chairmanship and presides over the biennial council ministerial meeting at the chairmanship's conclusion . at the ministerial meetings , the council chair typically proposes the priorities and projects for its chairmanship . for example , during the last council ministerial meeting held in kiruna , sweden , in may 2013 , canada — which assumed the chairmanship in 2013 — announced that the council would focus on “development for the people of the north” during the next 2 years . canada proposed projects focused on responsible resource development , safe shipping , and sustainable circumpolar communities , among other things . arctic ministers may also set council priorities , direct the saos and working groups to initiate new projects , establish new task forces , change the council structure , approve new permanent participant or observer groups , and endorse council reports and other projects . to document decisions , highlight the accomplishments achieved over the past 2 years , and formally announce the priorities the council will address for the next 2 years , the arctic ministers issue a ministerial declaration at the conclusion of each ministerial meeting . sao meetings . saos meet biannually to review and approve ongoing council work . saos are government officials selected by the arctic states who manage day - to - day council activities . most of the arctic states designate an arctic ambassador to serve as their sao , but the united states and canada do not currently have arctic ambassadors . a senior state official serves as the u.s. sao . during sao meetings , saos review the ongoing work and approve reports from the council working groups , task forces , and expert groups to forward to the arctic ministers . arctic states or permanent participants may also propose new projects at these meetings , and the saos decide which proposals to submit to the arctic ministers for approval . working group , task force , and expert group meetings . the council's work takes place in the working groups , task forces , and expert groups that the arctic states chair on a rotating basis . as such , the meetings occur in locations that span the eight arctic states . the working groups meet biannually and the task forces and expert groups meet at times decided by the participating arctic states . each arctic state selects a number of experts from government agencies to comprise a national delegation for each of the six working groups . permanent participants may also serve as members of a council working group and observers may participate in the work . working group members carry out scientific assessments , draft reports and recommendations , and work on other council projects as directed by the arctic states . each working group may establish operating guidelines and work plans . arctic ministers and saos review and approve the work plans and any revisions made to the operating guidelines for each working group .