this concludes my testimony . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have . for further information on this testimony , please contact ms. robin nazzaro at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included carole blackwell , bob crystal , doreen feldman , molly laster , carol shulman , stan stenersen , and bill swick . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . doe contracting activities are governed by federal laws and regulations . although federal laws generally require federal agencies to use competition in selecting a contractor , until the mid - 1990s , doe contracts for the management and operation of its sites generally fit within an exception that allowed for the use of noncompetitive procedures . instead , doe chose to address the performance problems using contract mechanisms , such as specific performance measures and interim performance assessments . in our september 2002 report , we commented that if the university of california did not make significant improvements in its performance , doe may need to reconsider its decision not to compete the contracts . in april 2003 , the secretary of energy decided to open the los alamos national laboratory contract to competition when the current contract expires in september 2005 . congressional committees and others have called for doe to compete these contracts . until recently , however , doe did not compete them . the secretary made this decision based on “systemic management failures” that came to light in 2002 . the management failures included inadequate controls over employees' use of government credit cards , inadequate property controls and apparent theft of government property , and the firing of investigators attempting to identify the extent of management problems at the laboratory . doe has also decided to restructure the ffrdc contracts supporting work at the idaho national laboratory . currently the laboratory has two ffrdc contracts — ( 1 ) a site management contract that includes activities ranging from waste cleanup to facility operations activities and ( 2 ) a contract to operate argonne national laboratory , which includes the argonne west facility at the idaho site . for example , doe competed the contract for the brookhaven national laboratory in 1997 , after terminating the previous contract for unsatisfactory performance by the incumbent contractor . doe competed the contract for the national renewable energy laboratory in 1998 to incorporate additional private sector expertise into the management team for the site . this competition resulted from an expanded mission at the site to develop innovative renewable energy and energy efficient technologies and to incorporate these technologies into cost effective new products . for the remaining four ffrdc contracts that doe has competed , the operator of the laboratory was a for - profit entity .