marshals service . the university of denver also provides interns to ciac . dhs i&a has conducted a needs assessment of ciac . however , at the time of our review , it had not placed an intelligence analyst in the center . ciac has access to a regional dhs protective security advisor . dhs and doj information systems or networks accessible to ciac include hsin , leo , and the fps portal . in addition , the center has access to , among others , rocky mountain information network , u.s. northern command , and siprnet , which is accessed through the fbi . ciac produces several types of bulletins and summaries , including for official use only and law enforcement sensitive versions of a monthly summary of reported incidents , daily reports , officer safety bulletins , and early warning and special reports . in response to your request to describe state and local fusion centers and federal efforts underway to support them , this report answers the following two questions: what are the stages of development and characteristics of state and local fusion centers ? products are also distributed directly to law enforcement officers via in - car mobile data computers . the monthly summaries are produced with the fbi fig and also cover incidents in wyoming , and some of the special reports are produced jointly with the fbi and the u.s. northern command . to what extent do efforts under way by the pm - ise , dhs , and doj help to address some of the challenges identified by fusion centers ? ctic is a multi - agency operation representing various jurisdictions that serves to collect , analyze , and disseminate criminal and terrorism - related intelligence to all law enforcement agencies in the state . ctic has an all - crimes scope of operations and endeavors to identify emerging threats or crime trends . to answer these questions , we reviewed relevant directives , plans , and documents and interviewed officials — including many of those from the pm - ise , dhs , and doj — who are involved with those entities' efforts to support fusion centers . dhs i&a placed an intelligence officer in the center in september 2007 . fbi personnel serve in both supervisory and analytical roles in ctic . for example , ctic operations supervisor is also the fbi fig supervisor . day - to - day operations are managed by an fbi supervisory special agent and supported by two intelligence coordinators , one from the state police and one from the fbi . the fbi also provides top secret clearances to ctic personnel . the state is divided into five regions , each of which is represented in ctic by a regional intelligence liaison officers . the officers are appointed by the corresponding connecticut police chiefs association and represent local law enforcement agencies in the center . the officers maintain full - time positions at ctic and serve a recommended minimum of 2 years after obtaining a top secret clearance . ctic offers a stipend for each municipality that places an officer in the center .