these alternatives may be combined . ( see fig . in 1995 , blm voided copper valley's right - of - way across carol holt's allotment that it held for 19 years . based on the date of use and occupancy claimed in carol holt's application , blm determined that she had rights prior to copper valley . ( see fig . these conflicts exist for three reasons . first , in 5 cases blm and alaska realty have applied the relation back doctrine to invalidate or question copper valley's rights - of - way . in each of these cases blm and alaska realty have invalided or questioned copper valley rights - of - way because a native allottee's use and occupancy of the land predated the right - of - way . for example , in 1992 , blm voided copper valley's right - of - way across evelyn hash koonuk's allotment that copper valley held for over 27 years . second , in six cases conflict exists regarding the status of copper valley's rights - of - way within native allotments because copper valley has a state — but not a federal — right - of - way within a highway easement granted by the federal government to alaska . the federal government transferred the easements for the richardson and old edgerton highways to the state of alaska under the 1959 alaska omnibus act . in 1962 and 1983 , the state of alaska granted copper valley utility rights - of - way within these federally granted highway easements . for example , in 1983 , the state of alaska granted copper valley a utility right - of - way within the old edgerton highway easement that crosses howard jerue's allotment . then in 1989 , 30 years after alaska became a state and was granted the highway easements from the federal government , interior's alaska office of the solicitor issued an opinion concerning whether a federal grant of a highway easement to the state of alaska authorized the state to grant a right - of - way within the highway easement to a utility . the solicitor concluded that federal , not state , law governed the issue and that under federal law , certain federally granted highway easements did not convey to the state the authority to grant rights - of - way for utility lines because they are not structures necessary for the use of highway easements but are new uses being imposed on the land . relying on the solicitor's opinion , alaska realty is now requesting that copper valley apply for rights - of - way from bia on behalf of the allottee where their electric lines are located within highway easements that cross native allotments . alaska realty has taken the position , supported by interior , that copper valley is trespassing on the allotment because it installed electric lines without acquiring a federal right - of - way across these allotments . copper valley , however , maintains that its state issued utility easements are sufficient .