focused review . according to officials , focused review publications are produced three times a year , and the topics are related to adverse medical events and associated follow - up data provided to dha as determined by data and performance trends . for example , in september 2016 , the publication included an explanation of the basic components of an rca , including their associated corrective actions and factors dha considers when determining if they are stronger , intermediate , or weaker . this publication included 2013 through 2016 system - wide data , such as the number of rcas submitted , the most common root cause categories , and the proportion of rcas with stronger , weaker , or no corrective actions . the publication also included an example of a decrease in occurrences of wrong - site surgery accompanied by an improvement in rcas with stronger corrective actions , common pitfalls in conducting high - quality rcas , and recommendations to conduct better rcas . patient safety alerts . dha uses these publications to inform the mhs about immediate hazards , and officials told us they produce these publications on an as - needed basis . for example , a july 2016 report was focused on unintended retained foreign objects during surgery , specifically , pieces of gloves . the publication described recent occurrences of retained pieces of gloves , glove selection best practices , tips for preventing unintended retention , and corrective actions when retention occurs . global trigger tool . the global trigger tool is a new tool for collecting adverse medical event data by selecting a sample of medical charts that was implemented mhs - wide as of september 2017 . unlike traditional methods to detect adverse events , the global trigger tool does not focus on voluntary reporting and tracking of adverse medical events . instead , a team of three reviewers managed by dha uses the tool methodology to retrospectively examine a random selection of patient medical charts at a facility over time to identify “triggers” ( or clues ) that may lead to an adverse medical event . the 53 triggers include events such as a patient fall or readmission to the emergency department within 48 hours of treatment . if a trigger is discovered , the medical chart is further reviewed to determine if an adverse event occurred . after the global trigger tool review is complete , the contractor is able to provide facility leaders with rates of harmful adverse events per 1,000 patient days and per 100 admissions . results from the tool are intended to aid mtfs in understanding the true frequency of harm events and in identifying systemic issues that contribute to patient safety events . all inpatient mtfs across the mhs will use the tool , and implementation began in 2017 . the global trigger tool has just begun to provide data to the mtfs , and dha officials told us that 6 to 12 months of data is recommended before the tool can be used to make improvements . sentinel event and root cause analysis ( serca ) tool .