interceptor boosters . in july 1998 , the gmd prime contractor ( boeing ) began developing a new three - stage booster for its ground - based interceptor from commercial off - the - shelf components . the contractor encountered difficulty , and by the time the booster was flight tested in august 2001 , it was already about 18 months behind schedule . subsequently , to reduce risk , mda altered its strategy for acquiring a new booster for the gmd interceptor . external sensors . existing sensors external to the gmd element would also be available for defensive operations , including defense support program satellites for early warning of missile launches , and three forward - deployed aegis an / spy - 1 radars on existing navy destroyers for early midcourse tracking . the above assets comprise the initial configuration , which is scheduled for fielding by the end of september 2004 . the agency's near - term intention is to grow this capability by adding 10 interceptors at fort greely , a sea - based x - band radar , and an upgraded early warning radar at fylingdales , england , by the end of 2005 . mda is moving forward , as directed by the president , with the fielding of an initial defensive capability by the end of the 2004 fiscal year to protect the united states from long - range missiles . mda cannot at this time formulate a credible assessment of system - level effectiveness , because critical components like the cobra dane radar and interceptor boosters have yet to be developed and tested in a flight test environment , and no initial defensive capability is available for a system - level demonstration and evaluation . cobra dane radar . the capabilities of the cobra dane radar will not be demonstrated in flight testing before september 2004 . it is an l - band phased array radar located at eareckson air station in shemya , alaska , at the western end of the aleutian chain . its close proximity to russia allows it to perform its primary mission of collecting data on intercontinental ballistic missile and submarine launched ballistic missile test launches to the kamchatka impact area . since the cobra dane radar is currently being used in a surveillance mode , it does not require real time communications and data processing capabilities . after planned software and hardware upgrades to be completed in fiscal year 2004 , it will have the additional mission to perform real - time acquisition and tracking , functions critical for ballistic missile defense . development of the original booster was transferred to lockheed martin , and mda authorized the gmd prime contractor to develop a second source for the booster by awarding a subcontract to orbital sciences corporation . both contractors are developing boosters for use in the september 2004 initial defensive capability . the first demonstration of an operational booster in an attempted intercept is scheduled for the third quarter of fiscal year 2004 . system - level testing . a system - level demonstration of the initial defensive capability will not be conducted prior to september 2004 .