mobilization authorities . dod officials said that following hurricane katrina it was clear to them that the military needed to be empowered to respond more quickly to disasters . ultimately , congress approved new authorities in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 , one of which provided dod with greater access to the federal reserve during domestic incidents . section 12304a of title 10 of the united states code states that when a governor requests federal assistance in responding to a major disaster or emergency the secretary of defense may mobilize any individual or unit of the federal reserves involuntarily for up to 120 days to respond to the governor's request . the military services were using interim implementation guidance for these authorities at the time of our review and were waiting for dod to finalize its guidance in september 2013 . additionally , dod officials told us that hurricane sandy is the only domestic disaster thus far to use the new mobilization authorities under section 12304a . since dod is still developing its process for implementing these new authorities and has had limited experience using them it is too early to know whether they will better enable the states to access federal capabilities when responding to domestic disasters . appendix iii: profile for the national guard bureau , army national guard directorate , and air national guard readiness center in addition to having full - time civilian and active guard and reserve personnel , the army national guard directorate has a group of personnel that are categorized as “active duty for operational support” . active duty for operational support is an authorized voluntary tour of active duty that is performed at the request of an organizational or operational commander , or as a result of reimbursable funding , among other things . the purpose of this category is to provide the necessary skilled manpower assets to support existing or emerging requirements . we included subordinate headquarters in the national guard bureau's list of capabilities because these headquarters are under the management of the chief of the national guard bureau . appendix iv: profile for the national guard state joint force headquarters these data reflect funded civilian and military positions . some dod personnel , referred to as “dual - status technicians,” are required , as a condition of employment , to be a drilling member of the national guard or reserves and thereby fill both a full - time civilian position and a part - time military position . additionally , some dod personnel , referred to as “active guard and reserve,” occupy both a full - time military position as well as a part - time military position . consequently , in our calculations , we included them in both the active guard and reserve and the part - time guardsmen categories . dod directive 5105.83 , national guard joint force headquarters - state ( ng - jfhqs - state ) ( jan. 5 , 2011 ) . appendix v: profile for the office of the chief of the army reserve and u.s. army reserve command these data reflect funded civilian and military positions .