examples follow . within the notice phase , various irs units can get involved and handle a case differently depending on whether the taxpayer has income from a small business or the taxpayer responds by telephone or through the mail . in the telephone contact phase , irs may place a lien on a taxpayer's property if previous attempts to resolve the debt have been unsuccessful . unless the lien filing prompts the taxpayer to resolve the debt , the case can move to the waiting queue for in - person contact . what process does irs use to attempt to collect or resolve unpaid tax debts ? what are the trends in unpaid tax debt , including the size and composition of the inventory , collections , and other resolutions of unpaid debt in fiscal years 2002 through 2007 ? what performance measures and related goals are available to assess how well the collection process works overall ? to answer these questions , we interviewed irs officials and reviewed irs's unpaid assessments database , documentation on the collection process and factors used in managing it , and irs's highest - level collection measures . appendix i provides more details on our scope and methodology . in addition , we also attempted to track irs's tax assessment and collection results across fiscal years 2002 through 2007 , and asked irs about its efforts to improve its management of the inventory and collection of debts . appendix ii describes our attempts to do this tracking from fiscal years 2002 through 2007 , focusing on what happened to fiscal year 2002 assessments , and appendix iii describes irs's improvement efforts . we conducted our work from july 2007 to may 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . unpaid assessments are generally identified by either ( 1 ) the taxpayer , such as by submitting a tax return with a balance due but without full payment , or ( 2 ) irs compliance programs such as irs's audit program that identifies reporting noncompliance on filed returns or the automated substitute for return ( asfr ) program that — for taxpayers who failed to file returns — creates a tax due return on the basis of available data provided to irs by third parties on income such as wages and interest . since irs's filing and reporting compliance programs identify new tax debt when pursuing apparent noncompliance , irs is contributing continually to the unpaid assessments inventory . after identifying potential tax assessments , irs sends a series of notices to taxpayers about these potential assessments as well as about any taxes due . for example , irs is required to send taxpayers certain statutory notices . irs first is to send a “30-day letter” that includes a proposed assessment of tax , penalty , and interest .