efforts to assist borrowers . fsa established procedures in november 2011 to assist eligible borrowers by removing defaults from their credit reports or reinstating their eligibility for student aid . however , borrowers had to contact the department or their collection agency to receive the assistance . as we reported in march 2014 , when fsa's upgraded information system began processing loan rehabilitations in april 2012 , the system still did not always recognize that eligible accounts had satisfied the requirements for loan rehabilitation . as a result , fsa had to implement system workarounds and begin manually processing loan rehabilitations . while fsa officials reported they stopped using manual processing in september 2013 , they acknowledged that the system still required workarounds and a substantial amount of development work was needed to address remaining issues . at the time of our march 2014 report , fsa expected the work to be completed under a new contract , which was awarded in september 2013 . to strengthen fsa's oversight of the defaulted student loan information system contract , in our march 2014 report we recommended that fsa take steps to ensure that the final monitoring plan for the new contract identified risks and the oversight activities planned to address them . fsa agreed with the recommendation and reported that it has developed a contract monitoring plan that tracks explicit deliverables related to key risk areas and is using a management approach that includes risk monitoring and mitigation strategies . fsa also reported working with an independent verification and validation service to ensure that the new system contractor establishes the appropriate controls and processes . while these are positive steps , education's office of inspector general recently reported ongoing concerns regarding education's oversight of the system contract . for example , the inspector general found that fsa did not update its plan for correcting the defaulted loan information system deficiencies until more than 9 months after the new contract work began , a delay that raises questions about the level of oversight fsa is providing . accordingly , we will continue to monitor how fsa builds upon and sustains these efforts over time to ensure it is providing appropriate levels of contract oversight . in march 2014 , we also found that fsa lacked data and related performance measures to inform its management and oversight of loan rehabilitation . efforts to hold the contractor accountable . while the system upgrade was completed at no additional cost to the government , the contractor also provided other services under the contract , such as loan servicing and providing fsa with access to its data centers . in september 2011 , fsa began assessing the contractor financial penalties due to implementation delays . in february 2012 , when the problems were still not resolved , fsa notified the contractor via a cure notice that it could default on the contract unless adequate progress was made on the upgrade issues . in november 2013 , fsa reported withholding approximately $14 million from total payments to the contractor for other services provided under the contract .