than funding . greater than anticipated hull corrosion in the 110-foot patrol boats has delayed their conversion to 123 feet and delivery several months . legacy cutters are scheduled to receive a c4isr upgrade of higher speed international maritime satellite service . however , the availability of the higher speed service has been delayed several times from early 2003 to the coast guard's current projection of june 2004 . scheduled to begin for several years . in keeping with fiscal year 2004 appropriations conference committee directives for how the additional amount was to be spent , $20 million went to begin the design phase for the offshore patrol cutter ( opc ) . the coast guard had planned to begin the design phase about 2010 for delivery of the first opc in 2012 ; current estimate is that the acquisition schedule has been accelerated by several years . incorporation of new homeland security requirements into the deepwater mission needs statement is still under way . in may 2004 , the dhs joint requirements council conditionally accepted it and directed the coast guard to develop new total ownership cost estimates for submission to and approval by the dhs investment review board in october 2004 . coast guard officials said the revision's main impact will be an increase in number of assets . rand concluded in an april 2004 study that the coast guard probably needs twice as many cutters and 50 percent more aircraft . in the interim , some requirements changes have been made to individual assets , mainly the national security cutter . operating requirement for chemical - biological - radiological - nuclear defense capabilities was expanded to enable the cutter to operate in a contaminated environment , not just pass through it . size of flight deck enlarged to accommodate navy , army , and customs and border protection agency models of the h - 60 helicopter . shipboard sensitive compartmented information facility added for collection and use of intelligence . used for deepwater program . $12.6 million in fiscal years 2002-03 was for testing / evaluating an intermediate gun system for the national security cutter ( and possibly other cutters ) . $12.5 million in fiscal year 2004 was for combat systems suites for the national security cutter . the navy did not transfer the $25.1 million to the coast guard but will transfer the resulting equipment . through a 1987 agreement , the navy provides to the coast guard all navy - owned , military readiness equipment and associated support materials that the navy deems necessary to enable the coast guard to carry out assigned missions while operating with the navy . upon declaration of war , or when the president directs , the coast guard operates as a service of the navy and is subject to the orders of the secretary of the navy . not worth the time and cost involved . absence of an up - to - date integrated acquisition schedule for deepwater is a concern , because it is a symptom of the larger issues related to whether this complicated acquisition is being adequately managed .