gao - 07-254t . washington , d.c.: december 5 , 2006 . ( see fig . currently , acf regional program staff report directly to its central program offices , rather than to regional office administrators . the regional administrators no longer have direct authority to manage individual program activities . as a result , head start program specialists are directly accountable to central office management . also , financial management specialists , who monitor financial management of all acf grants , including head start grants , are now directly accountable to the central office of grants management , which is located within the acf office of administration . the office of administration provides support to acf's program offices on a range of administrative issues , such as managing personnel , information resources , procurement , and grants . the office of grants management carries out the office of administration's grants administration duties and provides leadership and technical guidance to acf program and regional offices on grant operations and grants management issues . the head start program was revised and reauthorized in the december 2007 improving head start act . prior to this , the program was last reauthorized in 1998 , for fiscal years 1999 through 2003 . in the years between the 1998 and 2007 reauthorizations , the program remained funded through the annual appropriations process . acf has not undertaken a comprehensive assessment of risks to the federal head start program , despite our 2005 recommendation , and little progress has been made in ensuring that the data from its annual pir survey of grantees , which could facilitate such an assessment , are reliable . although acf has two systems in development to address risk assessment , neither system provides for a comprehensive , programwide risk assessment for the head start program . further , both systems depend to some extent on unreliable data from the annual pir survey of grantees . although acf has known about the problems with pir survey data , it has done little to address them . acf has not undertaken a comprehensive assessment of risks to the federal head start program . risk assessment is one of five internal control standards that together provide the foundation for effective program management and help government program managers achieve desired results through effective stewardship of public resources . to carry out a comprehensive risk assessment , program managers need to identify program risks from both external and internal sources , estimate the significance of these risks , and decide what steps should be taken to best manage them . although such an assessment would not assure that program risks are completely eliminated , it would provide reasonable assurance that such risks are being minimized . for the head start program , this might include anticipating and developing strategies to minimize the impact of changes in resources available to oversee and assist local grantees , or to develop initiatives to address social and demographic changes that may result in changing service needs for families with young children .