va will staff both wards . in fiscal year 2004 el paso was approved as a pilot location for testing a system that stores va and dod patient laboratory results electronically . partners: south texas veterans health care system ; wilford hall medical center , lackland air force base ; and brooke army medical center , fort sam houston as of march 2004 , a va official stated that va and dod have over 20 active agreements in place in san antonio . some of the sharing activities between va and the air force include radiology , maternity , laboratory , general surgery , and a blood bank . since 2001 , va staffs the blood bank and the air force provides the space and equipment — the blood bank provides services to va and air force beneficiaries . according to va , the blood bank agreement saves va and dod about $400,000 per year . further , according to air force officials , as of june 2004 va and the air force were negotiating to jointly operate the air force's icu . the air force would supply the acute beds and va would provide the staff . this joint unit would provide services to both beneficiary populations . in addition , va and army agreements include the following areas of service: gynecology , sleep laboratory , radiology , and laundry . according to va officials , va entered into a laundry service agreement with brooke army medical center in 2002 to utilize some of va's excess laundry capacity . under the contract va processes about 1.7 million pounds of laundry each year for the army at an annual cost of $875,000 . partners: va puget sound health care system and madigan army medical center , ft. lewis as of june 2004 , va and the army have two sharing agreements in place that encompass several shared services . for example , the army provides va beneficiaries with emergency room , inpatient , mammography , and cardiac services . the va provides the army with computer training services , laboratory testing , and radiology and gastrointestinal physician services on - site at madigan . among the significant sharing opportunities for this new facility are laboratory , radiology , and specialty services . partners: el paso va health care system and william beaumont army medical center , fort bliss in this joint venture , the va contracts for emergency department services , specialty services consultation , inpatient services for medicine , surgery , psychiatric , and intensive care unit from the army . the army contracts for backup services from the va including computerized tomography , and operating suite access . according to va officials , the army provides all general and vascular surgery services so that no veteran has to leave el paso for these services . this eliminates the need for el paso's veterans to travel over 500 miles round - trip to obtain these surgical procedures from the albuquerque vamc — the veterans' closest source of va medical care . the army provides these services at 90 percent of the cmac rate or in some cases at an even lower rate .