this continues to be the case . we found that , according to dod officials , quarterly working group meetings were frequently postponed , attendance was not fully representative of all stakeholders , and the discussions during a september 2018 meeting we observed were primarily focused on gathering information from the services for preparations for the upcoming annual report to congress and receiving service updates on the current status of their respective prepositioned stock programs . dod has not fully implemented joint oversight of the services' prepositioned stock programs because the department's guidance lacks detail and the department has not fully implemented requirements within other intended joint oversight efforts , such as the working group . instead , dod's approach has been for the services to manage their own respective programs with limited oversight at the department level . standards for internal control in the federal government state that objectives should be defined in specific and measureable terms that clearly define what is to be achieved , who is to achieve it , how it will be achieved , and the time frames for achievement . these standards also state that management should evaluate performance and hold individuals accountable for their internal control responsibilities . in addition , the ndaa for fiscal year 2014 mandates a framework for joint departmental oversight that reviews and synchronizes the military services' prepositioned stock strategies to minimize potentially duplicative efforts and maximize efficiencies in prepositioned stocks across the dod . further , our prior work in the area of fragmentation , overlap , and duplication in the federal government has found that congress and executive branch agencies have opportunities to contribute toward fiscal sustainability and act as stewards of federal resources . these include taking actions to reduce , eliminate , or better manage duplication , overlap , or fragmentation among federal agencies and programs ; achieve cost savings ; or enhance revenues . “fragmentation” refers to those circumstances in which more than one organization within an agency is involved in the same broad area of national need and opportunities exist to improve service delivery . without strengthening joint oversight across the department , dod continues to have a fragmented approach to its management of prepositioning programs , which has led to inefficiencies . for example , according to joint staff officials , there is no uniform process by which the services are reporting the readiness of prepositioned stock assets . joint staff officials also said that having a joint oversight approach would help them have a more complete picture on the readiness of prepositioned stocks across the services and help the services in developing more consistent reporting methods . service officials we interviewed have also noted that there may be duplication among dod's prepositioned stock programs resulting from limited joint oversight . for example , navy officials stated that because each service utilizes medical assets as a part of its prepositioned stock programs , there is potential duplicative medical equipment across the services , which may result in inefficiencies . finally , our ongoing classified work is finding a lack of joint oversight related to dod's management of prepositioned stocks in europe .