this review was never done . in 2005 , fcc awarded a contract to the national academy of public administration to study the administration of the usf programs generally , examine the tradeoffs of continuing with the current structure , and identify ways to improve the oversight and operation of universal service programs . however , fcc officials told us that fcc subsequently terminated the contract and the study was not conducted . in march 2015 , we found that fcc had not evaluated lifeline's effectiveness in achieving its performance goals of ensuring the availability of voice service for low - income americans , while minimizing the burden on those who contribute to the usf . specifically , we reported that , according to fcc officials , fcc had not evaluated the extent to which lifeline has contributed to the narrowing of the gap in penetration rates ( the percentage of households with telephone service ) between low - income and non - low - income households , and at what cost . we , therefore , recommended , and fcc agreed , to conduct a program evaluation to determine the extent to which lifeline is efficiently and effectively reaching its performance goals . we tested ssi eligibility across the 46 states and the district of columbia whose lifeline providers utilize nlad . we compared the approximately 3.4 million subscribers that , according to information entered in nlad , were eligible for lifeline due to enrollment in one of these three programs to eligibility data for these programs . prior to our analysis of nlad data , we conducted reliability testing including examining the data for anomalies such as last four ssn digits that were all zeroes and out - of - scope or dates of birth based on a comparison to the lifeline enrollment date . fcc is required to ensure that telecommunications carriers that provide interstate telecommunications services pay usf fees , on an equitable and nondiscriminatory basis , to the specific , predictable , and sufficient mechanisms established by fcc to preserve and advance universal service . in addition , according to standards for internal control in the federal government , management should internally communicate the necessary quality information to achieve the entity's objectives . per fcc regulations , its wireline competition bureau is required to take action in response to requests for reviews of decisions of the usf administrator within 90 days , with the option to extend the response time an additional 90 days , but there is no requirement regarding the timing of action on requests for guidance from the usf administrator . fcc officials told us the reasons for the significant delays are varied . for example , fcc officials told us that some guidance requests such as these from usac are very complicated and require the full commission's input , which can take a long time as the fcc has other competing priorities . without guidance on contribution requirements , some carriers collect more from customers and pay more into the fund than other carriers for the same service . for example , our review of the 74 contribution audits found 14 instances whereby a carrier classified texting or vpn revenues , or both , as assessable usf revenues .