( see fig . appendix iv shows how state agencies responded to our question on whether ssns are displayed in public records . we estimate that individuals' ssns are displayed in some public records in 80 to 94 percent of u.s. counties . while not everyone would be identified in such records , we estimate that this exposure could potentially affect any one of the estimated 91 to 97 percent of the u.s. population that lives in these counties . according to our survey , the county records in which ssns are most often revealed are those held by recorders and court clerks . ( for a description of the types of records held by each program area see app . v. ) specifically , we estimate that 58 to 68 percent of records held by courts and 50 to 68 percent held by recording offices contain publicly accessible ssns , while only 5 to 9 percent of records held by all other functions included in our survey contain ssns . figure 2 shows our estimates of the percent of records that display ssns to the public held by different types of local government offices . microfiche or microfilm and computer usable media such as dvds , cd - roms , diskettes , or tapes were also frequently cited . figure 5 shows the number of state agencies using each storage method we asked about in our survey . many state offices also use more than one method to store the same type of records . this pattern could be due to retention of older records in noncomputerized formats such as microfiche / film and placement of newer records into computerized formats , rather than having a single record available in multiple formats . table 4 shows the extent of this practice . courts and recording offices hold a substantial variety of records . for example , courts hold criminal proceedings , civil cases files , and traffic records , among others . recorders also maintain a variety of records , including many concerning property ownership . ( 3 ) how are these records stored and what methods can the public use to access them ? in addition to looking at public records , we examined the practices of several federal executive branch agencies pertaining to the display of ssns on health insurance cards and other identification cards issued under their authority . to answer these questions , we conducted research at federal , state , and local levels of government . to obtain information at the federal level , we reviewed the privacy act and other related statutes and conducted personal interviews with officials of 10 federal agencies . data gathering at the state level included a web - based survey to state agency heads that oversee eight pre - selected programs or functions in all 50 states and the district of columbia ( d.c. ) . in a previous gao survey , these programs or functions were identified as frequent users of ssns and likely to have public records .