for eor use . however , this plant does not produce electricity . plants have already been demonstrated commercially . for example , a number of ultrasupercritical plants ranging from 600 to more than 1,000 mw have been built or are under construction in europe and asia , and there are five igcc plants in operation around the world , including two in the united states . commercial deployment of ccs within 10 to 15 years is possible according to doe and other stakeholders , but is contingent on overcoming a variety of economic , technical , and legal challenges . many technologies to improve plant efficiency have been used and are available for commercial use now , but still face challenges . injection wells can be permitted as class i ( injections of hazardous wastes , industrial nonhazardous wastes , municipal wastewater ) or class v wells ( injections not included in other classes , including wells used in experimental technologies such as pilot co for geologic sequestration . endangerment of underground sources of drinking water until the operator meets all the closure and post - closure requirements and epa approves site closure of the well . according to epa , once site closure is approved , well operators will only be liable under the sdwa if they violate or fail to comply with epa orders in situations where an imminent and substantial endangerment to health is posed by a contaminant that is in or likely to enter an underground source of drinking water . epa plans to finalize the geologic sequestration rule in fall 2010 . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is presented in appendix ii . doe's office of fossil energy oversees research on key coal technologies , but doe does not systematically assess the maturity of those technologies . using trls we developed for these technologies , we found consensus among stakeholders that ccs is less mature than efficiency technologies . although federal standards for internal control require agency managers to compare actual program performance to planned or expected results and analyze significant differences , we found that doe's office of fossil energy does not systematically assess the maturity of key coal technologies as they progress toward commercialization . while doe officials reported that individual programs are aware of the maturity of technologies and doe publishes reports that assess the technical and economic feasibility of advanced coal technologies , we found that the office of fossil energy does not use a standard set of benchmarks or terms to describe or report on the maturity of technologies . in addition , doe's goals for advancing these technologies sometimes use terms that are not well defined . the lack of such benchmarks or an assessment of the maturity of key coal technologies and whether they are achieving planned or desired results limits: doe's ability to provide a clear picture of the maturity of these technologies to policymakers , utilities officials , and others ; congressional and other oversight of the hundreds of millions of dollars doe is spending on these technologies ; and policymakers' ability to assess the maturity of ccs and the resources that might be needed to achieve commercial deployment .