these efforts are ongoing . at the time of our may 2009 report , doj was noncommittal on whether it would develop guidelines if legislation providing the attorney general with discretionary authority to deny firearms or explosives transactions involving individuals on the terrorist watchlist was enacted . subsequent to that report , senator lautenberg introduced s. 1317 that , among other things , would require doj to develop such guidelines . we continue to maintain that guidelines should be a part of any statutory or administrative initiative governing the use of the terrorist watchlist for firearms or explosives transactions . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the committee may have . for additional information on this statement , please contact eileen larence at ( 202 ) 512-6510 or larencee@gao.gov . in addition , eric erdman , assistant director ; jeffrey demarco ; and geoffrey hamilton made key contributions to this statement . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the 24-hour destruction requirement does not apply to permit checks . rather , information related to these checks is retained in the nics database for up to 90 days after the background check is initiated . the fbi is analyzing and sharing information on individuals matched to the terrorist watchlist to support investigations and other counterterrorism activities . in our may 2009 report , we noted that the fbi is utilizing a tsc database to capture information on individuals who attempted to purchase a firearm and were a match to the watchlist . specifically , the fbi began analyzing each separate instance to develop intelligence and support ongoing counterterrorism investigations . further , we reported that in october 2008 , the fbi's counterterrorism division conducted — for the first time — a proactive analysis of the information related to nics background checks involving individuals on the terrorist watchlist that is captured in the tsc database . this analysis was conducted to identify individuals who could potentially impact presidential inauguration activities . based on the value derived from conducting this analysis , the counterterrorism division decided to conduct similar analysis and produce quarterly reports that summarize these analytical activities beginning in may 2009 . in updating our work , we found that the fbi's counterterrorism division is now issuing these analytic reports on a monthly basis . according to division officials , the reports contain an analysis of all nics background checks during the month that involve individuals on the terrorist watchlist . the officials noted that the individuals discussed in the reports range from those who are somewhat of a concern to those who represent a significant threat .