at that point , the service can delist the species . moreover , many staff activities overlap program areas , making it more difficult to determine which program area to charge when reporting time spent . consequently the service is less able to make informed decisions about future program operations and resource needs . incorrect reporting of time spent among the program areas could mask how staff actually divided their time among these areas . thirty - five percent of field office supervisors reported that their office charged staff time to another program area once funds in the relevant program area were depleted . our survey did not measure how often or to what extent this shifting of time charges occurred . headquarters officials were surprised to learn that supervisors were reporting that staff time was charged incorrectly and wondered why supervisors did not make reprogramming requests . moreover , only half of the field staff responding to our survey reported that they personally recorded the time charges for the program areas on their time sheets . the other half did not record their time charges ; instead , someone else ( eg , supervisor , timekeeper , budget officer ) recorded their time . of those staff who did not record their own time charges , 44 percent reported that they had no basis to judge whether the time charges recorded by others accurately reflected the work they had performed . other regional variations are shown in appendix iii . over 50 percent of the field staff who carried out activities in the consultation program area were concerned that they were not spending enough time on ( 1 ) conducting fieldwork in order to determine whether formal consultations were needed and ( 2 ) monitoring agency compliance with the terms and conditions of biological opinions associated with these consultations . field staff reported spending only 2 percent of their consultation time on fieldwork and only 2 percent on monitoring . regional and headquarters officials recognized the importance of monitoring the terms and conditions of the biological opinions to ensure that the agreements reached during consultation are being carried out . these officials noted , however , that other , more pressing consultation work often takes precedence over conducting fieldwork and monitoring activities . officials in all but one region agreed that consultation has taken staff time away from recovery efforts . however , officials in several regions stated that some consultation and recovery activities can be closely connected because some recovery tasks are imbedded in consultation actions and in broadly scoped habitat conservation plans that have a recovery focus . additionally , once a species is listed , the service's subsequent actions are directed to its ultimate goal of recovery , and biologists work towards this goal in all they do , according to regional officials . region 6 officials were concerned that the amount of time their field staff reported spending on consultation might have been overstated because several biologists who work solely on three recovery programs in their region were not included in our survey . they suggested that if these biologists' time had been included , the region's results would have shown a larger percentage of time spent on recovery and therefore less on consultation .