are these goals and objectives documented ? does the agency have processes and procedures in place to support the goals and objectives of the ethics program ? does the agency have processes and procedures in place to ensure political appointees who are not presidential appointees with senate confirmation do not undertake an activity that represents an actual or apparent conflict of interest ? does the agency have processes and procedures in place to ensure that political appointees receive required training ? management should internally communicate the necessary quality information to achieve the entity's objectives . we also found that the data are incomplete . for example , the data did not include information on political appointee positions within the eop . the eop provides data to opm only every 4 years for inclusion in the plum book . in addition to opm , the white house maintains timely data on political appointees that are likely more comprehensive than opm's data but are not publicly available . historically , ppo maintained data on political appointees as part of its responsibilities to recruit , vet , and place political appointees in positions across the government . ppo data on political appointees have not been made publicly available by the trump , obama , or bush administrations . according to former officials from the bush and obama administrations , ppo maintained and used data on political appointees to carry out its responsibilities . for example , during the obama administration , ppo established a database to help with filling political appointee positions and managing the overall appointee process . the database included preliminary information on candidates , such as names , application status , and where the applicant was in the vetting process . after a position was filled , the database tracked information such as the name of the appointee , position , federal department or agency , and start and departure dates . the primary limitation of the data was that departure dates of political appointees were unreliable . the former obama administration official attributed this limitation to the lack of a process for agencies to formally notify ppo when an appointee left a position . to address this gap , ppo met regularly with staff in federal agencies to review data for accuracy . there are requests by members of the public to obtain data on political appointees serving in the executive branch . for example , between january 2017 and november 2018 , opm received approximately 32 requests through the freedom of information act ( foia ) for data on political appointments across federal agencies . according to opm officials , requests for data on political appointees are common and tend to increase at the start of a new administration . former ppo officials also stated that when they served at ppo they received requests for data on political appointees serving in the executive branch . in the absence of comprehensive and timely data on political appointees serving in the executive branch , two nongovernmental organizations — the partnership for public service and propublica — stated that they collect and report some data themselves .