pursuant to 31 u.s.c . 1301 ( a ) , “ppropriations shall only be applied to the objects for which the appropriations were made . .” in the absence of specific statutory authority , appropriated funds may only be used to purchase items for official purposes , and may not be used to acquire items for the personal benefit of a government employee . for example , without statutory authority , appropriated funds may not be used to furnish meals or refreshments to employees within their normal duty stations . free food and other refreshments normally cannot be justified as a necessary expense of an agency's appropriation because these items are considered personal expenses that federal employees should pay for from their own salaries . likewise , appropriated funds may not be used to purchase gifts for employees or others unless an agency can demonstrate that the items further the purposes for which the appropriation was enacted . the purchase of the flowers and food were both personal rather than official in nature and , therefore , may not be paid for with appropriated funds . another transaction involved the purchase of a file cabinet from macy's at a cost of $1,462 . purchases of file cabinets are subject to rules prescribed in title 41 of the code of federal regulations , subtitle c , “federal property management regulations system,” which cover specific procedures that must be followed to limit the purchases of new filing cabinets , including disposing of all records that have been authorized for disposition in accordance with authorized disposal schedules and transferring inactive records not needed for daily business to approved agency records centers . after taking appropriate steps to maximize the use of existing filing cabinets , if the agency determines that additional filing cabinets are required , the far requires the agency to submit a requisition to the general service administration ( gsa ) . we found no documented evidence that the required procedures were followed . further , we found no documented justification for purchasing the file cabinet from macy's instead of through gsa , as required . we also identified a number of potentially abusive transactions . these were purchases of items supposedly for official use but without any documented agency determination that these items were necessary for government business rather than merely to satisfy the personal preference of individual employees . when a contracting official — in this case , a purchase cardholder — purchases an item based on his or her own preferences ( or the desires of another agency official or employee ) without a management decision that the item is necessary , he or she is abusing the procurement process . some of these items fall into categories described in gao's guide for evaluating and testing controls over sensitive payments ( gao / afmd - 8.1.2 , may 1993 ) . the guide states that “abuse is distinct from illegal acts ( noncompliance ) . when abuse occurs , no law or regulation is violated .