omb did this twice . most directly , in its april 6 , 2010 , memorandum that requires agencies to ensure reporting is accurate , and defines this as “the percentage of transactions that are complete and do not have inconsistencies with systems of record or other authoritative sources.” earlier , omb issued more general guidance directing agencies to have a process that enables the agency to substantiate ( by documentation or other means ) the quality of information it disseminates . however , for 12 of the data elements , we could not determine the extent of consistency or inconsistency because agency records provided to us did not always include definitive information adequate to verify the information reported on usaspending.gov ( see table 5 ) . four data elements in particular exhibited a significant amount of unverifiable information , meaning that at least 10 percent of awards contained unverifiable information for these data elements . specifically , we found that: cfda number: ffata requires agencies to identify and display on usaspending.gov the assistance funding agency and cfda program number . however , records provided to us did not include definitive information adequate to verify the information reported on usaspending.gov for the cfda program number for 12 percent through 22 percent of assistance awards . for example , our representative sample contained four assistance awards identified in usaspending.gov under cfda program 64.012 , veterans prescription service . however , records provided by the agency did not identify the cfda program number nor distinguish funding from a number of other medical benefits programs . program source agency and account codes: treasury's account symbol was selected to be used as the official program source for use on the website and is made up of two related codes: agency code and account code . omb guidance requires agencies to ensure that award documents contain the predominant treasury account symbol . however , records provided to us did not include definitive information adequate to verify the information reported on usaspending.gov for the data element agency code for 14 percent through 21 percent of awards and 19 percent through 27 percent for the account code . for example , officials from department of veterans affairs data quality services stated that program source information could not be provided because there was no documented link between the award and the program source information stored in the financial system . for another award , the office of personnel management provided a system screenshot that documented charge account information . however , the office did not provide supporting documentation to show how the charge account information tracked to the program source reported on usaspending.gov . principal place of performance state: guidance on usaspending.gov states that the place of performance should be reported as the place where the majority of work takes place , while reporting . however , other specific guidance is available for contractrecords provided to us did not include definitive information adequate to verify the information reported on usaspending.gov for the place of performance state for 23 percent through 31 percent of awards .