parts . is there sufficient stock on hand or in the supply pipeline to complete the program schedule on time ? tools and equipment . are all required special tools , fixtures , jigs , and stands on hand or being acquired ? process . the second policy memo will address orders funded with procurement appropriations . according to army officials , this second policy memo will discuss various aspects of procurement - funded orders , including different types of work such as pilot programs , prototypes , fabrication , and data requirements . according to the army , this action should result in a better alignment of the work to the customer delivery schedule and prevent the acceptance of workloads that are not executable in a specific fiscal year . we agree that these actions are needed for orders placed with industrial operations . if properly implemented , the army's actions should help address our concerns that ( 1 ) the scope of work was not well defined and ( 2 ) parts were not available to perform the work . however , the army has not issued the planned policy memos . the memos should contain specific timetables for implementing their planned actions and establish procedures to include steps to be followed by industrial operations in evaluating orders received from customers . the work that army industrial operations performs supports combat readiness by restoring equipment to a level of combat capability commensurate with a unit's future mission . reliable budgeted information on industrial operations , including carryover information , is essential for congress and dod to perform their oversight responsibilities , including reviewing and making well - informed decisions on industrial operations budgets . the army reported in its budgets to congress that industrial operations' adjusted carryover was under the allowable amount at the end of fiscal years 2011 and 2012 . however , budget estimates for carryover were consistently less than the actual amounts each year from fiscal years 2006 through 2012 primarily because of industrial operations underestimating new orders from customers , particularly procurement - funded orders . budget estimates could be improved by addressing the major factors that caused variations between budgeted and actual amounts , including improved communication between customers and industrial operations . the army recognized that it needed to improve the budgeting and management of carryover and formed a working group in april 2012 . the working group identified a number of actions that are under way and planned to help remedy this situation . however , the army has not yet implemented these planned actions and does not have a timetable for implementation . we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the army to take the following three actions to improve the budgeting and management of army industrial operations' carryover: issue the planned working group policy memos and establish a timetable for implementing these actions for improving the management of carryover . implement the working group's planned actions to improve the budgeting for new orders to be received by army industrial operations .