app . ii contains a more detailed description of each of the six sectors with infrastructure construction we reviewed. ) haiti is the poorest country in the western hemisphere , with more than 75 percent of the population living on less than $2 per day and the unemployment rate estimated at 60 to 70 percent . these conditions were exacerbated when the largest earthquake in haiti's recorded history devastated parts of the country , including the capital , on january 12 , 2010 . since then , haiti has suffered from a cholera epidemic that has affected over 450,000 persons and caused over 6,000 deaths . in addition , haiti has experienced political uncertainty following the earthquake . due to the inconclusive presidential election of november 2010 , the new president was not inaugurated until may 2011 . on may 13 , 2011 , the u.s. and haitian governments signed the haiti reconstruction grant agreement . later , the haitian parliament rejected two candidates nominated by the new president for the post of prime minister , who serves as head of government . in early october 2011 , the parliament approved the president's third nominee . in response to the earthquake , in the act , congress provided more than $1.14 billion in reconstruction funds for haiti , available through the end of fiscal year 2012 . of this amount , about $918 million was directed to usaid and state , of which $770 million was provided through the usaid - administered economic support fund ( esf ) account and about $148 million through the state - administered international narcotics control and law enforcement account ( see table 1 ) . of the almost $918 million in supplemental funds , as of september 30 , 2011 , $356.9 million was allocated for the construction and rehabilitation of infrastructure . in addition to these supplemental funds , usaid and state allocated funding for reconstruction activities from other budgetary sources , such as annual appropriations for fiscal years 2010 and 2011 , of which $54.8 million was allocated for construction and rehabilitation of infrastructure . in total , the agencies allocated almost $412 million from both supplemental and other budgetary sources for construction and rehabilitation of infrastructure . in september 2010 , state and usaid , as required by the act , issued a joint spending plan that showed allocations of supplemental reconstruction funds ( see fig . 1 for a timeline of key government of haiti and international donors and u.s. government actions and events after the earthquake ) . in january 2011 , the u.s. government issued the 5-year post - earthquake usg haiti strategy: toward renewal and economic opportunity . consistent with the government of haiti's development priorities , the u.s. strategy seeks to , among other things , encourage reconstruction and long - term economic development in several regions of the country — known as “development corridors” — including a region on the northern coast of haiti that is not close to the earthquake epicenter , but where some people displaced by the earthquake moved .