pub . 91-190 , 83 stat . 852 ( 1970 ) , as amended , codified at 42 u.s.c . ch . 55. assessments because of the large volume of recovery act work . the initial environmental assessment process was also the most common challenge cited by rus's gfrs , who told us that these assessments took longer than anticipated and negatively affected all awardees' schedules . officials from ntia and rus both noted delays associated with the environmental assessment process , and ntia officials noted that these delays have been up to 6 months for btop projects . btop and bip awardees reported facing other delays in beginning project construction , such as: prevailing wage requirements . the recovery act requires that all laborers and mechanics employed by contractors and subcontractors on projects funded directly by or assisted in whole or in part by and through the federal government under the recovery act be paid at prevailing wage rates . ntia and rus officials and an awardee told us that in many cases identifying the prevailing wage for activities such as fiber deployment was difficult because that type of work had often not been done in that area and the prevailing wage had not yet been determined by the department of labor . permitting , right - of - way agreements , and make - ready work . awardees must apply for and receive permits and right of way agreements before beginning construction . ntia officials and awardees told us that for some projects , obtaining these agreements from all the relevant stakeholders took longer than anticipated and put the projects behind schedule . for example , these agreements may have to be obtained from state and local governments , tribal governments , federal entities ( such as the bureau of land management ) , private landowners , and railroads . one awardee we spoke with experienced delays of up to 9 months in the installation of equipment and fiber because of the amount of time it took to receive right of way permits from railroad companies . in addition , make - ready work , which includes the tasks associated with preparing utility poles for the installation of equipment and fiber , must be complete before any construction occurs , and this need has posed challenges to maintaining project timelines . for example , one btop awardee indicated in its first quarter 2012 report to ntia that “keeping make - ready completion ahead of construction crew availability remains the major challenge for the project.” weather , terrain , and broadband fiber availability . weather - related challenges and difficult terrain can cause delays in construction . awardees reported delays for , among other things , a major tornado that caused damage to a service area and equipment , hurricanes , snowfall , and flooding . difficult terrain can also cause delays . one awardee told us that its project unexpectedly called for boring through solid granite under a river , which required additional tools and time . ntia and rus officials told us that btop and bip projects were also delayed due to fiber shortages caused by the 2011 tsunami in japan and increased worldwide demand for fiber .