iii ) . while a tank's design life is not a firm deadline beyond which a tank is no longer usable , site engineers considered design life a reasonable estimate of how long a tank could be expected to contain the radioactive and hazardous wastes and did not regard the tanks as a permanent solution to doe's weapons production legacy . in the 1940s and 1950s , site contractors viewed tank failures as inevitable and assumed that as the tanks failed , new tanks would be constructed to store the waste until a more permanent disposal solution could be developed . doe and its contractor acknowledge that aging equipment is subject to more frequent failure . the likelihood of a major failure of a tank increases with time . the conclusions of a 2007 ecology study on the single - shell tanks seem to agree with this position . from an evaluation of the tanks' leak history , this study concluded that the probability of a single - shell tank's leaking may double about every 10 years . the study estimated that about half ( 41 tanks ) of the single - shell tanks designated as sound could leak waste into the ground by the time they are emptied . regardless of whether the tanks have exceeded their design life , their long - term viability remains unknown . given the uncertainties over the bottom portions and foundations of the single - shell tanks uncovered by doe's 2002 study , and that 67 tanks have leaked or are presumed to have already leaked and additional tanks are likely to leak in the future , these tanks' viability is both questionable and unpredictable . furthermore , according to independent experts , doe has never controlled the chemical composition of the wastes in the single - shell tanks to reduce corrosion of the tanks' steel liners , as required for the double - shell tanks . it also remains unclear to what extent the single - shell tank study being planned will evaluate the expected viability of these tanks throughout the remainder of the treatment process . as for the double - shell tanks , doe has taken steps to try to assess whether they will remain usable until they are emptied . an independent panel of experts , including engineers , chemists , and corrosion experts from doe sites , academia , and industry analyzed actual corrosion rates of the inner carbon - steel linings of the 28 double - shell tanks . using these corrosion rates , the experts projected when future leaks in the tanks were likely to occur . they concluded that in a worst - case scenario — as when the waste is highly corrosive — assuming corrosion rates continue as observed , as many as 7 double - shell tanks may develop leaks in their inner steel shells between 2037 and 2043 . another study conducted by an independent professional engineer for doe's contractor used laboratory corrosion rate data , rather than rates from in - tank corrosion monitoring .