, the cost of mobility ) . for fiscal year 2003 , fta evaluated 50 projects and prepared ratings for 31 of them . of the 31 projects that received ratings , fta rated 27 projects as highly recommended or recommended , and proposed executing new grant agreements for 2 projects that are expected to meet the readiness criteria by the end of fiscal year 2003 . in addition , fta is proposing two other projects for grant agreements for fiscal year 2003 . these two projects — new orleans ( canal street spine ) and san diego ( oceanside - escondido rail corridor ) were not rated this year . although they were proposed for funding commitments last year , the grant agreements were not executed , and fta characterizes the projects as pending federal commitments . according to fta , the ratings for these two projects from last year are still valid . ( table 1 shows the ratings for the four projects recommended for new starts funding in fiscal year 2003. ) as table 1 shows , one of the four proposed projects received a highly recommended rating on the basis of its strong cost - effectiveness rating , good mobility improvement rating , and a demonstrated local financial commitment to build and operate the project . the proposed san diego ( oceanside - escondido rail corridor ) project received a medium - high rating in mobility improvement because it is expected to serve 15,100 average weekday boardings in 2015 , and 8,600 new daily riders . according to fta , it will also help to eliminate the heavy congestion of northern san diego county along the route 78 corridor , saving 700,000 hours of travel time a year compared to the tsm alternative . in addition , according to fta , the high ratings for the proposed project's capital and operating financing plans reflect the solid financial condition of the transit agency and the other funding partners , as well as the sufficient projected revenue growth and contingencies . finally , about half of the unused commitment authority results from fta's response to the recommendation in our august 2001 report to release $157 million in commitment authority reserved for a los angeles subway project for which the federal funding commitment had been withdrawn . the final rule became effective in 2001 . in addition , tea - 21 requires us to report each year on fta's processes and procedures for evaluating , rating , and recommending new starts projects for federal funding and on the implementation of these processes and procedures . in light of what we saw as an impending “budget crunch,” we recommended in march 2000 that the department of transportation ( dot ) further prioritize among the projects it rates as “highly recommended” and “recommended” for funding purposes . dot has not fully implemented this recommendation .