( see fig . these regions are known as petroleum administration for defense districts ( padds ) . proposed mergers in all industries , including the petroleum industry , are generally reviewed by federal antitrust authorities — including the federal trade commission ( ftc ) and the department of justice ( doj ) — to assess the potential impact on market competition . according to ftc officials , ftc generally reviews proposed mergers involving the petroleum industry because of the agency's expertise in that industry . ftc analyzes these mergers to determine if they would likely diminish competition in the relevant markets and result in harm , such as increased prices . to determine the potential effect of a merger on market competition , ftc evaluates how the merger would change the level of market concentration , among other things . conceptually , the higher the concentration , the less competitive the market is and the more likely that firms can exert control over prices . the ability to maintain prices above competitive levels for a significant period of time is known as market power . according to the merger guidelines jointly issued by doj and ftc , market concentration as measured by hhi is ranked into three separate categories: a market with an hhi under 1,000 is considered to be unconcentrated ; if hhi is between 1,000 and 1,800 the market is considered moderately concentrated ; and if hhi is above 1,800 , the market is considered highly concentrated . while concentration is an important aspect of market structure — the underlying economic and technical characteristics of an industry — other aspects of market structure that may be affected by mergers also play an important role in determining the level of competition in a market . these aspects include barriers to entry , which are market conditions that provide established sellers an advantage over potential new entrants in an industry , and vertical integration . over 2,600 merger transactions occurred from 1991 through 2000 involving all three segments of the u.s. petroleum industry . almost 85 percent of the mergers occurred in the upstream segment ( exploration and production ) , while the downstream segment ( refining and marketing of petroleum ) accounted for about 13 percent , and the midstream segment ( transportation ) accounted for over 2 percent . the vast majority of the mergers — about 80 percent — involved one company's purchase of a segment or asset of another company , while about 20 percent involved the acquisition of a company's total assets by another so that the two became one company . most of the mergers occurred in the second half of the decade , including those involving large partially or fully vertically integrated companies . petroleum industry officials and experts we contacted cited several reasons for the industry's wave of mergers in the 1990s , including achieving synergies , increasing growth and diversifying assets , and reducing costs . economic literature indicates that enhancing market power is also sometimes a motive for mergers . ultimately , these reasons mostly relate to companies' desire to maximize profit or stock values . many firms of varying sizes make up the u.s. petroleum industry .