fbcs cannot automatically adjudicate claims . system weaknesses have delayed claims payments . the officials we interviewed said that if the agency is to dramatically improve its claims processing timeliness , comprehensive and technologically advanced solutions must be developed and implemented , such as modernizing and upgrading vha's existing claims processing system or contracting out the claims processing function . in october 2015 , vha submitted a plan to address these issues as part of a broader effort to consolidate va care in the community programs . the agency estimated that it would take at least 2 years to implement solutions that would fully address all of the challenges now faced by its claims processing staff and by providers of va care in the community services . however , vha has not yet provided to congress or other external stakeholders a plan for modernizing its claims processing system . in particular , vha has not provided ( 1 ) a detailed schedule for developing and implementing each aspect of its new claims processing system ; ( 2 ) the estimated costs for developing and implementing each aspect of the system ; and ( 3 ) performance goals , measures , and interim milestones that vha will use to evaluate progress , hold staff accountable for achieving desired results , and report to stakeholders the agency's progress in modernizing its claims processing system . that vha has not yet provided a detailed plan but has stated that it expects to deploy a modernized claims processing system as early as fiscal year 2018 is cause for concern . thus , to help provide reasonable assurance that vha achieves its long - term goal of modernizing its claims processing system , we recommended in may 2016 that the secretary of veterans affairs direct the under secretary for health to ensure that the agency develops a sound written plan that includes: a detailed schedule for when vha intends to complete development and implementation of each major aspect of its new claims processing system ; the estimated costs for implementing each major aspect of the system ; and the performance goals , measures , and interim milestones that vha will use to evaluate progress , hold staff accountable for achieving desired results , and report to stakeholders the agency's progress in modernizing its claims processing system . the department concurred with our recommendation and said that vha plans to address the recommendation when the agency develops an implementation strategy for the future consolidation of its va care in the community programs . in conclusion , effective it management is critical to the performance of va's mission . the department faces challenges in key areas , including the development of new systems , modernization of existing systems , and increasing interoperability with dod . while we recognize that the transformation of va's it organization is intended , among other things , to mitigate the it weaknesses we have identified , sustained management attention and organizational commitment will be essential to ensuring that the transformation is successful and that the weaknesses are fully addressed . it is a suite of cobol mainframe applications . va has general plans to roll the capabilities of bdn into another system , but there is no firm date associated with this transition .