wind technologies . doe is assessing its long - term vision of generating 20 percent of the nation's electricity using wind energy by 2030 . its current r&d efforts , however , are focused on more immediate expansion of the wind industry , particularly on utility - scale wind turbines . more specifically , doe has focused its r&d efforts on improving the cost , performance , and reliability of large scale , land - based wind turbines , including both high - and low - wind technologies ; developing small and mid - size turbines for distributed energy applications , such as for residential or remote agricultural uses ; and gathering information on more efficient uses of the electricity grid and on barriers to deploying wind technology and providing that information to key national , state , and local decision - makers to assist with market expansion of wind technologies . for example , one of doe's targets is to increase the number of distributed wind turbines deployed in the united states from 2,400 in 2007 to 12,000 in 2015 . although wind energy has grown in recent years , from about 1,800 megawatts in 1996 to over 16,800 megawatts in 2007 , the wind industry still faces investors' concerns about high up - front capital costs , including connecting the wind farms to the power transmission grid . solar technologies . doe's r&d goal is for solar power to be unsubsidized and cost competitive with conventional technologies by 2015 by , for example , developing new thin - film photovoltaic technologies using less expensive semiconductor material than crystalline - silicon to reduce the manufacturing cost of solar cells . specifically , doe is working to reduce the costs of photovoltaic systems from about 18-23 cents per kilowatt hour in 2005 to about 5-10 cents per kilowatt hour in 2015 . doe is also conducting r&d to reduce the cost and improve the reliability of concentrating solar power technologies , which use various mirror configurations to convert the sun's energy to heat to generate electricity . in addition , doe has expanded r&d to address low - cost thermal storage to allow solar thermal systems to be more valuable to utility grid power markets . along these lines , both the photovoltaic and concentrated solar power activities have ramped up efforts in the areas of grid integration and reliability to facilitate the transition to larger scale , centralized solar electric power plants . doe had originally pledged about three - quarters of the estimated $1 billion cost of the futuregen project ( in constant fiscal year 2004 dollars ) . with escalation costs and rising price of materials and labor , the estimated project costs rose to nearly $1.8 billion . as a result , doe announced in january 2008 that it is restructuring futuregen to focus on multiple , competitively selected projects that demonstrate carbon capture and sequestration at commercially viable power plant project sites . the impact of doe's restructuring on futuregen at this time is not known , but an industry official from the futuregen alliance noted that the project cannot go forward without federal government assistance .