family . federal immigration law does not specifically define the term “family” for the purposes of identifying family relationships that are to be documented at apprehension . dhs components and other federal agencies use the term “family” for individuals with a variety of relationships such as step - , half - , foster , or adoptive family members . some family relationships , including parent - child , may be claimed upon apprehension , but cbp may determine that the relationship is invalid . for example , cbp may determine that ( 1 ) those claiming a familial relationship are not related or ( 2 ) their relationship does not meet the relevant component or agency's operational definition of family . for the purposes of this report , “family” refers generally to noncitizens with claimed familial relationships . unaccompanied alien child ( uac ) . the homeland security act of 2002 defines a uac as a child under the age of 18 , who has no lawful immigration status in the united states and who has no parent or legal guardian present in the united states , or if present , no parent or legal guardian available to provide care and physical custody for that child . agents and officers also collect biometric information , such as photographs and fingerprints , from certain individuals . border patrol agents and ofo officers use fingerprints to run records checks against federal government databases to determine if individuals have any previous immigration or criminal history . agents and officers are to enter information about the individuals in the appropriate automated data system as soon as possible , in accordance with cbp policy . border patrol agents and ofo officers print copies of the information they enter into their data systems to create a paper file , known as an “a - file,” for each noncitizen they apprehend . one of the key required dhs forms in the a - file is form i - 213 , record of deportable / inadmissible alien . among other things , this form captures biographic information and includes a narrative section for agents and officers to document the circumstances of the apprehension . according to cbp policy , border patrol agents and ofo officers are to determine the validity of family relationships among individuals they apprehend . to do so , for example , they are to review any available documentation , such as birth certificates ; monitor interactions between adults and children ; and use their law enforcement training , such as interview skills , to help assess the validity of family relationships . after making decisions about the validity of familial relationships , agents and officers are to decide whether and how family members will be detained together while in cbp custody .