reclamation . reclamation allows its lands to be used for incidental purposes , such as recreation and grazing , as long as such uses do not interfere with the operation of the dams or irrigation works associated with these projects . in general , reclamation allows grazing on its project lands when asked to do so by users , such as ranchers who have had historical access to the lands or wildlife managers wanting to improve habitat . for example , the albuquerque area office allows grazing on more than 19,000 acres in the brantley and avalon reservoirs project area , thereby allowing ranchers access to lands that they historically grazed . in fiscal year 2004 , reclamation reported that it permitted and leased lands for grazing at 36 of its facilities in 16 area offices , with the agency managing some of the permits and leases and other agencies , such as blm , the u.s . fish and wildlife service , or local and state agencies managing additional permits and leases under joint management agreements . for example , in central washington state , blm manages grazing on more than 8,000 acres of reclamation land that is adjacent to blm land in the columbia basin project . in the same area , the washington department of fish and wildlife manages grazing on almost 18,000 acres of reclamation land to improve vegetation and thereby enhance bird habitat . in total , in fiscal year 2004 , reclamation issued permits and leases for about 91,000 aums of grazing on almost 737,000 acres — almost 44,000 aums and about 238,000 acres under reclamation's management and about 47,000 aums and about 499,000 acres managed by agreement with other agencies . doe . the department allows grazing on only one site , the idaho national laboratory . under the taylor grazing act , the secretary of the interior is authorized , by order and with the approval of the relevant department , to establish grazing districts of certain public domain lands that are not in national forests , parks , or monuments . in idaho , interior , with the agreement of doe , issued such an order , and livestock grazing continues on approximately 50 percent of the idaho national laboratory site . blm manages the land as part of its grazing program but is to follow the security and land access requirements set by doe . dod . § 2667 , the secretaries of the army , air force , and navy are authorized to lease property under their control that is not excess property , if it will promote national defense or be in the public interest . the military services use this authority to lease rangelands on military installations and bases for grazing , among other uses . for example , the air force leases to nearby ranchers land that forms a buffer around the melrose air force range at cannon air force base in new mexico . the buffer consists of rangelands surrounding target areas used in training exercises and protects more developed areas from stray ( unarmed ) bombs .