a basic element of cryptography is encryption . encryption can be used to provide basic data confidentiality and integrity by transforming plain text into cipher text using a special value known as a key and a mathematical process known as an algorithm . if encryption is not used , user id and password combinations will be susceptible to electronic eavesdropping by devices on the network when they are transmitted . nsa and nist recommend encrypting network services , and nist guidance states that organizations should configure an information system to provide only the essential capabilities needed or restrict the use of protocols that can allow the unauthorized transfer of information . nist guidance also states that the use of encryption by organizations can reduce the probability of unauthorized disclosure of information . fdic did not always ensure that sensitive information transmitted over its network was adequately encrypted . specifically , fdic did not disable an unencrypted protocol in use in the production and nonproduction logical partitions on the mainframe . in addition , fdic did not restrict the use of unencrypted protocols on network servers . as a result , increased risk exists that an individual could capture information such as user ids and passwords and use them to gain unauthorized access to data and system resources . to establish individual accountability , monitor compliance with security policies , and investigate security violations , it is crucial to determine what , when , and by whom specific actions have been taken on a system . organizations accomplish this by implementing system or security software that provides an audit trail for determining the source of a transaction or attempted transaction and monitoring user activity . to be effective , organizations should ( 1 ) configure the software to collect and maintain a sufficient audit trail for security - relevant events ; ( 2 ) generate reports that selectively identify unauthorized , unusual , and sensitive access activity ; and ( 3 ) regularly monitor and take action on these reports . nist guidance states that an organization should review and analyze information system audit records for indications of inappropriate or unusual activity , and should report the findings to designated organization officials . nist guidance also states that organizations should track and monitor access by individuals who use elevated access privileges and that an organization should review and analyze information system audit records for indications of inappropriate or unusual activity , and should report the findings to designated organization officials . fdic did not always sufficiently review audit and monitoring of security - relevant events . for example , fdic's monitoring processes did not detect the existence of default installation user accounts on three unix servers . fdic did not effectively monitor certain dataset access activity on the mainframe . fdic mainframe logging controls were inappropriately configured , allowing the creation of large quantities of logged data for routine activities . as a result of these deficiencies , increased risk exists that unauthorized activity or a policy violation would not be detected on fdic systems and networks . in addition to access controls , other important controls should be in place to ensure the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of an organization's information .