( see fig . the national institutes of health ( nih ) considers the increase in age - related eye diseases to be an emerging major public health problem . according to nih , the four leading diseases that cause age - related legal blindness are cataract , glaucoma , macular degeneration , and diabetic retinopathy , each affecting vision differently . ( see fig . 2 for illustrations of how each disease affects vision. ) cataract is a clouding of the eye's normally clear lens . most cataracts appear with advancing age , and by age 80 , more than half of all americans develop them . glaucoma causes gradual damage to the optic nerve — the nerve to the eye — that results in decreasing peripheral vision . it is estimated that as many as 4 million americans have glaucoma . macular degeneration results in the loss of central visual clarity and contrast sensitivity . it is the most common cause of legal blindness in older americans and rarely affects those under the age of 60 . diabetic retinopathy is a common complication of diabetes impairing vision over time . it results in the loss of visual clarity , peripheral vision , and color and contrast sensitivity . it also increases the eye's sensitivity to glare . nearly half of all diabetics will develop some degree of diabetic retinopathy , and the risk increases with veterans' age and the length of time they have had diabetes . to assist legally blind veterans , va established visual impairment services team ( vist ) coordinators who act as case managers and are responsible for coordinating all medical services for these veterans , including obtaining medical examinations and arranging for blind rehabilitation services . there are about 170 vist coordinators , who are located at va medical centers that have at least 100 enrolled legally blind veterans . vist coordinators are also responsible for certain administrative services such as reviewing the veteran's compensation and pension benefits . almost all of va's blind rehabilitation services for veterans are provided through comprehensive inpatient care at brcs , where veterans are trained to use their remaining vision and other senses , as well as adaptive devices such as canes , to help compensate for impaired vision . va offers both basic and computer training . ( see table 2 for examples of the types of skills taught during basic and computer training. ) in fiscal years 2002 and 2003 , va spent over $56 million each year for inpatient training at brcs . during this same time period , va spent less than $5 million each year to provide outpatient rehabilitation training for legally blind veterans . va offers three types of blind rehabilitation outpatient services to legally blind veterans , but these services are available in few va locations . the three types of services include visual impairment services outpatient rehabilitation ( visor ) , visual impairment center to optimize remaining sight ( victors ) , and blind rehabilitation outpatient specialists ( bros ) . the services range from short - term outpatient programs provided in va facilities to home - based services . figure 3 identifies the locations throughout the united states and puerto rico where these services are offered .