ofo . we observed that one ofo holding facility ( one out of six ) posted information on both the dhs oig and cbp info center ; however , at the remaining facilities we did not see posted information on any reporting mechanisms . figure 3 shows an example of a prea poster that we observed in a border patrol holding facility . dhs components have undertaken some efforts to review complaints - related signage in holding facilities . for example , in 2015 , the cbp commissioner's office directed ofo and border patrol to review complaints - related signage in holding facilities because of concerns that it might be outdated and not consistently in place . as part of that effort , the components issued guidance to the field ; however , the guidance has been limited to ensuring prea posters are in place and removing outdated signage . for example , the border patrol instructed all border patrol sectors to ensure that signage in holding facilities complied with prea standards and remove any outdated signage related to the former immigration and naturalization service . similarly , ofo instructed holding facilities to ensure that proper signage , such as prea information , is displayed in the detention areas . while ofo and border patrol took steps to evaluate complaints - related signage in holding facilities and clarify that prea posters should be in place , they have not provided guidance to the field concerning how and which complaint mechanisms should be communicated to individuals in the holding facilities . according to dhs headquarters and holding facility officials , dhs has not placed an emphasis on which complaint mechanisms should be communicated because individuals are encouraged to submit complaints to holding facility personnel and an individual may be more likely to submit a complaint while in longer - term detention . for example , according to a border patrol official in the field , the majority of all complaints made by individuals are not made while they are in border patrol custody , but rather after they have been transferred to ice custody in a detention facility . however , individuals in holding facilities may have a concern that they do not communicate because they may not be aware of the available complaint mechanisms . in addition , while cbp and ice may encourage individuals to submit complaints to holding facility personnel rather than through external complaint mechanisms , individuals who need to file a complaint may not necessarily: ( 1 ) be able to get their complaint addressed at the field level , or ( 2 ) feel comfortable lodging a complaint to a local official , such as due to fear of retribution . monitoring . this report addresses the following questions: to what extent does dhs have ( 1 ) standards in place for the short - term custody of aliens and monitors compliance with established standards and ( 2 ) processes in place for obtaining and addressing complaints from aliens in holding facilities ? to address these questions , we visited a nongeneralizable sample of 32 cbp and ice holding facilities in california , florida , texas , and virginia . specifically , we visited 17 border patrol facilities , 7 ofo facilities , and 8 ice facilities .