provide training . recommendations related to developing , implementing , and documenting training for an agency's data act stakeholders . for example , one oig recommended that its agency provide mandatory training to all contracting officers and grant program staff to ensure their understanding of data act requirements . work with treasury , omb , and other external stakeholders . recommendations for the agency to work with treasury , omb , or other stakeholders external to the agency to resolve government - wide issues . for example , one oig recommended that its agency work closely with its federal shared service provider to address timing and coding errors that the service provider caused for future data act submissions . implement systems controls or modify systems . recommendations related to developing and implementing automated systems and controls . for example , one oig recommended that its agency complete the implementation of system interfaces and new procedures that are designed to improve collection of certain data that were not reported timely to fpds - ng and improve linkages of certain financial transactions and procurement awards using a unique procurement instrument identifier . increase resources . recommendations related to increasing the staff , resources , or both necessary to fully implement data act requirements . for example , one oig recommended that its agency allocate the resources to ensure that reconciliations are performed when consolidating source system data to the data act submission files . management for 36 agencies stated that they concurred or generally concurred with the recommendations of their oigs ( see fig . management at many of these agencies stated that they continued to improve their processes and controls for subsequent data submissions . in addition , management for seven agencies stated that they partially concurred with the recommendations that their oigs made . management for two agencies did not concur with their oigs' recommendations . management for one agency that did not concur with the recommendations stated that they should not be held responsible for data discrepancies that other agencies caused , and management for the other agency stated that they followed authoritative guidance that omb and treasury issued related to warnings and error messages . omb staff told us that they reviewed the oig reports — focusing on the 24 cfo act agencies — to better understand issues that the oigs identified and to determine whether additional guidance is needed to help agencies improve the completeness , timeliness , accuracy , and quality of their data act submissions . omb staff explained to us how they have or are planning to address oig - identified issues . omb staff told us that in april 2017 the cfo council's data act audit collaboration working group was formed , which includes officials from omb , treasury , and the chief financial officers ( cfo ) council to foster collaboration and understanding of the risks that were being identified as agencies prepared and submitted their data . the working group also consults with cigie , which is not a member of the working group , but its representatives attend meetings to help the group members better understand issues involving the oig reviews and the ig guide .