examples of these programs are described below . automated commercial environment ( ace ) : ace is a cbp program that was begun in 2001 to modernize trade processing and support border security by , among other things , fully automating commercial import and export data processing and facilitating information sharing among federal agencies with a trade - related mission . ace capabilities are being delivered in a series of increments , and thus far operational capabilities include screening cargo and conveyances , analyzing data to support targeting of high - risk entities , and processing truck manifests electronically . future increments are to provide additional screening and combined manifest processing across all types of transportation . through fiscal year 2009 , dhs has been appropriated about $2.7 billion for ace , and for fiscal year 2010 , the department has requested about $268 million . united states visitor and immigrant status indicator technology ( us - visit ) : this program dates to 2002 and is within the national protection and programs directorate . it is to enhance the security of our citizens and visitors , ensure the integrity of the u.s. immigration system , protect privacy , and facilitate legitimate trade and travel . the program is to achieve these goals by , among other things , ( 1 ) collecting , maintaining , and sharing information on certain foreign nationals who enter and exit the united states ; ( 2 ) identifying foreign nationals who have overstayed or violated the terms of their visit or who can receive , extend , or adjust their immigration status ; ( 3 ) detecting fraudulent travel documents , verifying visitor identity , and determining visitor admissibility through the use of biometrics ( digital fingerprints and a digital photograph ) ; and ( 4 ) facilitating information sharing and coordination within the immigration and border management community . dhs has delivered us - visit capabilities in a series of increments . as a result , a biometrically enabled entry capability has been operating at about 300 air , sea , and land poes since december 2006 ( 115 airports , 14 seaports , and 154 of 170 land ports ) . since 2004 , dhs has evaluated a number of biometric exit solutions , and several exit pilot evaluations are currently underway . however , an exit capability is not yet operational . for future information regarding this testimony , please contact randolph c. hite , director , information technology architecture and systems issues , at ( 202 ) 512-3439 , or hiter@gao.gov . other individuals who made key contributions to this testimony were kathleen agatone , mathew bader , justin booth , james crimmer , deborah davis , elena epps , ash huda , john p. hutton , tonia johnson , neela lakhmani , anh le , anne mcdonough - hughes , gary mountjoy , sabine paul , tomas ramirez , jr. , amelia shachoy , and teresa smith . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .