ii for further information ) . in narrative responses to our survey questions relating to job classification , one chco council member representing a large department , for example , recognized opm's work to develop job family standards . conversely , a council member representing an independent agency said he was not aware of any significant opm - led reforms related to classification . for those respondents who said they were aware of any opm efforts to reform the classification process , we also asked about the extent to which opm's efforts had helped their agencies and about their level of satisfaction or dissatisfaction with such opm efforts and related proposals . ( check one. ) number of respondents very satisfied somewhat satisfied neither satisfied nor dissatisfied no basis to judge / not applicable q10 . at the current time , who should take the lead in furthering the automation of federal hiring processes ? ( check one. ) number of respondents no further automation needed departments / agencies opm none of the above ( please explain: ) a job announcement is a tool in the recruitment process that provides an important opportunity to make a first impression on potential applicants , and may strongly influence their decision to apply for a position . job announcements should be clear , concise , and attractive and make potential job applicants want to apply . federal agencies post federal jobs on the internet - based usajobs database , which is operated by opm . has your department / agency made efforts to improve its job announcements and web postings ? number of respondents yes no - - skip to q15 not sure - - skip to q15 q13 . to what extent has opm assisted your department / agency in improving job announcements and web postings ? ( check one. ) to what extent is your department / agency using the newly authorized category rating flexibility in its hiring process ? ( check one. ) very great extent great extent moderate extent some extent little or no extent – skip to q23 no basis to judge / not applicable – skip to q23 8 22a . please briefly describe how your department / agency is using the newly authorized category rating flexibility . number of respondents q23 . how satisfied or dissatisfied are you with assistance that opm has provided your department / agency in improving job announcements and web postings ? ( check one. ) number of respondents very satisfied somewhat satisfied neither satisfied nor dissatisfied no basis to judge / not applicable q15 . number of respondents automation has the potential to streamline the hiring process by generating vacancy announcements , helping determine if a job applicant meets eligibility and basic job qualifications , and assessing the relative merits of the qualified candidates . the use of an automated system could also allow managers and human capital staff to easily document their decisions . both private vendors and opm offer software that can automate agency hiring processes . has your department / agency made efforts to automate any significant parts of its hiring process ? to what extent has opm assisted your department / agency in automating its hiring processes ?