gao - 06-764 . for information about this testimony , contact stephen l. caldwell at ( 202 ) 512-9610 or john hutton at ( 202 ) 512-4841 . other individuals making key contributions to this testimony include michele mackin , christopher conrad , and adam couvillion . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . each of these three areas is discussed in more detail below . while we recognize that the coast guard has taken steps to address our findings and recommendations , aspects of the deepwater program will require continued attention . a project of this magnitude will likely continue to experience other problems as more becomes known . we have ongoing work to monitor and evaluate the coast guard's efforts . our previous work and recommendations were based on concerns about the coast guard's program management . for example , we reported in 2004 that the coast guard had not adequately communicated to its operational personnel decisions on how new and old assets would be integrated and how maintenance responsibilities would be divided between government and contractor personnel . we also found that the coast guard had not adequately staffed its program management function . despite some actions taken to more fully staff the deepwater program , we reported that in january 2005 shortfalls remained . while 244 positions were assigned to the program , only 206 were filled , resulting in a 16 percent vacancy rate . one of the key program management concerns we had , and one that is worth highlighting , is the effectiveness of ipts . ipts are the coast guard's primary tool for managing the deepwater program and overseeing the system integrator . our past work has found that ipts can improve both the speed and quality of the decision - making process . they can make decisions involving significant trade - offs without relying unduly on other organizations for information or approval . in our prior work , we studied successful ipts in commercial firms and found that effective teams have ( 1 ) expertise to master different facets of product development , ( 2 ) responsibility for day - to - day decisions and product delivery , ( 3 ) key members who are either physically colocated or connected through virtual means to facilitate team cohesion and the ability to share information , and ( 4 ) control over their membership , with membership changes driven by each team's need for different knowledge . we identified two elements as essential to determining whether a team is in fact an ipt: the knowledge and authority needed to recognize problems and make cross - cutting decisions expeditiously . knowledge is sufficient when the team has the right mix of expertise to master the different facets of product development . authority is present when the team is responsible for making both day - to - day decisions and delivering the product .