follow up with the community . after completing the visit , the specialists who conducted the visit are to ensure that the community resolves deficiencies and violations found during the visit in a timely manner . specialists are to consider additional action , including enforcement actions , if deficiencies remain . in our visits to nfip communities , officials told us that community assistance visits generally were consistent with the process we found documented in fema's guidance . for example , community officials said specialists toured the floodplains to observe structures ( such as new construction , renovations , and waterfront developments ) and inspected community files , including permits and elevation certificates . the community officials said specialists generally spent from 1 to 7 days on site performing their reviews . until recently , fema's guidance documents stated that its goal was to visit all communities it considered to be high - risk every 5 years . fema designated some communities as high - risk based on factors including the community's size , number of flood insurance policies , and number of previously damaged structures . if fema does not know how effectively this process operates , it could miss opportunities to use the process to reduce the financial exposure of nfip . nfip communities that we visited reported varying levels of access to nfip claims data and information . according to fema guidance , the agency should provide local officials with information on their community that includes the number of flood insurance policies in force , dollar amount of coverage , and the number of claims . nfip communities also can access information on publicly available data on claims payouts . officials in some communities we visited were able to access claims data while officials in other communities were not . some officials with whom we spoke were unsure whether access was permissible . for example , an nfip community official in texas said that fema told his office they could not provide him with the data when he asked for it . another texas official said that typically the communities do not have access to data on flood losses and claims paid . in florida , an official said that she was able to access some data on nfip claims in her area as long as the community did not use the data to make substantial damage determinations . community officials told us that it would be helpful for them to access nfip claims data after a flood . for example , a number of community floodplain managers told us that having nfip claims information from fema would benefit their flood recovery efforts because it would allow them to better target their substantial damage assessments and make that process more efficient . document findings . within 30 days of the visit , the specialists are to enter information obtained from the visit , including specific information on deficiencies and violations , into fema's community information system . lower - risk communities were designated to receive a community assistance contact , training , or other contact without regard to time frame . fema officials with whom we spoke noted that the risk factors used to designate communities had not been updated since 2010 .