i would be happy to respond to any questions you may have . these practices generally align with those we previously identified . based on this prior work , we have identified several practices that may be especially useful for agencies to help ensure telework programs contribute to continuity of operations during covid - 19 and other major emergencies . these practices may be especially important if substantial numbers of employees remain out of their workplaces for an extended period or if agencies need to reverse their reentry decisions based on changing public health circumstances . in addition , agencies' experiences with telework during the current pandemic may suggest opportunities to increase the availability of telework in the future . these practices can be grouped into four general categories: ( 1 ) policies and guidance related to telework ; ( 2 ) technology ; ( 3 ) performance management ; and ( 4 ) program evaluation . major emergencies , such as a pandemic , underscore the importance of establishing and updating clear policies and guidance related to telework as agencies' continuity of operations may depend on employees working remotely for extended periods . agencies should assess whether their policies and guidance were sufficient to ensure that their workforces were telework ready and understood the agency's expectation of employees regarding teleworking during this emergency . the current crisis presents an opportunity for agencies to assess their established policies or requirements to ensure that they ( 1 ) balance employees' personal circumstances and work responsibilities , and ( 2 ) effectively facilitated communication and engagement among teleworkers , managers , and coworkers . agencies should institute processes for communicating human - capital guidance for emergencies ( eg , pay , leave , benefits ) to ensure they worked effectively . for example , agencies should consider whether emergency employees ( including coop employees ) knew in advance about their mission critical status . if not , agencies should ensure that , in case of future emergencies including a potential resurgence of covid - 19 , employees are notified about requirements to report for work , remain at work , work at home , or report to an alternative work site when government operations are disrupted . similarly , agencies should consider whether their guidance on workplace health and safety issues was adequate to ensure that teleworkers had safe and adequate places to work off - site , and whether information - security training was provided to all individuals , or managers of individuals , who teleworked during the current pandemic . it is important for agencies to correct any identified deficiencies in the guidance and training to improve the use of telework going forward , including for future emergency situations that may again require telework . we have reported that technology concerns are frequently cited barriers to telework . to effectively use telework as a tool to continue operations during major emergencies , agencies must have an appropriate information technology infrastructure in place that allows large numbers of employees to telework simultaneously .