those that did and responded to our survey reported a variety of licensing requirements . for example , some states did not require licenses unless appraisers planned to work with federally related transactions , while other states required appraisers to be either licensed or certified to perform real estate appraisals , even for transactions that are not federally related . the states' programs typically included temporary and reciprocal licensing provisions , though as discussed below , the provisions varied . ( title xi requires states to recognize on a temporary basis real estate appraisers who have been certified or licensed by another state if certain conditions are met , and encourages states to develop reciprocity agreements that readily authorize appraisers who are licensed by and in good standing with their home state to perform appraisals in other states. ) in addition to conducting certification and licensing activities , states with certifying and licensing agencies are required under title xi to provide the appraisal subcommittee with the names of those appraisers who become certified or licensed in accordance with title xi , and to collect from them an annual registry fee that goes to the subcommittee . all of our survey respondents reported that they approve courses for appraisers' education or training , enforce state regulations concerning appraisals , and investigate complaints . over half of the states reported that they had adopted appraisal standards in addition to those set by the asb . although the states are responsible for the certification and licensing of appraisers , the appraisal subcommittee has a role in ensuring that state qualifications satisfy title xi objectives . under title xi , the federal financial institution regulatory agencies are to accept a state's certifications and licenses unless the appraisal subcommittee issues a written finding that the state certifying and licensing agency has failed to recognize and enforce the standards , requirements , and procedures of title xi ; does not have enough authority to carry out its functions under title xi ; or does not make decisions on appraisal standards and qualifications or supervise appraiser practices in a way that carries out the purposes of title xi . title xi requires that the federal financial institution regulators prescribe the categories of federally related transactions that should utilize a state certified appraiser and those that should utilize a state licensed appraiser . the statute provides that certified appraisers must be used for federally related transactions having a value of $1,000,000 or more . the federal financial institution regulators generally require the use of certified appraisers for commercial transactions of $250,000 or more and “complex” residential transactions of $250,000 or more . the regulators are responsible for determining whether other types of transactions warrant the use of a certified appraiser . accordingly , we recommended that the appraisal subcommittee explore potential options for providing future grant funding , including drawing on its surplus if necessary , to the appraisal foundation and its two boards in support of their title xi activities . in responding to our survey , most of the states identified funding and staffing deficiencies as the most serious challenges they faced in carrying out their title xi duties .