rhs did this when its guarantee program was created . for instance , rhs officials told us that they had examined fha's system when they established their guaranteed program and decided it would be more cost - effective to require lenders to dispose of properties . thus , unlike fha , rhs relies on lenders to take title of foreclosed properties and manage and market them . but , rhs and fha have not taken steps to further explore the relative benefits and costs of each other's approaches . this and other areas may represent an opportunity for the agencies to explore how to take advantage of their respective best practices , while minimizing the adverse impact on targeted populations . finally , combining management of the portfolio of existing multifamily projects might require reassessing methods for overseeing and monitoring these projects . some noted that in rhs , staff were responsible for a particular portfolio of multifamily projects and offered a direct point of communication for these projects . the products also have some important distinctions . for example , va loan guarantees are an entitlement available only to veterans who have served in a branch of the armed services and received an honorable discharge , certain currently serving members of the reserves or national guard , and spouses of veterans under certain circumstances . rhs loan guarantees are limited by income and geography . fha requires at least a 3.5-percent down payment , while rhs and va require none . additionally , loan guarantee programs vary in the extent to which the agencies cover potential losses of the lender or other mortgage holder . fha provides 100-percent coverage of eligible losses when borrowers default . this guarantee covers the unpaid principal balance , interest costs , and certain costs of foreclosure and conveyance . usda's guarantee provides coverage for eligible losses of up to 90 percent of the original principal , including unpaid principal and interest ; principal and interest on usda - approved advances for protection and preservation of the property ; and the costs associated with selling the foreclosed property . one of the most significant differences among these products is the loss coverage offered by va , which covers from 25 to 50 percent of the original principal . of the agencies , only usda ( rhs ) offers single - family housing programs specifically for low - and very low - income families . rhs offers two unique products: a subsidized direct loan for the purchase of single - family housing , with interest rates as low as 1 percent , to low - income borrowers unable to qualify for credit elsewhere , and a home repair program that offers grants or loans ( with interest rates of 1 percent ) to very low - income rural residents . rhs may subsidize the interest on single - family direct loans , depending on the borrower's income . as shown in table 1 , two of the largest tax expenditures that provide assistance to homeowners are the mortgage interest and property tax deductions , with about half of all homeowners receiving housing assistance through them . taxpayers who itemize their deductions may deduct mortgage interest and property taxes on their principal residence and a second residence .