vi ) . although some of our reports have focused on concerns about implementation actions at a specific location , in december 1998 and april 2002 we issued two broader brac status reports addressing dod - wide closure issues . these reports discussed the magnitude and precision of cost and savings estimates , the progress of environmental cleanup and property transfer , and the impact on communities and their recovery . we also issued reports in july and august 2001 that updated closure - related implementation data and reaffirmed the primary results of our prior work . a brief summary of these reports is as follows: in our december 1998 report , we concluded that brac actions were on track . cost and savings estimates were substantial but not precise because the services had not routinely updated their savings estimates , as they had their cost estimates . environmental cleanup was progressing , but it was costly and time consuming . property disposal was progressing slowly because of factors that were not completely under dod's control and that were difficult to manage , such as identifying recipients for the property and associated transfer planning and addressing environmental concerns . most communities where bases had closed were recovering , and a majority was faring well economically relative to key national economic indicators . in our july 2001 report , we concluded that estimated brac net savings had reportedly increased to $15.5 billion from the $14 billion we reported in our december 1998 report . accumulated savings began to surpass accumulated costs in fiscal year 1998 . we observed that brac savings were real and substantial , but limitations existed in dod's effort to track costs and savings that affect the precision of its estimates . in our august 2001 report , we concluded that brac closing and realignment actions were essentially completed , but the subsequent transfer of unneeded base property was only partially completed . environmental cleanup was progressing but would require many years to fully complete . most communities were recovering from the economic impacts of base closures because of several factors , such as a strong national or regional economy and federal assistance programs . in our april 2002 report , we concluded that most ( about 58 percent ) former unneeded base property had not yet been transferred to other users , the closure process was generating substantial savings ( about $16.7 billion , although the savings estimates were imprecise ) , the total expected environmental cleanup costs were still within range of the cost estimates made in 1996 , and most communities surrounding closed bases were faring well economically in relation to key national economic indicators . as of september 30 , 2004 , nearly 72 percent ( 364,000 acres ) of the approximately 504,000 acres of unneeded brac property from the prior rounds had been transferred to other federal or nonfederal entities . when leased land is added to this acreage , the amount of unneeded brac property that is in reuse increases to 90 percent . the remaining untransferred property ( 140,000 acres ) has not been transferred primarily because of environmental cleanup issues . dod has used and continues to use several methods to transfer property and expedite its reuse .