the number of relevant grant programs could be higher . as discussed below , ojp was unable to identify the total number of relevant grant programs and total number grantees awarded grants under these programs , including potential fbos . more specifically within doj: ovw identified 20 grant programs subject to statutory restrictions on religious - based hiring . from these 20 programs , 604 grantees were awarded grants , including 25 that ovw identified as potential fbos . ojp identified at least 10 grant programs subject to statutory restrictions on religious - based hiring . according to officials , ojp was not able to readily identify grant solicitations that were available to nonprofit organizations from fiscal years 2007 to 2015 and subject to statutory restrictions on religious - based hiring . this effort , according to ojp , would have required a manual search of each grant solicitation . however , ojp was able to identify at least 10 grant programs subject to statutory restrictions on religious - based hiring . from these 10 programs , at least 1,113 grantees were awarded grants , including 74 we identified as potential fbos . cops identified four grant programs subject to statutory restrictions on religious - based hiring . we provided a draft of this report to the departments of labor , justice , and health and human services . although the agencies did not provide formal comments , the departments of justice and health and human services did provide technical comments that we incorporated , as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time we will send copies of this report to the secretaries of health and human services and labor ; the attorney general ; and appropriate congressional committees . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact either diana maurer at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or maurerd@gao.gov ; or cindy brown barnes at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or brownbarnesc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix i . in addition to the contact named above , mary crenshaw , adam hoffman , and kristy love ( assistant directors ) ; david ballard ; dominick dale ; michele fejfar ; melissa hargy ; joel marus ; heidi nielson ; kelly rolfes - haase ; and katrina taylor made key contributions to this report . world vision had a policy to hire only christian staff in order to maintain its identity as a christian organization . ojp informed world vision about the grant program's statutory restriction , which prohibited religious - based hiring . world vision petitioned ojp arguing that it should be exempted from the statutory restriction based on the religious freedom restoration act of 1993 ( rfra ) .