definition of outliers . the data for some snfs must be excluded from the analysis because they result in outliers — implausibly high or low margins that suggest data error . to identify outliers , medpac uses a method based on percentiles . we used a standard statistical distribution ( lognormal ) and removed snfs where margins were plus or minus 3 standard deviations or more from the mean . we used this method because it improved our ability to detect and eliminate extreme values . application of cost adjustment . medpac adjusted 1999 cost data for freestanding snfs that , after the implementation of the snf pps , changed from certifying a portion of their beds for use by medicare patients to certifying all or most their beds for medicare patients . this increase in certified beds resulted in the average cost per day reflecting the cost experience of a broader range of patients , many of whom may not have received skilled care . the adjustment made data more comparable over time by making costs for 1999 more similar to costs in 1997 and 1998 , which were based on a larger share of patients needing a snf level of care . to better ensure comparability of cost data across time , we made an adjustment similar to medpac's . following medpac's approach , we identified freestanding snfs for which this adjustment should be made by examining the change between years in the number of medicare - certified beds . if the number of certified beds increased 50 percent or more , over 90 percent of the snf's beds were medicare - certified , and certain other conditions were met , medpac adjusted the snf's routine costs . we used similar criteria: if a snf had over 90 percent of its beds certified as medicare and if , in addition , this percentage had changed by more than 30 percentage points from 1998 , we adjusted the snf's routine costs . the adjustment raised or lowered routine costs based on the pre - pps ratio of medicare snf routine costs per day to the entire facility's routine costs per day . we applied this adjustment in both 1999 and 2000 . we found that our criteria identified about 10 percent of snfs in 1999 and 18 percent in 2000 for which the adjustment was appropriate . without the adjustment , the median medicare margin for freestanding snfs in 1999 would have been 10.2 percent rather than 8.4 percent , and the median medicare margin in 2000 would have been 21.7 percent rather than 18.9 percent . a more refined measure of the routine costs attributable to medicare patients in all snfs would reflect the difference in nursing needs between medicare patients and other patients in the facility . to test the impact of such an adjustment , we used patient - specific data on services from cms's nursing home minimum data set ( mds ) to approximate the difference in nursing needs between medicare patients and other patients for each snf . using this estimate , we adjusted the portion of total facility routine costs attributable to employee wages and benefits , which we used as a proxy for nursing costs .