the marine corps established its process in 2003 . in 2002 , congress directed the secretary of defense to create a process to rapidly meet the urgent needs of combatant commands and the joint chiefs of staff . in 2004 , the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) established the joint rapid acquisition cell ( jrac ) to overcome institutional barriers and provide timely , effective support to facilitate meeting the urgent material and logistics requirements which combatant commanders certify as operationally critical . until 2008 , osd directed that the jrac report to the secretary of defense , through the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics ( at&l ) and the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , for monitoring and tracking joint urgent needs , facilitating the identification and resolution of issues , and providing regular status reports to the secretary and deputy secretary of defense . since 2008 , the under secretary realigned the jrac within the office of the director for defense research and engineering ( ddr&e ) and the cell resides currently under the director , rapid fielding . congress provides funding for joint urgent needs related to countering improvised explosive devices through the joint improvised explosive device defeat organization ( jieddo ) , to which it has appropriated nearly $16 billion through fiscal year 2009 . in our prior work , we have raised concerns about jieddo's management and operations and found that the organization lacks full visibility over all counter - ied initiatives throughout dod , faces difficulties with transitioning its counter - ied initiatives to the military services , and lacks criteria for counter - ied training initiatives it will fund which affects its training investment decisions . we have recommended that dod improve its visibility over all dod's counter - ied efforts , work with the military services to develop a complete transition plan for initiatives , and define criteria for funding training initiatives . air force officials stated they had one active request under their urgent needs process when we began our review , and navy officials stated they had eight active requests under their urgent needs process when we began our review . we visited forces conducting operations in the u.s. central command area of responsibility and gathered information on how they identify , document , and submit urgent requests through the urgent needs processes , and on the fielding and assessment of solutions in the theater . we conducted site visits to joint , army , and marine corps offices responsible for the respective urgent needs processes , as well as offices of officials who participate in reviewing urgent needs requests and developing funding strategies and solutions to be fielded . we reviewed existing policy and guidance applicable to joint , army , and marine corps urgent needs processes , and compared them to our standards for internal control in the federal government . we also compared actual practices , tools , and data systems used to manage the joint , army , and marine corps urgent needs processes to our internal control standards .