resource needs . epa has also yet to identify the budgetary and human resources that may be needed to implement its agencywide environmental justice plans . specifically , none of the nine plan ej 2014 implementation plans described the resources that are needed to carry out the strategies and activities detailed in the plans . according to epa's plans , the agency intends to undertake changes in operations that will impact the workload as well as roles and responsibilities of staff across the agency . these changes will include , among other things , additional processes for engaging communities during rulemaking development and additional analyses for conducting economic and risk assessments . this may involve allocating staff and funds differently to address skill gaps and workload changes . as we have reported in the past , effective strategies should describe the resources needed to accomplish established goals . epa officials told us that their most recent review of environmental justice - related resources was completed in fiscal year 2009 in preparation for the proposed fiscal year 2010 president's budget . the review , which focused on the staffing resources allocated to the office of environmental justice and to the regional offices , determined that each regional office needed additional full - time equivalents ( fte ) for staff positions to promote the integration of environmental justice within regional work . epa officials told us that as a result of the review , the agency increased the total agency staffing allocation of the office of environmental justice from 21 to 33 ftes . nonetheless , epa completed the review before it had developed its draft plan ej 2014 and did not consider the staffing needs for incorporating environmental justice in decision making across all epa program and regional offices . senior epa officials told us that they did not believe that identifying the resources associated with the activities detailed in the plan ej 2014 implementation plans was practical or necessary because they expect all epa staff to work on environmental justice . moreover , they said that they believe the new environmental justice efforts described in the implementation plans would only result in a negligible increase in resource needs because enhancing current program activities with environmental justice consideration or criteria should result in the same people doing many of the same things . for example , officials stated that they anticipate that including environmental justice considerations in economic and risk analyses conducted in support of regulatory decisions would involve adding several variables to otherwise resource intensive studies and thus would not substantially alter the resources required to complete these analyses . officials also stated that they believe a resource assessment would itself be resource - intensive and thus would only take resources away from more important program needs without a clear benefit to managers . without a clear understanding of the resources needed to integrate environmental justice considerations throughout the agency under its current plans , epa cannot ensure that its current staffing and funding resources are sufficient to meet its environmental justice goals .