see appendix i for additional details . to analyze what the tso performance data show , we examined trends in apr , pace , and asap results across time , and analyzed the results by airport categories ( x , i , ii , iii , iv ) to identify any trends among airports in different risk categories . see appendix i for further details on our data analysis . we interviewed tsa headquarters officials responsible for developing and monitoring tso training , including officials from tsa's office of training and development ( otd ) , office of human capital ( ohc ) , and the office of security operations ( oso ) . further , we interviewed staff from a total of 10 airports — including federal security directors ( fsd ) , transportation security managers , instructors , training managers , tsos , and other tsa staff , such as explosives experts , to determine how training is carried out in the field and to learn what tsa employees in the field thought about training . specifically , we conducted site visits to six airports , including three airports in category x , and one airport each in categories i , ii , and iii . further , we conducted phone interviews with officials at one airport each in categories i , ii , iii , and iv to obtain additional perspectives on how airport officials carry out training requirements locally — particularly at airports with smaller numbers of flights and passenger boardings . we selected the airports to visit in person based on factors such as airport category , geographic proximity to one another , and our analysis of the airports' tso performance on annual screening certification tests from calendar years 2009 through 2014 . for example , we calculated the average first time pass rates for screeners taking their annual proficiency review ( apr ) exams for each airport in each calendar year from 2009 to 2014 and sorted the scores by airport risk category . apr assessments are annual certification tests tsos must pass to remain employed as a screener . we then selected at least one airport from the high , low , and middle of the performance distribution and made sure to cover at least one airport in every risk category . to assess the extent to which tsa evaluates tso training , we reviewed tsa documents used for evaluating training courses , including end - of - course surveys administered to learners . further , we reviewed draft documents on tsa's training evaluation plan , including a draft management directive and draft standard operating procedures for evaluating training courses . we compared the training evaluation documentation to the kirkpatrick model for training evaluation , which is the model tsa uses as guidance for its evaluations of tso training . we also interviewed tsa headquarters officials responsible for evaluating tso training and for developing and implementing the tsa training evaluation plan . for example , we interviewed tsa officials from otd , oso , and ohc to determine the extent to which they evaluated training courses and used this information to refine future training .