we disagree . decision summaries we reviewed clearly indicated specific reasons for each reversal or remand and our analysis fully accounted for remands and reversals that were ordered by the bhr and ecab due to the introduction of new information by the claimant . for example , in the summary of one decision remanded by the ecab due to an evidence evaluation problem , the bhr had originally decided that a claimant was not entitled to benefits . the bhr decision was based on a second opinion physician's report and several reports from the claimant's two physicians' all of which preceded the bhr decision . the bhr “representative found that the opinions of the ( claimants ) attending physicians could not be afforded any great weight as their opinions were based on the fact that the ( claimant ) was performing duties requiring repetitive shoulder movements , and this was not true.” in remanding the decision , ecab determined that there were “discrepancies between the opinions of the ( claimant's physicians ) and the ( second opinion physician ) that there is a conflict in the medical opinion evidence as to the cause of the ( claimant's ) current condition and , therefore , the case will be remanded” for the appointment of a referee physician . an example of a decision where new evidence was submitted , was an ecab decision summary that stated that the decision was remanded back to the owcp district office “because ( claimant ) submitted relevant and pertinent evidence not previously considered by the office.” cases are frequently reviewed by claims examiners on arrival and may be remanded if late arriving evidence is sufficient to meet the claimant's burden of proof . these claims examiner remands prior to hearing are frequently based on the review of evidence not available to the district office examiner . it appears that the gao investigators entirely excluded these cases from their sample . owcp is incorrect . our sample , as indicated in our report , was drawn from all appealed case decisions made during a 1-year period and therefore encompassed all affirmations , remands and reversals that were made before hearings , after hearings and those for the record during that 12 month period . the percent of appeals reversed or remanded by the ecab may be the purest indicator of district office oversight or error . we note that , based on our sample , the rate of ecab remands and reversals was approximately 23 percent , which closely approximates the composite remand and reversal rate for both bhr and ecab of 25 percent . the report also conflates its analysis of remands and reversals . remands and reversals must be distinguished . a remand does not reverse the denial of a claim and direct the examiner to pay the denied benefit . it may , for example , direct the examiner to ask further questions of the reporting physician , after which the district office issues a new decision that considers the doctor's further response . the new decision may reinstate the original denial or award the benefit . we have added wording to our report to make the distinction clear . however , because our analysis focused on the same issue for both , i.e .