va concurred with this recommendation . implementing this recommendation should include providing the nsoc with appropriate authority to review logs of activity on va's network . nsoc has initiatives under way to further improve incident response capabilities . for example , it is performing an analysis to determine how best to further restrict access to the va network and is planning to purchase new incident response tools . however , it has not established a time frame for completing these actions . as noted in our prior work , elements such as specific actions , priorities , and milestones are desirable for evaluating progress , achieving results within specific time frames , and ensuring effective oversight and accountability . these threats can be unintentional or intentional . unintentional threats can be caused by software upgrades or defective equipment that inadvertently disrupt systems , as well as user error . intentional threats can come from sources both internal and external to the organization . internal threats include fraudulent or malevolent acts by employees or contractors . external threats include the ever - growing number of cyber - based attacks that can come from hackers , criminals , foreign nations , and other sources . these threat sources can exploit vulnerabilities such as those resulting from flaws in software code that could cause a program to malfunction . reports of incidents affecting va's systems and information highlight the serious impact that inadequate information security can have on , among other things , the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of veterans' personal information . for example: in january 2014 , a software defect in va's ebenefits system — a web application used by over 2.8 million veterans to access information and services — improperly allowed users to view the personal information of other veterans . according to an official from va's office of information and technology , this defect potentially allowed 5,399 users to view data of 1,301 veterans or their dependents . in june 2013 , va's former chief information security officer testified that in 2010 va's network had been compromised by uninvited visitors — nation - state - sponsored attackers — and that attacks had continued . he stated that these attackers were taking advantage of weak technical controls within va , including those for web applications that contained common exploitable vulnerabilities . he further stated that these resulted in unchallenged and unfettered access to and exploitation of va systems and information by this specific group of attackers . the federal information security management act of 2002 ( fisma ) sets forth a comprehensive framework for ensuring the effectiveness of information security controls over information resources that support federal operations and assets.other things , develop , document , and implement an agency - wide information security program , using a risk - based approach to information security management . such a program includes planning , implementing , evaluating , and documenting remedial actions to address information security deficiencies . fisma requires each agency to , among the act also assigned the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) responsibility for developing standards and guidelines that include minimum information security requirements .