part 46 ) . epa regulations authorize the agency to deviate from certain regulations on a case - by - case basis . we previously reported that epa used this deviation authority extensively to close out inactive grants without following certain closeout requirements . epa awarded about 17,000 project grants totaling $2.8 billion in fiscal years 1996 through 1999 . finally , the grants are used to identify , develop , or demonstrate pollution control techniques or to prevent , reduce , or eliminate pollution . the following examples illustrate the variety of activities funded by these grants: in february 1999 , epa awarded a $10,000 grant to monitor international , a nonprofit organization located in annapolis , maryland , to develop a feasibility study and action plan for a science and education center in indonesia . in august 1999 , epa awarded a $1.5 million grant to the west virginia university research corporation , national research center for coal and energy . with the grant funds the center was to provide technical assistance , outreach , a library of databases , maintenance of a web site , and publications on the design , implementation , and maintenance of alternative wastewater treatment and collection systems for small communities . epa awarded research project grants totaling $690.9 million . generally , these grants were to fund laboratory and other research into a variety of environmental problems , such as air pollution and its impact on asthma . for example , epa awarded a $4.6 million grant to the university of new orleans in september 1999 for research and development on technical solutions to waste management problems faced by the academic , industrial , and governmental communities . epa awarded about $408.8 million in grants to states and other government entities and to nonprofit organizations to conduct cleanup activities at specific hazardous waste sites and to implement the requirements of the superfund program . for example , in september 1999 , epa awarded a $1.5 million grant to the wisconsin department of natural resources to complete an investigation and study at a waste site in order to select a cleanup remedy for controlling the risks to human health and the environment . the senior environmental employment program , for which epa makes grants authorized by the environmental programs assistance act of 1984 , accounted for approximately $199.1 million . under this program , epa awards cooperative agreements to organizations to enable individuals 55 or older to provide technical assistance to federal , state , or local environmental agencies for pollution prevention , abatement , and control projects . for example , in september 1999 , epa awarded a $1.3 million grant to the national older worker career center to provide general support to epa's staff within the office of pesticides program . epa awarded $108.3 million in training grants to government , educational , and nonprofit entities , which provide environmental related training in a variety of topics . for example , epa awarded a $1.5 million grant in july 1999 to north carolina state university to provide state - of - the - art training courses on the clean air act amendments .