deputies committee . this interagency decision - making group , chaired by the deputy adviser to the president for national security affairs or his designee , was typically comprised of the undersecretaries of state and defense and similar officials from other agencies . for these eight decisions , the deputies committee made the final decision to vote for the proposed operation . interactions between these three levels were iterative and supported by extensive intelligence reporting . figure 3 shows the typical timing and content of consultations with the congress about the seven decisions . although neither directive 25 nor the u.n . participation act required that the executive branch consult with the congress about operational shortfalls in the proposed operations , executive branch officials recognize that “u.s . policy - makers' views on the shortfalls , challenges and risks associated with successfully undertaking an operation” should be addressed comprehensively during consultation discussions with the congress . our analysis of executive branch records and transcripts of monthly peacekeeping briefings for the senate , supplemented by our observation of similar briefings for the house , showed that the executive branch provided the congress with substantial information about the u.s. interests in all of the proposed operations and general information about their mandates , cost , and exit strategies . however , we found no evidence that the congress was informed about most shortfalls identified in executive branch assessments of the proposed operations for east timor and sierra leone . as previously discussed , these shortfalls included judgments that the proposed operations lacked adequate means to carry out their missions or their duration was not linked to realistic exit criteria . in contrast , our analysis showed that the congress was informed about most shortfalls identified in executive branch assessments of the proposed operations in the democratic republic of the congo . according to congressional staff , this information provided the congress with an opportunity to develop a more informed opinion about the proposed operations and better convey to policy - makers its views about them . the following examples illustrate our findings about the content of executive branch consultations . prior to the may 1999 decision to support the u.n. mission in east timor , executive branch assessments identified four directive 25 shortfalls in the proposed operation . for example , 13 assessments questioned whether the operation's mandate was appropriate , in part because the role and objectives of the civilian police component were unclear . similarly , five assessments questioned whether the operation's duration was tied to realistic exit criteria . in the months before the may decision , executive branch officials briefed the congress at least 10 times about peacekeeping issues . our analysis of executive branch and congressional records showed that those briefings provided substantial information about ( 1 ) how the proposed operation would advance the united states' substantial security , political , and commercial interests in indonesia ; ( 2 ) the threat to international peace and security posed by the violent attacks in civilians ; and ( 3 ) the necessity of u.n. action to ensure a free and fair vote . additionally , these briefings provided information about one shortfall — concerns about whether the preconditions for a peacekeeping operation existed in east timor .