mr. chairman this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the committee may have at this time . for further information on this testimony , please contact cathleen a. berrick at ( 202 ) 512-3404 or berrickc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . in addition to the contact named above , chris currie ; joe dewechter ; vanessa deveau ; thomas lombardi ; steve morris , assistant director ; meg ullengren ; and margaret vo made contributions to this testimony . dhs and tsa officials generally agreed with these recommendations . we will continue to evaluate tsa's efforts to develop and implement secure flight as part of our ongoing review . our work has identified homeland security challenges that cut across dhs's and tsa's mission and core management functions . these issues have impeded the department's and tsa's progress since its inception and will continue to confront the department as it moves forward . a number of additional projects have initiated procurements or are being researched and developed . for example , tsa has procured 34 scanners for screening passenger casts and prosthetic devices to be deployed in july 2008 . in addition , tsa has procured 20 checkpoint explosive detection systems and plans to deploy these in august 2008 . further , tsa plans to finish its testing of whole body imagers during fiscal year 2009 and begin deploying 150 of these units by fiscal year 2010 . despite tsa's efforts to develop passenger checkpoint screening technologies , we reported that limited progress has been made in fielding explosives detection technology at airport checkpoints in part due to challenges s&t and tsa faced in coordinating research and development efforts . for example , we reported that tsa had anticipated that the explosives trace portals would be in operation throughout the country during fiscal year 2007 . however , due to performance and maintenance issues , tsa halted the acquisition and deployment of the portals in june 2006 . as a result , tsa has fielded less than 25 percent of the 434 portals it projected it would deploy by fiscal year 2007 . in addition to the portals , tsa has fallen behind in its projected acquisition of other emerging screening technologies . for example , we reported that the acquisition of 91 whole body imagers was previously delayed in part because tsa needed to develop a means to protect the privacy of passengers screened by this technology . while tsa and dhs have taken steps to coordinate the research , development and deployment of checkpoint technologies , we reported in february 2007 that challenges remained . for example , tsa and s&t officials stated that they encountered difficulties in coordinating research and development efforts due to reorganizations within tsa and s&t . since our february 2007 testimony , according to tsa and s&t , coordination between them has improved .