guidance . noaa has developed several guidance documents to help state coastal zone managers and others identify specific ways marine coastal ecosystems may be used to help withstand the potential impacts of climate change and enhance the resilience of coastal areas . for example , in 2015 , noaa developed its guidance for considering the use of living shorelines to provide information on how to use natural ecosystems , such as oyster reefs or marshes , to reduce coastal erosion caused by intense storms , wave erosion , or sea level rise . in addition , in 2016 , noaa issued a guide for considering climate change in coastal conservation . the guide provides coastal managers a step - by - step approach to considering climate change in coastal conservation planning , with links to relevant tools , information , and other resources . officials from 19 of the 25 state coastal zone management programs said noaa's guidance was generally useful , but officials from 14 of these programs said that noaa's guidance alone is not sufficient to plan or implement actions that enhance ecosystem resilience and address climate change risks . officials from one state , for example , said that noaa's guidance on using living shorelines is helpful for general purposes such as educating the public on the benefits of this technique , but that the guidance does not cover all shoreline types , such as gravel beaches , exposed rocky shores , or tidal flats . noaa officials said that using living shorelines as a strategy to enhance coastal resilience is a relatively new technique , and as coastal managers gain more experience with its use on different types of shorelines , noaa plans to incorporate this information into the assistance it provides to coastal states . noaa officials also said that the guidance was not intended to be a comprehensive source of technical information on living shoreline techniques , but rather to provide information on key technical and policy considerations in planning and designing shoreline management projects . training . noaa has developed instructor - led and online training on topics such as the use of marine coastal ecosystems for improving community resilience and understanding how to use the tools found in the digital coast as a way to plan for and take action to address the potential impacts of climate change . for example , from 2014 to 2016 , noaa provided training to over 250 state coastal zone managers and other state practitioners across the country on identifying various types of flooding in coastal areas and methods for mapping potential flooding scenarios . similarly , during the same time period , noaa officials said they offered 11 3-day climate adaptation workshops across the country that covered a variety of climate - related topics including methods for assessing the vulnerability of coastal areas and options for using ecosystems , such as wetlands , to provide flood protection . officials from 16 of the 25 state coastal zone management programs told us that they viewed the training provided by noaa on topics related to climate change and ecosystem resilience as helpful .