we did not receive such a paper . after seeing this reference in dod's comments , we contacted cce to request a copy of this document , but as of our report issuance date , we had not received it . gsa agreed with our recommendation that the agency strengthen controls to guard against situations where contractors advertise services on the gsa advantage web site that are not in their underlying schedule contracts . gsa noted that while it provides limited oversight of the orders issued under schedule contracts , it takes actions to educate customers about how best to use the contracts . gsa also pointed out that because the revised special item number category “acquisition management support” has been implemented under the mobis schedule , contracting for contract specialist work is now within the scope of that schedule . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the secretary of the army ; the commander , aca ; the commander , cce ; the administrator of gsa ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will provide copies to others on request . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report or need additional information , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or huttonj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . staff acknowledgments are provided in appendix iv . to learn more about the use and roles of contractors providing contract specialist services , we conducted a case study under the authority of the comptroller general to conduct evaluations on his own initiative . we selected the army's contracting center of excellence ( cce ) , in the washington , d.c. , area , as one department of defense ( dod ) agency using contractors in this role based on a bid protest that had been submitted to our office . the protest , which was denied , challenged the defense contracting command – washington's ( now known as cce ) acceptance of caci , international's ( caci ) organizational conflict - of - interest mitigation plan and the evaluation of proposals for contract specialist services . in fiscal year 2007 , cce obligated almost $1.8 billion in contract actions . because nearly all of the contractor - provided contract specialists at cce during the performance of our review were employees of caci , our primary focus was on the caci contract . cce had also ordered a few contract specialists from another firm , the ravens group . in all , cce had established blanket purchase agreements ( bpa ) with four contractors in september 2006 , under general services administration ( gsa ) schedule contracts , to provide contract specialist services . to determine the extent to which and the reasons cce is relying on contractors , we obtained contract specialist staffing levels in fiscal year 2007 . we reviewed cce's task orders issued under schedule contracts using the agency's bpas for contracting support services and agency billing information .