technical suggestions have been incorporated in the report as appropriate . in the mid - 1990s , the army military history institute began developing proposed legislation for charging and retaining fees to defray costs of providing historical information to the public . the institute , whose mission is to preserve the army's history and ensure access to historical research material , was experiencing a significant increase in requests from the public while resources available to respond were decreasing . for example , the institute reported that the annual number of requests increased from about 13,000 in 1987 to 20,600 in 1995 and to 35,800 in 2000 . we visited two of the four designated military archives . our work was performed from april through july 2001 in accordance with u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the secretary of defense or his designated representative . written comments from the deputy chief financial officer , office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , are discussed in the agency comments and our evaluation section of this report and are reprinted in the appendix . we did not independently review the basis for any of the established or proposed fees . we obtained information by interviewing dod officials in the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) ; directorate for freedom of information and security review ; legislative reference service , office of general counsel ; four primary military archives ; and other offices providing historical information . also , we reviewed ( 1 ) laws , regulations , and documents related to dod providing information to public requesters and ( 2 ) documentation from the military archives and their web sites . during the same period , the number of staff members decreased from over 40 to 33 . as a result , backlogs and waiting times increased . the institute developed and submitted legislative proposals that authorized it to charge and retain fees . in response , congress enacted section 1085 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2001 , which authorizes the charging and retaining of fees by one designated primary archive in each of the four military departments . the four designated archives are the air force historical research agency at maxwell afb , alabama ; army military history institute at carlisle barracks , pennsylvania ; marine corps historical center at washington navy yard , d.c. ; and naval historical center at washington navy yard , d.c . because section 1085 does not apply to the dod offices , organizations , museums , and archives other than the four designated archives , the user charge statute and foia will continue to be the basic authority for these activities to charge fees for providing information . section 1085 does not specify a fee structure or the fees that are to be charged , but states that fees are not to exceed the costs of providing the information . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases .