( recommendation 8 ) . we provided a draft of this report to rrb , ssa , and hhs for review and comment . what steps does rrb take to calculate financial interchange amounts ? what factors , if any , account for the trends in transfers between rrb , ssa , and hhs through the financial interchange ? to what extent do the agencies provide oversight to ensure that financial interchange transfer amounts are accurate ? to address the first objective we reviewed rrb guidance and documentation to determine the methodology rrb uses for its financial interchange calculations , as well as assessments of the soundness of the methodology . we also observed rrb staff while they conducted calculations on four non - generalizable four cases — selected to provide variation in terms of the type of benefits being received — to determine the steps taken by staff . to address the second objective , we analyzed data on the amounts of financial interchange transfers from calendar year 1951 to 2015 , the number of rrb beneficiaries from fiscal year 1937 to 2016 , and the number of rail workers from calendar year 1937 to 2016 , the most recent available data . we assessed the reliability of these data by reviewing rrb documentation regarding internal controls and interviewing knowledgeable officials . we determined that the data on the number of beneficiaries and workers were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we determined that the data we report on the amounts of financial interchange transfers were sufficiently reliable for our purposes of discussing trends in transfers over time . to address the third objective , we reviewed agency policies , procedures , and documentation . we also observed rrb staff demonstrate , on the four illustrative cases described above , the safeguards to prevent errors that are built into the system they use to compute financial interchange amounts . we compared these steps taken by the agencies to criteria for using quality data and documenting agency procedures in standards for internal controls in the federal government . for all three objectives , we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations , and interviewed staff at the three agencies to provide additional context . we conducted this performance audit from january 2017 to april 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the rail industry was one of the first to pioneer private pensions for its employees in the late 19th century , and by the 1930s , these pensions were more developed than in most other industries . however , according to rrb , these private rail pensions had serious defects that were magnified by the effects of the great depression . for instance , rrb noted that the plans were generally inadequately financed and that employers could terminate the plans at will . according to rrb , this system was created separately from social security for several reasons .