( see app . furthermore , additional delays have occurred on interior and exterior stonework installation , the east front , the utility tunnel , and the house connector tunnel . for example , according to aoc's construction management contractor , during september , the sequence 2 contractor gained only 12 workdays on critical interior stonework and 10 workdays on the utility tunnel out of a possible 21 days of work . according to the construction management contractor , stonework has been delayed due a shortage of stone masons , a lack of critical pieces of stone , the need to do remedial concrete work in the orientation theaters and along the exterior concrete walls and interior concrete floors of the auditorium , and delays in getting shop drawings for stonework on the east front . according to aoc's construction management contractor , excavation work on first street for the utility tunnel has been delayed due to unforeseen conditions and the need to stop work for the former chief justice's funeral at the supreme court , and unforeseen conditions have also delayed work on the house connector tunnel . during september , the sequence 2 contractor changed the manner in which the hvac and fire protection system's commissioning work and acceptance testing would be done , with the potential result of a time savings . the changes largely involved re - sequencing work and doing work concurrently that the august schedule showed would be done sequentially . aoc told us that it has discussed these issues with its contractor and concluded that while no duplication of work or funding exists , it needs to clarify the contract's scope of work on wayfinding signage because it included more work than the contractor would actually do . mr. chairman , this concludes our statement . we would be pleased to answer any questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have . for further information about this testimony , please contact bernard ungar at ( 202 ) 512-4232 or terrell dorn at ( 202 ) 512-6923 . according to the contractor's revised schedule , these changes will result in an improvement of over 60 workdays and bring the scheduled completion date for this work to december 11 , 2006 , compared to the february 26 , 2007 , date shown in the august schedule . however , these changes have not yet been fully evaluated . aoc and its construction management contractor are reviewing the changes , as is aoc's chief fire marshal . aoc and its construction management contractor believe it will take about 30 to 60 days to complete their assessments , and aoc's chief fire marshal believes that he may have his evaluation done before the end of october . altogether , the construction management contractor has identified a total of 11 critical activity paths in the september schedule that will extend the base project's completion date beyond aoc's september 15 , 2006 , target date if expected lost time cannot be recovered or further delays cannot be prevented .