we then incorporated those substitutions into our analysis . we performed a similar comparison to determine whether the force structure would be able to sustain longer - term deployments . we compared the needs of the five illustrative scenarios that army officials believe could last more than 6 months with the planned force structure . we accepted the army's criterion that it needs to maintain a 3-to - 1 pool of troops to adhere to its 6-month deployment ceiling . our analysis , which was based on unit comparisons , included the substitutions the army had previously identified for unit types experiencing shortfalls . we did not assess defense's selection of these contingencies or the likelihood that they may occur simultaneously . to identify various actions the army might take to mitigate the shortages we identified , we gave army force planning officials the results of our analysis and discussed possible mitigating actions . during these discussions , we became aware of varying interpretations of defense guidance and whether it would permit the army to authorize personnel for units needed exclusively for contingency operations . we discussed these varying interpretations with both army and osd officials . we also analyzed relevant defense guidance provisions to understand the merits of individual interpretations . we conducted our review from march through november 2000 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the honorable donald h. rumsfeld , secretary of defense and the secretary of the army . we will also make copies available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-5140 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . the force structure requirements identified by this process were unconstrained . in other words , participants identified the logical army unit types required to carry out the designated missions . this selection of force requirements was made irrespective of whether ( 1 ) the unit types currently existed within the army force structure or ( 2 ) there were sufficient unit types to successfully carry out the army's designated mission . table 2 shows the units and personnel most heavily used for each of the seven contingencies by army branch . table 3 shows the number of units and personnel needed to meet the requirements of the seven contingencies . the following table lists those unit types for which there will be insufficient units in the army's force structure to meet the simultaneous demands of seven illustrative contingency scenarios in 2007 . the shortages shown are those that would remain even after the army substituted units with similar capabilities wherever possible . the following table lists army branches with insufficient units to sustain deployments to illustrative contingencies lasting over 6 months . the analysis assumes concurrent operations related to counterdrug activities , maritime intercept operations , peace enforcement operations , and peacekeeping operations , each of which could be expected to continue more than 6 months . the analysis also assumes that humanitarian assistance and noncombatant evacuation operations would occur concurrently , though not for an extended period . in addition to those named above , james mahaffey , leo jessup , ron leporati , and tim stone made key contributions to this report .