compile a summary of other nagpra items . section 6 of nagpra requires that each federal agency and museum prepare a written summary of any holdings or collections of native american unassociated funerary objects , sacred objects , or objects of cultural patrimony in its possession or control , based on the available information in their possession . the act requires that the summaries be completed no later than 3 years after its enactment — by november 16 , 1993 . preparation of the summaries was to be followed by federal agency consultation with tribal government officials , native hawaiian organization officials , and traditional religious leaders . after a valid claim is received by an agency or museum , and if the other terms and conditions in the act are met , a notice of intent to repatriate must be published in the federal register before any item identified in a summary can be repatriated . repatriate culturally affiliated human remains and objects . section 7 of nagpra and its implementing regulations generally require that , upon the request of an indian tribe or native hawaiian organization , all culturally affiliated nagpra items be returned to the applicable indian tribe or native hawaiian organization expeditiously — but no sooner than 30 days after the applicable notice is published in the federal register — if the terms and conditions prescribed in the act are met . nagpra assigns certain duties to the secretary of the interior , which are carried out by the national nagpra program office ( national nagpra ) within nps . in accordance with nagpra's implementing regulations , national nagpra has developed a list of indian tribes and native hawaiian organizations for the purposes of carrying out the act . the list is comprised of federally recognized tribes , native hawaiian organizations , and , at various points in the last 20 years , corporations established pursuant to the alaska native claims settlement act ( ancsa ) . since the enactment of two recognition laws in 1994 , bia has regularly published a comprehensive list of recognized tribes — commonly referred to as the list of federally recognized tribes — that federal agencies are supposed to use to identify federally recognized tribes . the recognition of alaska native entities eligible for the special programs and services provided by the united states to indians because of their status as indians has been controversial . since a 1993 legal opinion by the solicitor of the department of the interior , bia's list of federally recognized tribes has not included any ancsa group , regional , urban , and village corporations . it had also administered the nomination process for nagpra review committee members . overall , we found that most of the actions performed by national nagpra were consistent with the act , but we identified concerns with a few actions . specifically , national nagpra had developed a list of indian tribes for the purposes of carrying out nagpra , but at various points in the last 20 years the list had not been consistent with bia's policy or an interior solicitor legal opinion analyzing the status of alaska native villages as indian tribes .