pub . 108-188 authorized an annual supplemental education grant ( seg ) for the fsm and rmi in fiscal years 2005 through 2023 , to be awarded in place of grants formerly awarded to the countries under several u.s. education , health , and labor programs . the fsm and rmi are not eligible for the programs replaced by the seg during these years . unlike the compact sector grants , the amended compacts' implementing legislation authorized the seg but did not appropriate funds for it . funding for the seg is appropriated annually to the u.s. department of education ( education ) and is transferred to interior for disbursement . other provisions of the amended compacts' implementing legislation , as well as other u.s. law , make the fsm and rmi eligible for a number of additional programs . as of fiscal year 2016 , compact sector grants and the seg , each of which end in 2023 , supported a substantial portion of government expenditures in the fsm and rmi . compact sector grants and the seg supported about one - third of all fsm government expenditures . the four fsm states relied on these grants to a greater extent than the fsm national government does . in the rmi , compact sector grants and the seg supported about one - quarter of all government expenditures . the end of the compacts' programs and services agreements in 2024 would also require the fsm and rmi to bear additional costs to provide services currently provided by the united states under the agreements . compact sector grants , the seg , and other u.s. grants supported almost half of fsm national and state government expenditures in fiscal year 2016 . compact sector and supplemental education grants that end in 2023 supported approximately one - third of total fsm national and state government expenditures in fiscal year 2016 , while other u.s. grants supported an additional 15 percent of total fsm government expenditures ( see fig . while the supplemental education grant ends in 2023 , the fsm would be eligible for some of the programs that the supplemental education grant replaced after 2023 . a small number of other u.s. grants also end in 2023 . see gao - 19-648t , app . i , for a discussion of grants and programs that do and do not end in 2023 . in fiscal year 2016 , compact sector and supplemental education grants that end in 2023 supported a larger proportion of fsm state governments' expenditures than of the fsm national government's expenditures . compact sector grants and the seg supported 8 percent of national government expenditures but supported 50 percent or more of each state's government expenditures . among the fsm states , chuuk , which has both the largest population and the lowest per - capita income in the fsm , had the highest percentage of expenditures supported by u.s. grants . ( see table 2 for a summary of fsm national and state government expenditures supported by compact sector grants and the seg and by other u.s . grants. )