at that time , attrition at uspto was steadily rising . the revised fees are effective for 2005 and 2006 . similarly , as shown in table 6 , uspto has not implemented 4 of the 11 initiatives related to agility , has only implemented 1 and partially implemented 6 . these 11 initiatives are designed to further the agency's goal to create a more flexible organization and include efforts to increase electronic processing of patent applications , reduce examiners' responsibilities for literature searches , and participate in worldwide efforts to streamline processes and strengthen intellectual property protection . the status of the 6 partially implemented agility initiatives to increase electronic processing and harmonize u.s. and international practices is as follows: although uspto has largely accomplished the actions related to implementing image - based electronic processing of patent applications , it has not achieved the full extent of electronic sharing of patent documents with the european patent office the initiative had anticipated and the two offices continue to finalize security and protocols between their servers . uspto has amended rules to generally allow electronic filing of postgrant review documents and trained additional judges in streamlined procedures , but it has not defined records management schedules for electronic documents or implemented full electronic processing capabilities to support these reviews , such as text searching and the ability to receive , file , store , and view multimedia files . to ensure the availability of critical data in the event of a catastrophic failure , uspto has certified and accredited its classified system and its mission - critical and business - essential systems , uses scanning tools to identify security weaknesses , and uses intrusion detection systems , but has not acquired the hardware , software , staff , and facilities for a backup data center . to promote harmonization of patent processing among international intellectual property offices and pursue goals to strengthen international intellectual property rights of u.s. inventors , uspto participated in substantive patent treaty discussions that addressed such topics as the first - to - file ( european ) versus the first - to - invent ( u.s. ) standards , access to genetic resources , and definitions for such terms as prior art and novelty . to pursue multi - and bilateral agreements with other intellectual property offices , uspto completed pilot programs to compare search results with the japan and european patent offices and with patent offices in australia and the united kingdom . reviewing patent applications involves knowledge and understanding of highly technical subjects , but uspto does not require ongoing training on these subjects . instead , uspto only requires newly hired examiners to take extensive training on how to be a patent examiner during the first year , and all other required training is focused on legal training . for example , newly hired examiners are required , within their first 10 months at the agency , to take about 200 hours of training on such topics as procedures for examining patent applications , electronic tools used in the examination process , and patent law and evidence . in addition , almost all patent examiners are required to take a range of ongoing training on legal matters , including patent law .