ii ) . the ics sponsoring the highest number of contracts are nci , nhlbi , and nimh . ncrr also plans to sponsor a significant number of loan repayment contracts . as with most of the training and career development awards , an nih official told us that the ics were in the best position to assess applications and the clinical research career potential of awardees . in general , nih has complied with the key provisions in crea . it has increased its financial support of clinical research , expanded its clinical research activities , made improvements in its review of clinical research proposals , expanded its support of gcrcs , established new clinical research career development and training programs , and begun to implement a new extramural clinical research loan repayment program . some of nih's actions were taken prior to crea's passage and some are still being implemented . however , we identified some inconsistencies with the way that nih counts clinical research expenditures . these inconsistencies limit the precision of nih's reports of clinical research expenditures and its ability to monitor the support of clinical research . to strengthen the tracking and reporting of intramural and extramural expenditures for clinical research , we recommend that the director of nih develop and implement a consistent , accurate , and practical way for all ics to count intramural and extramural clinical research expenditures . nih reviewed a draft of this report and provided comments , which are included as appendix iii . nih concurred with our recommendation and reported that it is taking steps to implement a better , more unified system for tracking and reporting clinical research expenditures across the ics . according to nih , this new system will be implemented in fiscal year 2003 . nih also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . in particular , nih clarified its response to our questions about the peer review of clinical research . nih emphasized that it recognizes the importance of collecting data on the grouping of clinical research applications and reviewers . toward that end , nih stated that one of the responsibilities of csr's newly appointed special advisor on clinical research review will be to investigate new methods to reliably identify and track clinical research applications and clinical research reviewers . we will send copies to the secretary of health and human services , the director of nih , appropriate congressional committees , and others who are interested . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7119 or martin t. gahart at ( 202 ) 512-3596 . key contributors to this assignment were anne dievler , cedric burton , and elizabeth morrison . nhlbi is administering the majority of the k30 awards . although nih has received applications for k23 and k24 awards from a variety of clinical investigators , most applicants and awardees are physicians . nih officials told us that they are initiating plans to evaluate the new clinical research career development awards and track career outcomes .