epa concurred with these recommendations and is in the process of implementing them . to ensure that it is meeting its mission effectively , epa needs high - quality scientific and environmental information to establish priorities that reflect risks to human health and the environment , and that compare risk reduction strategies across programs and pollution problems . such information is also needed to identify and respond to emerging problems before significant damage is done to the environment . while epa has collected a vast amount of scientific and environmental data , much of the data is not complete and accurate enough to credibly assess risks and establish corresponding risk reduction strategies . it is likely that these issues will be even more difficult and expensive to solve . as the agency responsible for establishing environmental policy , epa must interact regularly with the departments of agriculture , defense , energy , the interior , state , transportation , and others . these agencies spend billions of dollars annually to comply with environmental laws and clean up past contamination . however , years of experience have demonstrated that these agencies do not always provide the support and cooperation necessary to further environmental goals . in this regard , environmental consequences were largely ignored at sites of the department of defense ( eg , in testing mustard gas at spring valley in washington , d.c. ) ; department of energy , ( eg , in using nuclear materials at rocky flats , colorado ) ; and department of the interior ( eg , in dealing with thousands of abandoned mines on federal lands ) . such sites now are likely to cost the nation hundreds of billions of dollars to correct polluted conditions . furthermore , jurisdictional conflicts have created roadblocks that are not conducive to cooperating with epa and that have sometimes resulted in placing a low priority on environmental protection . such conflicts could be addressed more effectively in the future by placing the head of the federal environmental organization on an equal footing with the heads of other federal departments . this would enable environmental issues to better compete with other national issues in policy , budgetary , and programmatic decisions as they are being made . international environmental problems involving climate change , stratospheric ozone depletion , and acid rain will require greater attention in the 21st century . on these and other issues , epa's key international functions include providing technical expertise to the state department in integrating environmental policies into environmental treaties and foreign trade agreements . for example , under the clean air act , epa played a major role in implementing the montreal protocol by issuing administrative changes to the final rule to phase out ozone - depleting substances in 1995 , and provides data and funding that support the protocol . cabinet status for epa could enhance the ability of the united states to provide leadership and assistance to the rest of the world by conveying that the nation recognizes the seriousness of domestic and global environmental problems , and that the problems are receiving adequate attention . whether or not epa becomes a cabinet - level department , the challenges that await it are formidable .