gao . medicare fee - for - service beneficiary access to physician services: trends in utilization of services , 2000 to 2002 . gao - 05- 145r . washington , d.c.: january 12 , 2005 . lake , timothy , et al . results from the 2003 targeted beneficiary survey on access to physician services among medicare beneficiaries . prepared for the centers for medicare and medicaid services . cambridge , mass . : mathematica policy research , inc. , 2004 . medicare payment advisory commission . report to the congress: medicare payment policy . washington , d.c.: 2005 . schoenman , julie , et al . 2002 survey of physicians about the medicare program . what are the characteristics of concierge care ? what aspects of concierge care are of interest to the medicare program and its beneficiaries ? to obtain information on the characteristics of concierge care , we surveyed concierge physicians about their practices and the types of services and financial arrangements they offer . because no comprehensive directory of concierge physicians was available , we identified concierge physicians through a variety of methods , including a nationwide literature search , telephone interviews , and referrals from other concierge physicians . we identified as concierge physicians those who ( 1 ) had established a direct financial relationship with patients in the form of a membership or retainer fee and ( 2 ) provided enhanced services or amenities , such as same - day appointments or preventive services not covered by patient health insurance . we located a total of 146 concierge physicians practicing in the united states . we received survey responses from 112 physicians who practiced concierge care in october 2004 . because these 112 respondents were not selected at random from a larger population of known concierge physicians , the information they provided cannot be projected to any other concierge physicians . we did not attempt to verify the accuracy of their responses . to review the aspects of concierge care that are of interest to the medicare program and its beneficiaries , we reviewed documents and interviewed officials from two hhs entities responsible for administration and oversight of the medicare program: the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) and the office of inspector general ( oig ) . we also reviewed relevant sections of medicare law and regulations ; interviewed concierge physicians and their representatives ; and in our survey , asked concierge physicians for their views on the guidance available from hhs on concierge care . to assess what is known about how concierge care may affect medicare beneficiary access to physician services , we reviewed nationwide sources of information on medicare beneficiaries' overall access to physician services , for example , reports by the medicare payment advisory commission . while we did not contact medicare beneficiaries who were patients of physicians who converted to concierge practices , we contacted organizations that medicare beneficiaries were likely to call with concerns or questions about concierge care , such as the 1-800-medicare call line . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards from may 2004 through july 2005 .