we disagree . the commission's relationship with its media services vendor has evolved into a de facto annual award . in addition , for fiscal year 2003 , the contract had a maximum value of $156,000 . we did not request records from the commission in attempt to tally a fiscal year 2003 total of funds actually spent . we did , however , tally a fiscal year 2002 total of funds spent on the media services contract and found that $131,225 was spent on a “not - to - exceed” limit of $140,000 . we have added a footnote in the report section to clarify this point . we disagree with the staff director's belief that our findings are subjective and erroneous . that resulted from those projects . of the 43 total products that resulted from these projects as of july 2003 , we included in our review the 32 issued during fiscal year 2002 . we excluded 3 products issued during fiscal year 2001 and 8 products issued or expected to be issued during fiscal years 2003 or 2004 . table 2 provides details about project names and product titles produced during fiscal year 2002 by those offices that generate headquarters commission products that result from commissioner - approved projects: the office of civil rights evaluation ( ocre ) , the office of general counsel ( ogc ) , and the office of the staff director ( osd ) . the osd product resulted from a project initiated by the staff director rather than from the commissioners . table 2 also includes a state advisory committee report from alaska because ocre staff assisted in preparing the report . the table excludes an arizona state advisory committee briefing and state advisory committee reports from iowa and pennsylvania in 2002 because ocre staff were not involved in preparing the briefing or those reports . some fiscal year 2002 projects will generate products in future years . ( see app . ii. ) this appendix lists the number of products , by type of product , issued or expected to be issued after fiscal year 2002 from projects that were ongoing during fiscal year 2002 . ( see app . our draft report clearly indicates that we found deficiencies in the project management practices at the commission . we focused largely on the role of the commissioners because they comprise the commission which , under the applicable statute , has ultimate responsibility in providing reports to congress and the president , and carrying out other statutory responsibilities . we do not concur with the staff director's comment that the commission has rejected the desirability of commissioners shaping the findings and recommendations of commission projects . commission staff play an important role in running projects and helping produce reports , but their involvement does not diminish the important role that commissioners can and should play in shaping reports on civil rights issues . we disagree that our draft failed to acknowledge the commissioners' role in helping scope projects . the draft indicates that commissioners have some involvement , albeit limited , in the planning process .