annual certification evaluations . tsa's annual evaluations assess whether canine teams meet the explosives detection certification standards established by the program . following initial training , new canine teams must demonstrate certain critical skills in order to be certified to work in their home operating environment . after initial certification , all tsa canine teams are evaluated on an annual basis to maintain certification . canine teams that fail their annual evaluation are decertified and limited to training and operating as a visible deterrent until they successfully complete the annual evaluation and are recertified to conduct screening . to achieve edc certification , canine teams must demonstrate their ability to detect hidden explosive training aids across a specified number of areas , a certain percent of the time . after passing this conventional evaluation , psc teams undergo further testing in different locations within the sterile area of an airport . to achieve psc certification , canine teams must successfully identify an explosives - carrying target / decoy in a specified number of search areas . in fiscal year 2015 , tsa conducted 673 edc annual certification evaluations and 116 psc evaluations . the fiscal year 2015 first - time pass rates for edc and psc canine teams has been designated as sensitive security information and thus cannot be included in a public report . short notice assessments . tsa conducts covert testing of canine teams to measure their effectiveness in detecting and responding to explosives odor during normal operations . these covert tests , known as snas , are conducted using one of four scenarios chosen to match a canine team's primary area of operations — an unattended bag , unattended vehicle , cargo screening , and passenger screening . annual proficiency reviews . aprs evaluate tsos' skill in performing the various checkpoint and checked baggage screening functions and all tsos must successfully complete the required apr component tests related to their job function on an annual basis as a condition of employment with tsa in their capacity as a screener . components of the apr focused on checkpoint screening specifically included tests that evaluate tsos' ability to identify prohibited items on an x - ray machine and tests that evaluate whether tsos can perform various practical skills such as pat downs , bag searches , and use of explosive trace detection technology . in calendar year 2015 , tsa conducted roughly 150,000 apr component tests focused on checkpoint screening . ( recommendation 2 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dhs for review and comment . the department's letter is included in appendix iii . in its comments , dhs generally concurred . dhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . with regard to our first recommendation that tsa explore and pursue methods to assess the deterrent effect of its passenger aviation security countermeasures , dhs concurred , noting that this may require proxy or output measures and assumptions about potential adversary choices . dhs also concurred with our second recommendation that tsa systematically evaluate the potential cost and effectiveness tradeoffs across countermeasures . this public version was also prepared in accordance with these standards .