( app . ii provides further details on actions taken to address the call to action steps for each sector. ) dhs implemented activities to mitigate the cyber risks for the chemical sector for eight of nine of the nipp's call to action steps ; however , it had not established incentives to encourage its sector partners to voluntarily invest in cybersecurity - enhancing measures . dhs has developed technical resources , cybersecurity awareness tools , and information - sharing mechanisms among its activities to enhance the sector's cybersecurity . dhs officials described other cybersecurity activities in development including updates to sector cybersecurity guidance that could include incentives ; however , they were unable to identify specific incentives to encourage cybersecurity across the sector . dhs conducted cyber mitigation activities that aligned with eight of the nine nipp call to action steps for the commercial facilities sector . dhs provided technical assistance and supported information - sharing efforts for the sector . for example , it developed a risk self - assessment tool in conjunction with sector partners to raise awareness of the importance of their cyber systems . dhs also promoted a number of information - sharing mechanisms available through its office of cybersecurity and communications , including the dissemination of alerts through the u.s. computer emergency readiness team ( us - cert ) , ics - cert , and the commercial facilities cyber working group , among others . however , dhs did not identify efforts to establish incentives to encourage commercial facilities sector partners to implement cybersecurity - enhancing measures . dhs worked to reduce risk to the communications sector through collaborative cyber risk mitigation activities that align with eight of nine nipp call to action steps . however , dhs did not establish incentives to promote cybersecurity for the sector . as previously stated , dhs and its communications sector partners completed the 2012 national sector risk assessment for communications , which examined risks from cyber incidents or events that threaten the sector's cyber assets , systems , and networks . according to dhs officials , it coordinated mitigation activities with its communications sector partners and addressed risks identified through the assessment process . in addition , officials explained that it implemented or facilitated sector - wide information - sharing mechanisms with such entities as the national cybersecurity and communications integration center , national infrastructure coordinating center , and national coordinating center for telecommunications and communications information sharing and analysis center . although dhs had not implemented specific cyber - related incentives for the communications sector , dhs officials stated that national security staff and the office of policy have been working on possible national incentives such as tax credits for future use . dhs focused cyber risk mitigation activities in seven of nine nipp call to action steps for the critical manufacturing sector . however , cyber risk mitigation activities did not include efforts to incentivize cybersecurity or support cybersecurity - related research and development . among its cyber risk mitigation activities , dhs participated in information sharing efforts through the sector coordinating council to enhance situational awareness ; and led outreach efforts to encourage diverse ( i.e.