successful commercialization . sbir successfully fosters commercialization of research results . at various points in the life of the program we have reported that sbir has been successful in increasing private sector commercialization of innovations . for example , past gao and dod surveys of companies that received sbir phase ii funding have determined that approximately 35 percent of the projects resulted in the sales of products or services , and approximately 45 percent of the projects received additional developmental funding . we have also reported that agencies were using various techniques to foster commercialization . widespread competition . the sbir program successfully attracts many qualified companies , has had a high level of competition , and consistently has had a high number of first - time participants . specifically , we reported that the number of proposals that agencies received each year had been increasing . in addition , as we reported in 1998 , agencies rarely received only a single proposal in response to a solicitation , indicating a sustained level of competition for the awards . we also found that the agencies deemed many more proposals worthy of awards than they were able to fund . for example , the air force deemed 1,174 proposals worthy of awards in fiscal year 1993 but funded only 470 . moreover , from fiscal years 1993 through 1997 , one third of the companies that received awards were first - time participants . this suggests that the program attracts hundreds of new companies annually . effective outreach . many of the projects dod funded have specialized military applications while nih projects have access to the biomedical market in the private sector . moreover , we found that sbir promotes research on the critical technologies identified in lists developed by dod and / or the national critical technologies panel . generally agencies reviewed these listings of critical technologies to develop research topics or conducted research that fell within one of the two lists . we have also identified areas of weaknesses and made recommendations that , if addressed , could strengthen the program further . many of our recommendations for program improvement have been either fully or partially addressed by the congress in various reauthorizations of the program or by the agencies themselves . for example , duplicate funding . in 1995 , we identified duplicate funding for similar , or even identical , research projects by more than one agency . a few companies received funding for the same proposals two , three , and even five times before agencies became aware of the duplication . contributing factors included the fraudulent evasion of disclosure by companies applying for awards , the lack of a consistent definition for key terms such as “similar research,” and the lack of interagency sharing of data on awards . in response to our recommendations , sba strengthened the language agencies use in their application packages to clearly warn applicants about the illegality of entering into multiple agreements for essentially the same effort and developed internet capabilities to access sbir data for all of the agencies .