( see fig . ( see app . the hha receives the balance of the payment after the episode is complete . special payment adjustments exist for hhas with beneficiaries who have few visits during an episode or who have partial episodes , and for hhas with outlier beneficiaries . cms significantly refined the home health pps effective january 1 , 2008 . as of november 2008 , cms contracted with three regional home health intermediaries ( rhhi ) to process and pay home health claims . in processing and paying claims , rhhis are responsible for minimizing improper payments . the rhhis also are responsible for screening hha enrollment applications and making recommendations to cms and state survey agencies about whether the applications should be approved . as of november 2008 , cms contracted with four program safeguard contractors ( psc ) that are responsible for preventing , detecting , and deterring fraud in the medicare home health benefit through benefit integrity investigations and referrals to law enforcement . pscs coordinate their activities with the rhhi responsible for claims processing in their jurisdiction . pscs also work with the oig and other law enforcement organizations to pursue criminal or civil penalties . specific activities undertaken by pscs to identify and prevent fraud and abuse include analysis of claims data to identify improper billing that may indicate fraud or abuse and on - site visits to beneficiaries and providers . medical review , performed either before or after a claim is approved for payment , is one way that rhhis and pscs ensure that claims are being paid correctly . medical review involves obtaining hha documentation , such as the beneficiary's plan of care and medical records , to determine whether the beneficiary meets medicare's coverage criteria for home health services , whether the care provided was reasonable and necessary , and whether the claim was coded properly . cms and its contractors can take a series of actions against hhas with a pattern of improper billing or that are suspected of engaging in fraud or abuse . initially , an rhhi can educate an hha about proper billing if the hha's billing pattern appears to be aberrant . rhhis can flag a percentage of the hha's submitted claims for medical review if the hha's billing pattern appears aberrant or there is knowledge of abuse in the service area . rhhis can also require the hha to return any money it received in excess of the proper amount ( called an overpayment ) or hold payment for current claims while an overpayment is calculated if there is reason to believe that the hha has engaged in fraud or has been overpaid in the past ( called a payment suspension ) . finally , if cms or its contractors determine that an hha billed medicare for a service that could not have been provided on the date claimed , cms can revoke the hha's medicare billing privileges and it would be barred from re - enrolling in the medicare program for 1 to 3 years . stakeholders said that hhas offered beneficiaries payments in the form of cash or other goods , such as cigarettes or alcohol .