we disagree . as discussed in this report , we identified several instances where bea did not follow best practices , policies , and guidance . for example , we requested files that provided documentation of the analyses bea conducted to determine changes to its estimation methodology . bea provided written descriptions of its regression analysis in a conference paper . bea staff told us that its analysis files had been saved among many partially complete files and that it would be difficult to identify the files that led to the current version of the model . bea's best practice standards require that all methodological changes and the rationale for the changes be clearly documented . as we describe in the report , without documentation bea could not effectively convey and support the rationale and appropriateness of its methodology . we were unable to verify , among other things , the accuracy of much of bea's data or fully understand the selection of its methodology . as we stated in the report , documentation of analysis , testing , and evaluations of models should show evidence of adherence to procedures and policies that are part of an effective quality assurance framework . bea did not provide documentation that reflected such a framework . for example , bea officials described conducting managerial and external reviews of the model's revision but provided only the minutes to one management review meeting indicating that the model had been discussed but was still under consideration . though we requested documentation of final approval of the model by the management committee , bea told us that it had nothing further to provide . bea also described an external review of its model revision that was done by an external econometrician for quality assurance purposes . when we asked for documentation of this review , however , bea told us that it had been informal and that no written opinion had been provided . in addition , bea stated that our ability to reproduce the agency's estimates showed that its documentation was adequate . however , we did not attempt to reproduce bea's estimates . rather , we ran the computer program that bea provided on the data created by bea to replicate a few intermediate steps in its methodology . by replicating these steps , we found inconsistencies between bea's description of the analysis and what was actually done , and other errors . we did not and would not have been able to reproduce the analysis , based on the documentation that bea provided , that led to the final remittance estimates or even create the dataset used by bea from its listed sources . bea noted that it provided us with new summaries to help explain certain aspects of its methodology , but asserted that we conflated this additional effort with an inadequacy of internal control and initial documentation . however , we maintain that in some cases , bea provided these summaries because it was unable to provide us with original documentation . for example , we asked for records of analysis that supported the calculations of 2012 and 2013 estimates . bea told us that the documents were created only when each year's estimate was produced and were not saved .