ii . as specified in fepca and similar to the process for across - the - board adjustments , the president may decide to either provide locality pay adjustments based on the pay agent's recommendation , or provide for alternative pay adjustments based on national emergency or serious economic conditions affecting the general welfare . additionally , congress may legislate an average percent increase that is different from the pay agent's recommendation or the president's alternative plan ; this is not part of the process specified by fepca . opm also reviews a sample of case files to check that the awards granted meet the requirements of the law and and assists agencies in leading their own evaluations . regulations,opm officials said that they have identified the following issues in regard to pay increases and awards: some agencies tried to circumvent limitations on award amounts by issuing several incremental awards within a short time period . some agencies granted quality step increases to compensate for low award budgets . some agencies' human capital management systems did not link individual performance expectations and recognition through pay increases and awards to the accomplishment of specific mission - related goals or milestones . when opm determines that an agency violated the law or regulations , such as circumventing award limitations by issuing several incremental awards within short periods of time , it requires the agency to take corrective action and respond to opm with evidence of how it addressed or plans to address the violation within 60 days . for example , according to an opm official , corrective action may result in the agency recovering the award from the recipient and correcting the documentation for the award . when opm observes an issue with an agency's award implementation that does not violate regulations , opm may recommend to the agency improvements that could be made . for example , when opm determines that an agency has granted quality step increases to compensate for a low award budget , it recommends that the agency review its policies for granting pay increases and awards to ensure the policies comply with the intent of the laws and regulations . according to an opm official , opm requires an agency to respond to the recommendations made , but the agency is not required to take action on addressing the issue . the different study designs used by the authors of six studies resulted in varying conclusions on how federal pay differed from private sector or nonfederal pay . as shown in table 2 , conclusions varied on which sector had the higher pay ( which does not include benefits ) and the size of pay disparities . all but one of the studies estimated the difference in pay after controlling for some personal and job - related attributes that can affect pay levels such as education and locality . this remaining difference is sometimes called the unexplained difference because it persists after controlling for attributes that can affect pay . however , the overall pay disparity number does not tell the whole story ; each of the studies that examined whether differences in pay varied among categories of workers , found such variations ( see table 2 ) .