pub . 111-376 , ยง 3 , 124 stat . personnel security division ( psd ) , including interviewing psd officials who are responsible for deciding whether an applicant or incumbent officer or agent is suitable for hire or continued employment . we compared cbp's integrity - related controls , as applicable , with standards in standards for internal control in the federal government and standard practices from the project management institute . furthermore , we conducted visits to four locations along the southwest u.s. border to observe the implementation of various integrity - related controls and obtain perspectives from cbp officials at these locations on the implementation of integrity - related controls . we selected these locations on the basis of a variety of factors , including the colocation of cbp ia with ofo offices and u.s. border patrol ( usbp ) sectors along the southwest border and the number of allegations against or arrests of cbp employees for corruption or misconduct . because we selected a nonprobability sample of locations to visit , the information we obtained from these visits cannot be generalized to all field locations . however , observations obtained from these visits provided us with a greater understanding of cbp's integrity - related initiatives . to evaluate cbp's integrity strategy , including how the agency incorporates lessons learned from prior misconduct and corruption cases , we reviewed cbp strategic planning documents and other policy statements on integrity initiatives . in particular , we analyzed these documents against the requirements set forth in cbp's fiscal year 2009- 2014 strategic plan . in addition , we analyzed all available postcorruption analyses reports , which identify deficiencies that may have enabled cbp employees to engage in corruption - related activities , against ofo and usbp program requirements . we interviewed cbp officials in washington , d.c. , as well as during our site visits , regarding cbp's integrity strategy and the extent to which cbp is using lessons learned from prior corruption and misconduct cases to guide changes in policies and procedures , as appropriate . we conducted this performance audit from december 2011 to december 2012 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . appendix i presents more details about our scope and methodology . cbp is the largest uniformed law enforcement agency in the united states , with approximately 21,400 bpas patrolling between the nation's ports of entry and more than 20,000 cbpos stationed at air , land , and seaports nationwide at the end of fiscal year 2011.southwest border , there are about 5,500 cbpos and 18,000 bpas as of the end of fiscal year 2011 . cbpos , based within ofo , are responsible for processing immigration documentation of passengers and pedestrians and inspecting vehicles and cargo at u.s. ports of entry .