our interviews with other experts are ongoing . in addition , we met with officials and staff from interagency bodies coordinating the federal response to climate change , including ostp , ceq , and usgcrp , as well as the department of energy ( doe ) , which coordinates the climate change technology program ( cctp ) — a multiagency research and development program for climate change technology . we also identified and reviewed federal laws and international agreements ; interviewed international law experts ; and interviewed officials from the environmental protection agency's ( epa ) office of general counsel , marine pollution control branch , and the office of water to discuss how federal laws are being or could be applied to activities related to geoengineering . our work is ongoing , and we are continuing to collect and analyze information related to the objectives and findings presented in this testimony . we conducted our work on this testimony from december 2009 to march 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . substantial questions remain on the efficacy and potential environmental impacts of proposed geoengineering approaches , in part , because geoengineering research and field experiments to date have been limited . according to the experts we spoke with , research related to proposed srm geoengineering approaches is sparse . according to recent studies , much of the research into srm approaches to date has been limited to modeling studies to assess the effects of either injecting sulfur aerosols into the stratosphere or brightening clouds to reduce incoming solar radiation at the earth's surface and produce a cooling effect . for example , one study found that combining a reduction of incoming radiation with high levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide could have substantial impacts on regional precipitation — potentially leading to reductions that could create drought in some areas . based on our literature review and interviews with experts to date , only one study has been published for a field experiment related to srm technologies — a russian experiment that injected aerosols into the middle troposphere . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . contributors to this testimony include: john stephenson , director ; tim minelli , assistant director ; ana ivelisse aviles ; charles bausell jr. ; frederick childers ; judith droitcour ; lorraine ettaro ; brian friedman ; cindy gilbert ; gloria hernandezsaunders ; eric larson ; eli lewine ; madhav panwar ; timothy persons ; jeanette soares ; joe thompson ; and lisa van arsdale . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .