this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any question you may have at this time . if you or your staff has any questions concerning this testimony , please contact christopher p. currie at ( 404 ) 679-1875 or curriec@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this statement include kathryn godfrey ( assistant director ) , susanna kuebler ( analyst - in - charge ) , nick bartine , jeffrey cirillo , michele fejfar , eric hauswirth , tracey king , dawn locke , and adam vogt . we plan to report in fall 2019 . we reported in october 2017 that opportunities remain to enhance threat awareness across the entire biodefense enterprise , leverage shared resources , and inform budgetary tradeoffs among various threats and agency programs . as depicted in figure 1 , we reported in october 2017 that key biodefense agencies , including dhs , dod , hhs , usda , and epa , rely on intelligence and global surveillance information , scientific study of disease agent characteristics , and analysis to better understand threats and help make decisions about biodefense investments . these activities are often conducted to support the agencies' mission or to understand a specific threat . additionally , to facilitate collaboration among government partners , federal agencies with key roles in biodefense share biological threat information through many different mechanisms including interagency bodies , working groups at the agency and executive level , formalized agreements , colocation , joint projects and funding efforts , and shared expertise ( see figure 2 ) . the collaborative mechanisms in which the key agencies in our october 2017 review participated may facilitate information sharing in support of specific federal activities and in individual programs , or in response to specific biological events after they begin to unfold . however , as we reported in october 2017 , there was no existing mechanism that could leverage threat awareness information to direct resources and set budgetary priorities across all agencies for biodefense . the nation faces many biological threats , including naturally occurring diseases that affect human , animal , and plant health , and biological weapons used by state or nonstate actors . without a mechanism that is able to assess the relative risk from biological threats across all sources and domains , the nation may be limited in its ability to prioritize resources , defenses , and countermeasures against the most pressing threats . the strategy and nspm - 14 outline requirements for participating agencies that lay the ground work for a more systematic , cross - government examination of existing programs . the effort offers the potential for the nation to progress toward more integrated and enterprise - wide threat awareness and to use that information to identify opportunities to leverage resources , but this will take time and entails a change in the way participating agencies have traditionally operated . because implementation of the strategy is in its early stages , it is too soon to assess how , if at all , it might address this challenge .