other challenges . in addition to those mentioned above , a number of officials mentioned other challenges states face in improving teen driver programs , including: overcoming public attitudes that lead to reckless behavior . several officials commented that parents and teens do not always understand the risks associated with teen driving . in particular , officials were concerned about attitudes toward alcohol , including parents who permit teens and their friends to consume alcohol when they are at home and teens' tendencies to binge drink . challenges with the judicial system . many officials suggested several challenges related to punishing teens who violate driving laws , such as allowing teen drivers to enter into plea bargains , and the large degree of judicial discretion that may result in minimal and inconsistent penalties . despite the recent decline in fatalities , teen drivers remain at greater risk than any other group of drivers in the united states . available research indicates that gdl systems are associated with lower teen fatality rates , and most states have a three - stage gdl system that includes key requirements recommended by safety experts . however , because limited research has been conducted on the optimum provisions and how they might interact with other variables , states might be missing opportunities for strengthening their gdl systems . while nhtsa and other researchers have conducted a range of studies concerning teen driver safety and a number of additional research initiatives are under way , gaps still exist in researching the effectiveness of specific gdl provisions . in particular , research is lacking on specific provisions for minimum entry age , the learner's permit stage , nighttime and passenger restrictions , bans on electronic devices , driver education , and parental involvement . we recognize that opportunities to study specific effects of gdl provisions and other programs may be limited . however , additional research on certain requirements could provide states with important information on the optimal provisions and , thus , help states to develop more effective teen driver safety programs . to assist states in understanding and implementing key requirements of a teen driver safety program and to help identify the optimum provisions of gdl systems , we recommend that nhtsa conduct additional research on specific gdl provisions , including minimum entry age , nighttime and passenger restrictions , the effect of bans on electronic devices , driver education , and parental involvement . we provided a draft of this report to dot for its review and comment . dot officials concurred with our report and recommendation to conduct additional research . they noted that many states have revised and improved their gdl provisions since 2006 and that these changes should facilitate new research to clarify the benefits of the various gdl provisions . consequently , dot officials proposed conducting a meta - analysis — an analysis of evidence from several separate but similar studies to test for statistical significance — using available research and data to enable dot to provide more specific guidance on the potential benefits of particular gdl provisions . we agree this approach would meet the intent of our recommendation . dot officials also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .