how do these blends affect gasoline prices ? in answering these questions , we reviewed federal and state analyses of gasoline markets and the environmental effects of various special gasoline blends ; examined the literature on gasoline supplies and prices ; and analyzed wholesale gasoline price data for 100 cities and the national average . we interviewed a wide range of government officials and industry experts including federal officials at the epa and the department of energy's energy information administration ; staff at state environmental offices ; academic and industry experts ; petroleum industry officials from companies involved in refining , terminal operations , and pipeline operations , as well as from large oil companies ; and representatives of trade associations . we also conducted detailed examinations of markets in california , louisiana , texas , and new jersey — states with large refining sectors and experience with producing and using special gasoline blends . what is the effect of these blends on the gasoline supply in the united states ? because many factors may affect gasoline prices at various times , only some of which are readily and consistently observable through available data , we agreed to report on prices and volatility but not to provide a definitive causal link between specific gasoline blends and prices . we conducted our work from june 2004 to may 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . for a more detailed discussion of the scope and methodology of our reiew , see appendix i . the clean air act , as amended , provides the basic statutory framework for the role of the federal government and the states in managing air quality in the united states . among other things , the act authorizes epa to set and enforce standards , referred to as national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) , for pollutants . epa has subsequently set standards for six pollutants — ozone , particulate matter , carbon monoxide , nitrogen dioxide , sulfur dioxide , and lead . while carbon monoxide is directly emitted when various fuels are burned , ground - level ozone is formed when vocs and nox mix in the presence of heat and sunlight . as a result , emissions of vocs and nox are considered by epa and the states in their efforts to reduce concentrations of ground - level ozone . because heat and sunlight act as catalysts in the formation of ground - level ozone , high ozone levels are most prevalent in spring and summer . epa sets and enforces the naaqs to , among other things , reduce the negative health effects of air pollution . each of the six pollutants covered by the naaqs is known to cause a variety of adverse health and other consequences . for example , at certain concentrations ground - level ozone and carbon monoxide can , among other things , cause lung damage , eye irritation , asthma attacks , chest pain , nausea , headaches , and premature death .