, honey bees and other bees ) . specifically , we interviewed a nonprobability sample of stakeholders from 35 of the following types of organizations or entities: general farming , including conventional and organic farming ; commodity farmers whose crops are pollinated by managed bees ; commercial beekeeping ; pesticide manufacturing ; state government ; university research ; and conservation / environmental protection . in our interviews , we asked stakeholders for their familiarity with agency efforts to protect bee health as well as for their views on suggestions for any efforts the agencies should make to further protect bee health . the information in table 1 provides a summary of stakeholders' views on commonly - cited topics and indicates the types of stakeholder groups that expressed those views . the ipm institute of north america , inc. assistant extension / research professor of entomology commercial director of beeologics monsanto company project apis m . we interviewed usda officials regarding all of these activities . ( the eiis data show that 3 bee kill incidents were highly probable or probable but name no specific pesticide. ) according to agency officials , epa encourages the public to report incidents to their state lead agency ( typically the state's department of agriculture ) so that such incidents can be properly investigated . recognizing that some members of the public may not feel comfortable with reporting to their state officials , epa's website and the “bee advisory boxes” added to certain pesticide labels identify additional options for the public to voluntarily report bee kill incidents . these include reporting through beekill@epa.gov , an e - mail address monitored by epa's office of pesticide programs or to report incidents to the national pesticide information center . in addition , epa enters into cooperative agreements with states . through these agreements , epa may delegate certain authority to states to cooperate in enforcing fifra . one condition of the cooperative agreement is that states must report information on all known or suspected pesticide incidents involving pollinators to beekill@epa.gov and send a copy to the relevant epa regional office . epa stores data on incident reports from the public , the national pesticide information center , and the states in its eiis database . several factors may contribute to underreporting of bee kill incidents , according to epa staff and others we interviewed . according to officials from epa and beekeeping and environmental organizations , beekeepers may be reluctant to report bee kills to state agencies or to epa for one or more of three reasons . first , beekeepers may want to avoid conflicts with farmers with whom they have an arrangement for providing pollination services or for obtaining access to forage for honey production , even if the farmer's pesticide application practices may have contributed to the incident . second , beekeepers may want to avoid investigations that may suggest the beekeeper's hive management practices — specifically , the use of miticides or other pesticides to combat hive pests — contributed to the incident .