washington . d.c.: january 22 , 2002 . aviation safety: safer skies initiative has taken initial steps to reduce accident rates by 2007 . gao / rced - 00-111 . washington , d.c.: june 30 , 2000 . aviation safety: faa's new inspection system offers promise , but problems need to be addressed . gao / rced - 99-183 . ( see fig . for example , faa has established clear accountability for ensuring that inspectors have access to technical training , developed a way for inspectors to choose courses that meet job needs and further professional development , and offers a wide array of technical and other courses . however , both faa and its inspectors recognize the need for more timely selection of inspectors for technical training . in addition , faa acknowledges the need to increase communication between inspectors and management with respect to the training program , especially to ensure that inspectors have bought into the system safety approach to inspections . faa offers numerous technical courses from which inspectors can select to meet job needs . however , from our survey of faa's inspectors , we estimate that only about half think that they have the technical knowledge needed for their jobs . faa officials told us that inspectors' negative views stem from their wanting to acquire proficiencies that are not as crucial in a system safety environment . we also found a disparity between inspectors and faa concerning the receipt of requested training . we estimated that 28 percent of inspectors believe that they get the technical training that they request . however , faa's records show that faa approves about 90 percent of these requests , and inspectors are making good progress in receiving training . over half of the inspectors have completed at least 75 percent of technical training that faa considers essential . faa officials told us that inspectors' negative views on their technical knowledge and the training they have received stem from their not accepting faa's move to a system safety approach . that is , the inspectors are concerned about acquiring individual technical proficiency that is not as crucial in a system safety environment . given that it has not completed assessing whether training for each inspector specialty meets performance requirements , faa is not in a position to make definitive conclusions concerning the adequacy of inspector technical training . faa also generally followed effective management practices in evaluating training . the agency requires that each training course receive a systematic evaluation every 3 years to determine if the course is up to date and relevant to inspectors' jobs , although training officials noted that many courses have yet to undergo such an evaluation . however , faa collects limited information on the effectiveness of training , and its evaluations have not measured the impact of training on faa's mission goals , such as reducing accidents . training experts acknowledge that isolating performance improvements resulting from training programs is difficult for any organization . ( see fig .