, as necessary . land management panel members agreed with the information needs identified with the scientific panel . see day 1 , question 5 . forests ecosystem workshop participants identified the following as information and / or research needed to better understand and prepare for the potential climate change effects on forest ecosystems: information related to biology and biogeography of forest pests and pathogens — factors that cause life cycles to accelerate , interactions with natural enemies , and phenology of infestation outbreaks interactions between disturbance events and monitoring of forest establishment after disturbances , especially the potential for forest composition to change substantially information on water balance , related to temperature - induced drought remote sensing , especially from landsat and geostationary operational environmental satellite platforms that provide indicators of seasonal to interannual stress — particularly with regard to fire and other disturbance phenomena — and related to this , a family of models that are based on actual land cover — not potential vegetation — and that are more closely integrated with decision - making models and that are spatially relevant at the 30- to 100-meter level high - elevation monitoring of climate , soil moisture , and streamflow monitoring and assessment of the amount of residual aquifer groundwater available throughout the country stream gauging network needs to be improved optimize monitoring systems for early impacts ecological studies of all the species likely to be engaged in responding to climate change . ( one expert disagreed with this approach. ) fresh waters ecosystem workshop participants identified the following as information and / or research needed to better understand and prepare for potential climate change effects on fresh waters ecosystem: need for better understanding of current anthropogenic stressors stream systems in the west are managed for other purposes in ways that are likely to “trump” climate change effects that we anticipate ( eg , dams out west create a wide range of flow ) . human - induced changes may “swamp” climate change effects — how should our water management practices be changed , if at all , in light of climate change ? an nps representative said that millions of dollars are spent on infrastructure on federal lands , but asked whether federal land managers are adequately addressing the effects that climate change might have on these investments in the future . panelists suggested that the congress may want to consider requiring that climate change be considered in environmental impact analyses ( environmental impact statements , environmental assessments , etc. ) required under nepa . this could be mandated by changes in the regulations promulgated by the council on environmental quality . one official commenting after completion of the workshop said that this sentiment was directed at proposed projects requiring an environmental impact statement where ( 1 ) climate is significant in the project's context and ( 2 ) the look - ahead horizon is long enough where significant climate change is projected to occur . this official said that federal agencies plan projects where nepa is required but conditions ( 1 ) and / or ( 2 ) are not met .