we provided a draft of this report to dod for review and comment . in an email , the director of accession policy within the office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for military personnel policy stated that the military services concurred with the report and dod had no additional comments . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the national commission on military , national , and public service ; the secretary of defense ; the acting assistant secretary of defense for manpower and reserve affairs ; the commander , u.s. military entrance processing command ; the secretaries of the army , the navy , and the air force ; the commandant of the marine corps ; and the director , selective service system . the military services are generally smaller today than they have been in many years . in fiscal year 2003 , for example , dod's total active military end strength was approximately 1.5 million , while in fiscal year 2017 the number was 1.38 million . additionally , dod's total workforce mix has also changed . dod concurred with these recommendations and in response implemented the first recommendation in february 2013 . a 1997 memorandum of understanding between the selective service system and dod indicates , among other things , that the department of the army will provide 1,500 enlisted army retirees to augment the selective service system within 72 hours after a draft is initiated . according to officials within the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness - military personnel policy , this memorandum of understanding was reviewed and revalidated in 2014 . however , army officials told us that they believed some of their service - specific procedures might require updates identifying individuals to augment the selective service system's staff , especially the retired personnel that would need to be recalled to duty . they thought it would be beneficial for officials within the office of the secretary of defense to conduct a thorough , top - down review , and lead an update of service instructions related to supporting a draft to ensure the services are prepared to provide their share of personnel if needed . these army officials said , however , that their higher army headquarters saw no operational reason to review their policies and procedures related to mass mobilization given that dod has no operational plans that envision mobilization at a level that would require a draft . as discussed previously in this report , dod's workforce mix has been changing . at that time , the principal deputy assistant secretary of defense for readiness and force management reported that it had reevaluated the mission and military necessity for the selective service system and concluded that the all - volunteer force was of adequate size and composition to meet the department's demands , and that there were no operational plans that envision mobilization at a level that would require conscription . additionally , the selective service system is to be prepared to implement an alternative service program within the civilian community for registrants classified as conscientious objectors during a draft .