moreover , these programs have grown . in 2001 , ssa provided $73.2 billion in cash benefits to 8.8 million working - age adults . with advancements in imaging techniques , ssa will also accept evidence from , for example , computerized axial tomography ( cat ) scan and magnetic resonance imaging ( mri ) techniques . despite these changes , program design issues have limited the extent that advances in medicine and technology have been incorporated into the di and ssi disability decision - making criteria . the statutory and regulatory design of these programs limits the role of treatment in deciding who is disabled . unless an individual has been prescribed treatment , ssa does not consider the possible effects of treatment in the disability decision , even if the treatment could make the difference between being able and not being able to work . thus , treatments that can help restore functioning to persons with certain impairments may not be factored into the disability decision for some applicants . for example , medications to control severe mental illness , arthritis treatments to slow or stop joint damage , total hip replacements for severely injured hips , and drugs and physical therapies to possibly improve the symptoms associated with multiple sclerosis are not automatically factored into ssa's decision making for determining the extent that impairments affect people's ability to work . additionally , this limited approach to treatment raises an equity issue: applicants whose treatment allows them to work could be denied benefits while applicants with the same condition who have not been prescribed treatment could be allowed benefits . as with treatment , the benefits of innovations in assistive technologies — such as advanced prosthetics and wheelchair designs — have not been fully incorporated into di and ssi disability criteria because the design of these programs does not recognize these advances in disability decision making . for example , ssa does not require an applicant who lost a hand to use a prosthetic before the agency makes its decision about the impact of this condition on the ability to engage in substantial gainful activities . for an applicant who does not have an impairment that meets or equals the severity of the medical listings , ssa evaluates whether the individual is able to work despite his or her limitations . specifically , an individual who is unable to perform his or her previous work and other work in the labor market is awarded benefits . ssa relies upon the department of labor's dictionary of occupational titles ( dot ) as its primary database to help make this determination . however , labor has not updated dot since 1991 and does not plan to do so . although labor has been working on a replacement for the dot called the occupational information network ( o*net ) since 1993 , labor and ssa officials recognize that o*net cannot be used in its current form in the di and ssi disability determination process . the o*net , for example , does not contain ssa - needed information on the amount of lifting or mental demands associated with particular jobs .