by polynesians . during the nineteenth century , germany , great britain , and the united states developed commercial and military pursuits in samoa , and in 1899 the three powers divided their authority over the islands , as germany and great britain renounced all rights to tutuila and the other samoan islands east of longitude 171 degrees west of greenwich , and the united states renounced all rights to the western islands . on february 19 , 1900 , president mckinley issued an executive order placing control of the islands under the authority of the department of the navy , and on the same day , the secretary of the navy issued an order providing that the islands were established into a naval station , to be known as the naval station , tutuila , and to be under the command of a commandant . on april 17 , 1900 , the high chiefs of tutuila formally ceded the islands of tutuila and aunuu to the united states , and on july 16 , 1904 , the high chief of manua ceded the islands of tau , olosega , ofu , and rose to the united states . the deeds of cession were not formally accepted by the united states until 1929 when congress , by joint resolution , accepted and ratified them and provided that “until congress shall provide for the government of such islands , all civil , judicial , and military powers shall be vested in such person or persons and shall be exercised in such manner as the president of the united states shall direct….” in 1951 , president truman transferred the authority to govern american samoa from the secretary of the navy to the secretary of the interior . the secretary of the interior subsequently issued an order to delimit the extent and nature of the authority of the american samoa government , which provided for a governor and an independent judicial branch . american samoa ratified a constitution , which went into effect on october 17 , 1960 , and a revised constitution went into effect on july 1 , 1967 . the constitution provides for legislative , judicial , and executive branches . the legislature , called the fono , consists of a house of representatives and senate . the house of representatives is composed of twenty members popularly elected from representative districts . the senate is composed of eighteen members , each of whom must be matai and elected in accordance with samoan custom by the city councils of the counties that the member is to represent . the 1967 constitution provided that the executive branch was to consist of a governor , to be appointed by the secretary of the interior . in 1977 , the secretary of the interior superseded this provision by issuing an order providing that the governor and lieutenant governor were to be popularly elected .