we disagree . the seven composite units we identify in this report were vetted and received training after the policy change in april 2007 . we identified these units in our review of vetting records provided by state's acota office and training rosters of individuals trained provided by state's gpoi evaluation team . according to the data provided by state , three composite units from niger received training in august 2007 and november - december 2007 , one composite unit from nigeria received training in september - october 2007 , and three composite units from uganda received training in july 2007 . records for these units indicate that vetting was completed between june 2007 and november 2007 . key contributors to this report include audrey solis , assistant director ; monica brym ; justin monroe ; and diahanna post . technical assistance was provided by ashley alley , johana ayers , joseph brown , lynn cothern , barry deweese , nisha hazra , chris kunitz , isidro gomez , matthew reilly , elizabeth repko , ronald schwenn , jay smale , adrienne spahr , barbara steel - lowney , laverne tharpes , and heather whitehead . ( app . ii identifies the gpoi partner countries in these geographic regions. ) training of military peacekeepers under gpoi can be provided by contractors , u.s. military active duty personnel , or by trainers from neighboring countries in the region , and is focused on providing battalion - level training for peacekeeping missions . u.s. contractors provide the majority of training in africa and , when available , u.s. military active duty personnel serve as mentors to african trainees . in asia , u.s. military personnel provide the majority of training but use contractors to provide some of the training for military officers . in central america , training is provided by other countries and by u.s. military personnel . the united states has funded the training of a few individuals in the near east and europe . u.s. military personnel may serve as mentors to trainees in these regions . training has not yet occurred in central asia . gpoi training of stability police is provided at coespu — italy's international training center for peace operations located in vicenza , italy , where the italian carabinieri train instructors of stability police units . state and dod have made some progress in achieving gpoi goals in three principal areas: training and equipping peacekeepers , providing equipment and transportation for deployed missions , and building peacekeeping skills and infrastructure , but challenges remain in meeting these goals . table 1 summarizes the status of gpoi activities for the three principal goals and seven objectives . first , state and dod have trained about 40,000 military peacekeepers , predominantly in africa , and supported the training of over 1,300 stability police , but it is unlikely that gpoi will meet its goal of training 75,000 military peacekeepers by 2010 due to the time it takes to expend program funds , and state and dod have encountered delays in delivering nonlethal training equipment .