i for the key best practices used in our review ) . fema officials stated that they are considering various options to ensure that the plans are in place for future contracts . however , without detailed surveillance plans , the expectations of the cor and contractor can be misaligned during performance evaluations and may not focus on the quality , quantity , and timeliness of performance outputs . receiving a positive cpars assessment can enhance a contractor's reputation when bidding on future contracts , and as such , the assessments provide an incentive for the contractor to perform as expected . effective controls are necessary to help ensure that fema fully implements required monitoring and reporting of contractor performance . in addition , the cors for the risk map contracts we reviewed have not entered ratings for the contractors into cpars , the contractor assessment reporting database used by dhs that feeds into a government - wide contractor past performance database . cpars data are key to informing federal contracting decisions and applicable regulations and agency guidance requires the use of cpars to assess contractor performance . not submitting cpars assessments disadvantages contractors and the federal government because it reduces the information available to federal acquisition staff when determining contractor selection . as with the surveillance plan , by determining the extent to which this situation exists , identifying the root cause , and implementing steps to address the root cause , as appropriate , fema can help ensure that its — and other agencies' — contracting decisions and management draw on complete , relevant , and timely performance information . while fema has begun to consider how to address the lack of a quality assurance surveillance plan for the bsa contract and to enter risk map contractor performance assessments into cpars , we are making two recommendations aimed at improving monitoring and reporting of contractor performance . in contrast , our 2008 report found that fema had a quality assurance surveillance plan for a past bsa contract . further , fema developed a detailed quality assurance surveillance plan for the two mapping contracts . for example , the quality assurance surveillance plan for the mapping contracts outlined management roles and responsibilities , quality standards , and the process for ensuring quality control . quality assurance surveillance plans that focus on the quality , quantity , and timeliness of performance outputs would likely avoid challenges monitoring the contractor's performance . additionally , without detailed quality assurance surveillance plans , the expectations of the cor and contractor can be misaligned during performance assessments . for example , in 2010 and 2011 , fema identified persistent issues with the bsa contractor's deliverables , including quality and timeliness , and faced challenges in resolving those issues , which may have been avoidable if a quality assurance surveillance plan had been developed and used . fema officials acknowledged the need to develop quality assurance surveillance plans . they also stated that various actions are under consideration that may help ensure that quality assurance surveillance plans are in place for future contracts . however , fema officials did not provide specifics about these actions or provide a date for when they would determine which actions , if any , to implement .