projects . according to all of the five brt project sponsors we spoke with during our work , even at a lower capital cost , brt could provide rail - like benefits . for example , cleveland rta officials told us the healthline brt project cost roughly one - third ( $200 million ) of what a comparable light - rail project would have cost . similarly , eugene , oregon , lane transit district ( ltd ) officials told us that the agency pursued brt when it became apparent that light rail was unaffordable and that an ltd light rail project would not be competitive in the new starts federal grant process . in terms of benefits , these projects — and most other brt project we examined — increased ridership and improved travel times over the previous bus service . as a result of the lower initial capital costs for brt along with the benefits of improved service , transit agencies took advantage of federal new and small starts dollars to invest in a relatively large number of brt projects , as compared to other modes of transit . ( see fig . in addition , we found that although many factors contribute to economic development , most local officials in the five case study locations we visited believed that brt projects were contributing to localized economic development . for instance , officials in cleveland told us that an estimated $4 to $5 billion had been invested near the healthline brt project — associated with major hospitals and universities in the corridor . while most local officials believed that rail transit had a greater economic development potential than brt , they agreed that certain factors can enhance brt's ability to contribute to economic development , including physical brt features that relay a sense of permanence to developers ; key employment and activity centers located along the corridor ; and local policies and incentives that encourage transit - oriented development . our analysis of land value changes near brt lines at our five case study locations lends support to these themes . map - 21 included a few changes that affected brt . decisions . transit agencies that measure and quantify the effects of their capital - investment decisions are likely to make a stronger case for additional funding from state and local decision - makers . however , of the nine transit agencies we visited , only two measured the effects of capital investments on the condition of certain transit assets and none of the agencies measured the effects on future ridership , in part because they lacked the tools to determine these effects . figure 1 below shows the extent to which selected transit agencies measured the effect of capital investments . accordingly , we recommended that the administrator of fta conduct additional research to help transit agencies measure the effects of capital investments , including future ridership effects . the fta concurs with this recommendation , in part . fta agrees that more research to identify the operational impacts of not addressing the state of good repair backlog will support better asset management by transit agencies .