vi ) . based on this analysis , we estimated that overseas - homeported ships had , on average , about 25 ( + / - 11.6 ) casualty reports and u.s. - homeported ships had about 20 ( + / - 1.7 ) . however , these numbers of casualty reports for u.s. - and overseas - homeported ships are not statistically distinguishable from one another . the casualty reports over the past 5 years comprise mostly category 2 casualty reports . we found that category - 2 casualties — those that indicate that a deficiency exists in mission - essential equipment that causes a minor degradation in a ship's primary mission or a major degradation or total loss of a secondary mission — are much more prevalent than more - serious category 3 and 4 casualties . for example , in 2014 , we found that the average number of casualty reports for all ships was about 27 , and category 3 and 4 reports accounted for about 1.0 of these . navy officials acknowledged the increasing amount of casualty reports on navy ships and a worsening trend in material ship condition . they stated that casualties require unscheduled maintenance and have a negative impact on fleet operations since there is an associated capability or capacity loss . additionally , officials noted that two factors may have contributed to this increase , including ( 1 ) a cultural shift in the navy emphasizing the timely identification and reporting of casualties and ( 2 ) adoption of an automated system for reporting casualties beginning in 2010 , which may have made it easier to report casualties . curiously , ships in the first year of being homeported overseas , after being homeported in the united states during the prior year , had no different operational costs on average than ships that remained homeported in the united states in both years . the results remained similar when holding constant the proportion of required mandays executed , although the standard error of the estimated difference between overseas - and u.s. - homeported ships in the current year was somewhat larger . personnel costs are more likely to have a straightforward association with overseas homeporting . unlike sustainment and operational costs , which are somewhat inversely related and linked to operational tempo , personnel costs are not as directly tied to cycles of operations and maintenance . as we discuss in the report , overseas homeporting can involve additional costs related to relocating sailors and paying higher living allowances and cost of living salary adjustments than the navy would have paid to sailors homeported in the united states . these costs are more directly related to the use of overseas homeports , rather than being indirectly related through operational tempo . as a result , we can more directly compare personnel costs between ships that were homeported overseas and in the united states , without accounting for operational tempo .