arbitration . the rla also offers grievance arbitration to help resolve disagreements between carriers and unions over how to interpret and apply provisions of existing collective bargaining agreements . nmb does not directly provide arbitration services , but rather maintains a list of registered arbitrators from which the parties can select someone to review and decide their case . in the airline industry , the parties pay the costs of arbitration . in the railroad industry , however , consistent with the requirements of the rla , nmb pays the fee and travel expenses of the arbitrator . the office of management and budget ( omb ) and the office of personnel management ( opm ) have key oversight responsibilities for all federal agencies , including nmb . omb is responsible for the oversight of nmb's management and information technology . opm is the central personnel management agency of the federal government charged with administering and enforcing civil service laws , regulations , and rules . opm annually administers surveys to federal employees across the government , including nmb , to solicit their views on their agencies including agency leadership , collaboration , and other issues . opm also offers various services to agencies to evaluate organizational climate . federal law does not establish an inspector general ( ig ) for nmb . however , the agency signed a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) in 2018 with the national labor relations board's ( nlrb ) office of inspector general to provide independent audit and investigative oversight . in the mou , the nlrb ig agreed to ( 1 ) operate a hotline for employees to anonymously submit information — via email or telephone messages — regarding fraud , waste , and abuse involving the nmb's programs and operations , and ( 2 ) take action to address complaints , such as inform the appropriate law enforcement agency or the nmb chairman or board members , as appropriate . fedramp is a government - wide program that provides authorizations for use of cloud services . as an executive agency that uses a cloud service approved through fedramp , nmb is subject to related requirements . through a december 2011 memorandum , omb established requirements for executive agencies to use fedramp when conducting security authorizations for agency use of cloud services . in addition , the fedramp program management office issued guidance in 2017 that specifies authorization requirements , including that an agency should document the authorization of the agency system supported by a cloud service approved through fedramp and the related cloud service used by the agency . gao has issued three prior reports on nmb and collectively had 13 recommendations . nmb had previously implemented six of those recommendations , and seven remained in our current review . we issued our first report in december 2013 with seven recommendations in key management areas , including strategic planning , performance measurement , and workforce planning . we also suggested that congress consider authorizing an ig at an appropriate federal agency to provide independent audit and investigative oversight at nmb . we issued a second report in february 2016 , which found that nmb needed to take additional actions to implement the seven recommendations from our december 2013 report .