results are really what counts . if irs , or any other agency , can figure out how to more cost effectively achieve a result , then reallocation of resources to other problem areas could be an appropriate strategy , within the restrictions applying to appropriation accounts , for making the best use of limited resources . we live now in a much more global economy , with highly mobile capital , and investment options available to ordinary citizens that were not even imagined decades ago . we have growing concentrations of income and wealth . more firms operate multi - nationally and willingly move operations and capital around the world as they see best for their firms . do the revenues for the proposed system hold up in the future ? as an adjunct to looking forward when making reforms , the revenue consequences of all major tax changes should be estimated well into the future . such long - term projections undoubtedly will be subject to uncertainty , but at the very least we should have the best estimates possible of whether the revenue trend is likely to shift up or down over the long - term . does the proposed system have attributes associated with high compliance rates ? because any tax system can be subject to tax gaps , the administrability of reformed systems should be considered as part of the debate for change . others have made long - term investments in tax - favored college savings plans . thus , changes to the tax system can materially affect citizens' futures . still others make their livings advising taxpayers , helping them understand tax provisions and complete their tax returns , and helping them devise investment and other financial plans taking into account current tax rules . our publication , understanding the tax reform debate: background , criteria , and questions , may be useful in guiding policymakers as they consider tax reform proposals . it was designed to aid policymakers in thinking about how to develop tax policy for the 21st century . in general , a reformed system is most likely to have a small tax gap if the system has few tax preferences or complex provisions and taxable transactions are transparent . transparency in the context of tax administration is best achieved when third parties report information both to the taxpayer and the tax administrator . what transition issues exist and have they been dealt with in an equitable fashion that minimizes additional complexity and any adverse effects on the benefits to be gained from the new tax system ? under the current individual income tax system , citizens have made fundamental life choices based at least in part on the incentives in the tax system . for many , the favorable tax treatment of owner - occupied housing has led to choices to invest disproportionately in housing . while not designed to break new conceptual ground , this report brings together a number of topics that tax experts have identified as those that should be considered when evaluating tax policy . it attempts to provide information about these topics in a clear , concise , and easily understandable manner for a non - technical audience .