what are the characteristics of homelessness in rural areas ? what assistance is available to individuals or families experiencing homelessness and what amount of funding have the federal departments and agencies awarded to organizations that assist persons experiencing homelessness in rural areas ? what barriers do persons experiencing homelessness and homeless service providers encounter when seeking assistance or funding to provide assistance ? to address these questions , we conducted a review of relevant reports , studies , and our prior research . we also conducted site visits in arizona , kentucky , maine , minnesota , new mexico , and texas . during these visits , we interviewed federal , state , and local housing and homelessness officials and nonprofit homelessness organizations , and toured rural areas in which homelessness was present . we selected the site visit locations based on several factors , including ( 1 ) discussions with knowledgeable individuals in the field of homelessness , ( 2 ) a review of studies and reports on local and state efforts to serve the homeless in rural areas , ( 3 ) the presence of tribal lands and colonias , and ( 4 ) geographical diversity . we also reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and program documentation and interviewed officials from various federal agencies as well as national stakeholder organizations . for purposes of this report , we did not limit ourselves to any one federal definition of homelessness and did not specify a specific definition when speaking with researchers , providers , and relevant government officials , but they did clarify on how they defined homelessness in the context of their comments . we conducted this performance audit from july 2009 to july 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . several federal programs — mainstream and targeted — may be available to assist those experiencing homelessness in rural and nonrural areas . mainstream programs — such as temporary assistance for needy families , public housing , the supplemental nutrition assistance program , medicaid , and the workforce investment act — provide a wide range of assistance , such as cash assistance , housing , food , health care , and job training , for low - income people including those experiencing homelessness . targeted programs — such as the emergency shelter grant and runaway and homeless youth programs — also provide a range of services but are designed specifically for individuals or families experiencing homelessness . the mckinney - vento homeless assistance act ( mckinney - vento ) is the principal federal legislation designed to provide funding for shelter and services to persons experiencing homelessness . mckinney - vento originally consisted of 15 programs providing , among other things , resources for emergency shelter , transitional housing , job training , primary health care , education , and permanent housing . the current act has been amended several times and was most recently reauthorized by the hearth act .