dod concurred with all of these recommendations . in response to a request of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics , the defense science board issued a report in october 2004 on dod's efforts for corrosion control , referring to “the importance of leadership commitment and proper incentives for ensuring corrosion is considered early and often in decisions” and calling for an increased commitment on the part of dod to prevent and mitigate corrosion . this report found that corrosion prevention has not been a priority across dod , and it made 17 recommendations , most of which dod concurred with . specifically , dod concurred on 11 , partially concurred on 4 , and did not concur on 2 . it also affects safety . for example , since 1985 , the army has reported over 50 aircraft accidents , including 12 fatalities , caused by corrosion . incorporating corrosion prevention planning early in the acquisition process is the most effective way to reduce and perhaps avoid corrosion impacts in terms of costs , readiness and safety . for fiscal year 2006 , dod and the military services funded about $24 million for corrosion strategy efforts . of this amount , $19 million was spent on 29 corrosion - related projects and about $5 million on contractor support , training , outreach , and other administrative activities . the dod corrosion office projects a combined average return on investment of 42.5 to 1 for the $19 million , or a projected savings of $809 million over the life of the projects . the services frequently bypass the corrosion office to obtain their funding for corrosion - related efforts . we reviewed the president's budget justification for fiscal year 2006 and identified more than $97 million for service - specific corrosion mitigation - related projects in addition to those reviewed by the corrosion office . these projects had not been submitted to the corrosion office for review , and corrosion office officials told us that they lacked any information about the $97 million and the status of the associated efforts . because corrosion - related projects may be included under other maintenance projects or budget accounts , it is likely that there is more funding that we have not identified . according to recent corrosion cost studies conducted by dod , the annual corrosion costs for army ground vehicles and navy ships alone were identified to be $2.019 billion and $2.438 billion , respectively . without comprehensive reviews of the services' corrosion - related programs and proposed funding requests , the corrosion office cannot fulfill its oversight and coordination role for the department . none of the four services has a designated official or office to oversee and coordinate corrosion activities , despite a recommendation by the defense science board that they do so . currently , multiple offices in the services are responsible for corrosion programs and related budgets .