this is consistent with prior reviews . figure 9 shows what lobbyists reported as their ease of understanding the terms associated with ld - 2 reporting requirements from 2012 through 2018 . the u.s. attorney's office for the district of columbia ( usao ) officials stated that they continue to have sufficient personnel resources and authority under the lda to enforce reporting requirements . this includes imposing civil or criminal penalties for noncompliance . noncompliance refers to a lobbyist's or lobbying firm's failure to comply with the lda . however , usao noted that due to attrition the number of the assigned personnel has changed from 2017 as indicated in table 3 . usao officials stated that lobbyists resolve their noncompliance issues by filing ld - 2 , ld - 203 , or ld - 2 amendments , or by terminating their registration , depending on the issue . resolving referrals can take anywhere from a few days to years , depending on the circumstances . during this time , usao creates summary reports from its database to track the overall number of referrals that are pending or become compliant as a result of the lobbyist receiving an email , phone call , or noncompliance letter . referrals remain in the pending category until they are resolved . the pending category is divided into the following areas: “initial research for referral,” “responded but not compliant,” “no response / waiting for a response,” “bad address,” and “unable to locate.” usao officials noted that they attempt to review and update all pending cases every six months . usao focuses its enforcement efforts primarily on the “responded but not compliant” and the “no response / waiting for a response” groups . officials told us that , if after several attempts , it cannot contact the noncompliant firm or its lobbyist , it confers with both the secretary of the senate and the clerk of the house to determine whether further action is needed . in the cases where the lobbying firm is repeatedly referred for not filing disclosure reports but does not appear to be actively lobbying , usao suspends enforcement actions . usao officials reported they will continue to monitor these firms and will resume enforcement actions if required . usao received 3,798 referrals from both the secretary of the senate and the clerk of the house for failure to comply with ld - 2 reporting requirements cumulatively for filing years 2009 through 2018 . figure 10 shows the number and status of the referrals received , and the number of enforcement actions taken by usao to bring lobbying firms into compliance . enforcement actions include usao attempts to bring lobbyists into compliance through letters , emails , and calls . about 40 percent ( 1,533 of 3,798 ) of the total referrals received are now compliant because lobbying firms either filed their reports or terminated their registrations . in addition , some of the referrals were found to be compliant when usao received the referral , so no action was taken . this may occur when lobbying firms respond to the contact letters from the secretary of the senate and the clerk of the house after usao received the referrals .