population health . obesity , smoking , and other population risk factors can lead to expensive chronic conditions , such as diabetes and heart disease . the increased prevalence of such conditions drives spending as the utilization of health care resources rises . for example , one study indicated that the rising prevalence of obesity and higher relative per capita health care spending among obese individuals resulted in 27 percent of the growth in inflation - adjusted per capita health care spending from 1987 through 2001 . addressing these drivers will be a major societal challenge . solving the problem of the federal government's escalating health care costs is especially difficult , since changing programs such as medicare and medicaid will involve changes , not just within these federal programs , but to our country's health care system as a whole . market dynamics . another cost - containment challenge for all payers relates to the market dynamics of health care compared with other economic sectors . in an ideal market , informed consumers prod competitors to offer the best value . however , without reliable comparative information on medical outcomes , quality of care , and cost , consumers are less able to determine the best value . insurance masks the actual costs of goods and services , providing little incentive for consumers to be cost - conscious . many insured individuals pay relatively little out of pocket for care at the point of delivery because of comprehensive health care coverage . current federal tax policies encourage such comprehensive coverage , for example , by excluding employers' contribution for premiums from employees' taxable income . these tax exclusions represent a significant source of forgone federal revenue and work at cross - purposes to the goal of moderating health care spending . furthermore , clinicians must often make decisions in the absence of universal medical standards of practice . under these circumstances , medical practices vary across the nation , as evidenced by wide geographic variation in per capita spending and outcomes , even after controlling for patient differences in health status . however , many experts have recommended that the federal government could help drive improvement in the health care system . for example , experts note the need for strong financial incentives to overcome a lack of systems — including information systems — to reduce error and reinforce best practices . medicare — the single , largest purchaser of health care services in the united states — could play a more active role in promoting a market that rewards better performance through payment incentives that promote the pursuit of improved quality and efficiency . here in the first half of 2008 , the long - term fiscal challenge is not in the distant future . the first baby boomers have already retired . ( see table 2. ) the budget and economic implications of the baby - boom generation's retirement have already become a factor in cbo's 10-year baseline projections and that effect will only intensify as the baby boomers age . as the share of the population over 65 climbs , demographics will interact with rising health care costs .