no wrongdoing was found . we selected the two cases and highlighted the issues associated with them in order to show potential problems that could result from the exchange of government information . in addition , we used these examples to discuss and illustrate the guidance , policies , and procedures in place for protecting and disseminating information with the potential to be defined as political intelligence from the two branches of government . for these cases we reviewed relevant legal documentation and executive and legislative branch guidance on protecting information . we interviewed fda officials concerning the fda case and a congressional staff member about the asbestos trust fund case . to determine the laws and ethics rules that govern the sale of political intelligence and to determine the extent to which information being sold would be considered nonpublic information we examined legislative and executive branch ethics guidance and the interpretation and application of sec rule 10b - 5 ( related to insider trading ) to identify and summarize the distinctions between public and nonpublic information . interviews were used to obtain opinions on what information shared by members of congress or executive or legislative branch employees would be considered material nonpublic information . in addition , we obtained opinions about the statutes and regulations that cover political intelligence activities , and the compliance mechanisms in place to deal with legal , ethical , and regulatory issues that may arise regarding the use of political intelligence . we also met with staff from the senate and house ethics committees to discuss the laws and ethics rules for political intelligence activities and contacted the office of government ethics . to determine what is known about the sale of political intelligence and assess the extent to which investors rely on such information and what is known about the effect the sale of political intelligence may have on the financial markets , we used the semi - structured interviews to systematically collect testimonial evidence from the various interviewees potentially engaged in political intelligence activities . we asked interviewees about the role of various parties involved in the collection and dissemination of political intelligence , the process through which information is gathered and disseminated , client relationships and services , the types of information used to make an investment or business decision , and the extent to which political intelligence information affects financial markets . to seek economic data on the size of the political intelligence industry ( i.e . measure the size of the industry ) , we searched for political intelligence in the industry classification systems used by federal statistical agencies to collect economic data on u.s. business establishments , the north american industry classification system and the standard industrial classification system . to describe any benefits or practical and legal issues that could arise from the imposition of disclosure requirements on those who engage in political intelligence activities , during the semi - structured and open - ended interviews we asked interviewees to describe any benefits or costs , as well as potential legal and practical issues , that could be raised by the imposition of disclosure requirements on those who engage in political intelligence activities .