port of galveston 5 . presidio port authority local government corporation 6 . red hook container terminal , llc 7 . united parcel service co . in addition to the contact named above , kirk kiester ( assistant director ) , dominick dale , michele fejfar , eric hauswirth , stephanie heiken , susan hsu , elizabeth leibinger , david lutter , and sasan j . “jon” najmi made significant contributions to this report . fiscal year 2016 partners: 1 . city of charlotte aviation department 2 . dole fresh fruit company ( port of wilmington , delaware ; port everglades ; and port of freeport ) 3 . gt usa llc 4 . figure 8 details this information for each application cycle . as mentioned above , once cbp selects an application for a new reimbursable services partnership , cbp and its partner sign a legally binding reimbursable services agreement . from fiscal years 2013 through 2017 cycle 2 , cbp selected 114 applications and entered into 69 reimbursable services agreements with partners . as mentioned previously , local cbp officials also work with the partner to negotiate the terms of an mou , which outlines how the partnership will work at the poe . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . in october 2017 we also received demonstrations on the systems that cbp uses to document and audit work ticket and billing data . we interviewed officials at cbp and gsa headquarters to gain insights on how the agencies use qualitative information to monitor program performance and share best practices . we assessed whether cbp's efforts were consistent with office of management and budget guidance for making program expansion decisions and leading practices for program evaluation from the american evaluation association . we conducted this performance audit from march 2017 to march 2018 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . since 2013 , u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) has entered into public - private partnerships with private sector or government entities under its reimbursable services program ( rsp ) to cover cbp's cost of providing certain services at u.s. ports of entry ( poe ) upon the request of partners . as of the end of fiscal year 2017 , cbp approved 114 applications for reimbursable fee agreements . these services can include customs , immigration , agricultural processing , border security and support at any facility where cbp provides , or will provide services and may cover costs such as salaries , benefits , overtime expenses , administration , and transportation costs . once cbp selects an application for a new reimbursable services partnership , cbp and its partner sign a legally binding reimbursable services agreement , which is a standard legal form that cbp uses for all new rsp agreements . table 8 provides information on the scope and status of dap projects that cbp and gsa have selected since cbp established the dap in fiscal year 2015 . as noted in the above table , mous detail a variety of services that cbp officers can provide at the poes , and the types of services vary by poe type .