telecommuting . sec officials stated that sec's capacity for telecommuting continues to improve across the agency . these officials stated that due to improved dial - up and wireless connection access , sec employees' remote access to certain software applications has improved with the deployment of new laptops in the division of enforcement offices . in the summer of 2001 , sec began revising its it capital investment decision - making process . the revisions were based on recommendations in an audit report issued by sec's oig in august 2001 that reviewed sec's it capital investment decision - making process in order to improve communication between oit and sec staff . beginning in 2002 , sec developed a new decision - making process for it investments , with sec's ioc and itcpc responsible for managing the portion of sec's it budget related to new technology initiatives . specifically , ioc , which includes program office senior staff familiar with both the business and it needs within their programs , receives and evaluates specific it investment proposals submitted by sec's divisions and program offices . based on their review , ioc makes recommendations regarding which projects should be approved for funding . these recommendations are forwarded to itcpc , a more senior council of division directors and program office heads , for final funding decisions . although sec has taken steps to develop a formal decision - making process for it investments , in a 2004 follow - up report , oig raised concerns about the current state of this process . according to the oig report , oig evaluated sec's compliance with the clinger - cohen act of 1996 ( cca ) by applying gao's it investment management framework for assessing and improving process maturity ( it im maturity model ) . in general , gao's framework includes standards for the selection , control , and evaluation of federal information technology investments , in accordance with the fundamental it governance mandates of the cca . oig found that sec has made progress in establishing an it investment process that complies with applicable laws and regulations and incorporates best practices from the public and private sectors . however , oig also identified some concerns . for example , oig found that sec's process still did not meet the minimum criteria of gao's it im maturity model because sec had not assigned specific responsibility or delegated appropriate authority for establishing a compliant and effective decision - making process in order to strengthen the governance over the process . based on this review , oig concluded , and we generally agree , that the lack of clearly defined and formally approved it governance policies , criteria , and procedures resulted in an undisciplined it investment decision - making process subject to broad interpretation by sec management , which lacked auditable and enforceable standards and controls .