app . ii contains a copy of the questionnaire. ) we conducted our work between april 2007 and august 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the workforce investment act created a new , comprehensive workforce investment system designed to change the way employment and training services are delivered . when wia was enacted , in 1998 , it replaced the job training partnership act ( jtpa ) with three new programs — adult , dislocated worker , and youth — that allow for a broader range of services to the general public , no longer using income to determine eligibility for all program services . in addition to establishing these three new programs , wia requires that services for these programs , along with those of a number of other employment and training programs , including the wagner - peyser - funded employment service , be provided through a single service delivery system — the one - stop system . states were required to implement these changes by july 1 , 2000 . sixteen categories of programs , receiving an estimated $15 billion from four separate federal agencies , must provide services through the system . ( see table 1. ) each state must have one or more designated local workforce investment areas , and as of april 2007 , the 50 states reported having 563 local workforce investment areas . nine states reported having the entire state as its workforce investment area , and california reported having the most local workforce investment areas ( 50 ) . ( see app . iii for additional data about the numbers of local workforce investment areas and comprehensive one - stop centers , and related information. ) each local area must have at least one comprehensive one - stop center where core services for all mandatory programs are accessible . wia allows flexibility in the way these mandatory program partners provide services through the one - stop system , allowing colocation , electronic linkages , or referrals . while wia requires these mandatory partners to participate , it does not provide additional funds to operate one - stop systems and support one - stop partnerships . as a result , mandatory partners are expected to share the costs of developing and operating one - stop centers . in addition to mandatory partners , one - stop centers have the flexibility to include other optional partners , such as tanf or the food stamp employment and training program , in the one - stop system to better meet specific state and local workforce development needs . services may also be offered at satellite or affiliated sites — designated locations that provide access to at least one employment and training program . about $3.3 billion was appropriated in fiscal year 2006 for the three wia programs — adult , dislocated worker , and youth . from 2001 to 2007 , the total number of comprehensive one - stop centers in the 50 states declined by 7 percent , and during the same period , the total number of satellite or affiliated sites decreased by 13 percent .