legacy systems . according to the fiar guidance , reporting entities involved in system transformation initiatives are required to assess the target dates of their to - be environments against their audit - ready assertion dates to determine whether existing systems , to - be systems , or both should be included in their current readiness efforts . in this regard , based on transformation efforts associated with implementing gfebs and other key erp systems intended to replace certain existing legacy systems , the army excluded tasks to ensure the readiness of these legacy systems and related business processes from the scope of its readiness efforts . the army expects the appropriation accounts that would continue to generate transaction data from such systems to be expended or expired and thus amounts would become immaterial over time . however , officials told us that they were uncertain as to how continued reliance on these systems may affect initial audits . for example , officials told us that a timeline for transitioning funding for classified and other associated activity from legacy systems to a gfebs - based environment has not been determined . until this transition occurs , ongoing activity accounted for in legacy systems could have a major impact on the army's sbas and sbr . also , processing billions of dollars in unobligated balances and unpaid obligations in the army's five procurement appropriation accounts that are accounted for in legacy systems as previously discussed could take several years . therefore , this ongoing activity will likely affect initial examinations of incremental sbas currently expected to begin with fiscal year 2015 as well as full sbrs to be examined in subsequent years . army officials acknowledged these risks and that the army had not documented its assessment of them . despite the uncertainty associated with how these risks may affect the auditability of the army's incremental sbas and full sbrs , according to army officials , the scope of their efforts and plans for adhering to established audit readiness assertion and examination milestones have remained unchanged . however , without sufficient documentation identifying these risks and assessing their potential impact on producing auditable sbas and full sbrs within established time frames , the army is unable to provide needed assurance that its strategy will achieve audit readiness or when it will be achieved . further , as discussed earlier , the ndaa for fiscal year 2013 requires that dod's fiar plan status reports include the army's determination on whether it will achieve an auditable sbr by september 30 , 2014 . recognizing the potential impact of audit readiness challenges , the ndaa also requires that the fiar plan status report include an alternative date for achieving sbr audit readiness if the army determines that it is unable to meet this deadline . however , the army's determination , as presented in the november 2013 fiar plan status report , did not meet these requirements . specifically , while the army's determination stated that it would achieve sba audit readiness by september 30 , 2014 , it did not address whether full sbr auditability would be achieved by that date or , if not , clearly indicate an alternative deadline for doing so .