pub . 107-300 , 116 stat . prior to ipia , former section 57 of omb circular no . a - 11 required certain agencies to submit similar information , including estimated improper payment target rates , target rates for future reductions in these payments , the types and causes of these payments , and variances from targets and goals established . in addition , these agencies were to provide a description and assessment of the current methods for measuring the rate of improper payments and the quality of data resulting from these methods . dod began reporting improper payment information for military health benefits and military retirement in fiscal year 2003 . appendix c to omb circular no . a - 123 , requirements for effective measurement and remediation of improper payments ( aug. 10 , 2006 ) . improper payments are defined as any payment that should not have been made or that was made in an incorrect amount ( including overpayments and underpayments ) under statutory , contractual , administrative , or other legally applicable requirements . it includes any payment to an ineligible recipient , any payment for an ineligible service , any duplicate payment , payments for services not received , and any payment that does not account for credit for applicable discounts . dod , department of defense budget for fiscal year 2008: financial summary tables ( february 2007 ) . an obligation is a definite commitment that creates a legal liability of the government for the payment of goods and services ordered or received , or a legal duty on the part of the united states that could mature into a legal liability by virtue of actions on the part of the other party beyond the control of the united states . payment may be made immediately or in the future . an expenditure is the actual spending of money — an outlay . we use the terms payment and expenditure interchangeably . government that year . over the past several years , gao has issued numerous reports that highlighted problems with dod travel practices that resulted in wasteful spending of millions of dollars and potentially improper travel , including weak controls over first class travel , unused airline tickets , and the accuracy of travelers' claims . the dod office of inspector general ( dod oig ) , first reporting on the department's overall compliance with ipia in fiscal year 2006 , identified several significant flaws . conference report 109-676 , accompanying the department of defense appropriations act , 2007 , included a requirement for gao to assess the reasons why dod was not fully in compliance with ipia related to travel expenditures and make any needed recommendations for corrective action . in may 2007 , we issued an initial report that provided an overview of dod's ipia reporting for fiscal years 2003 through 2006 and a discussion of the reasons reported by the dod oig for why the department was not in compliance with ipia for fiscal year 2006 .