workforce needs . institutionalize this capability to ensure its continuation by successive administrations . ineffective placement , training , and recruitment constrained workforce management . determine the desired general composition workforce planning system . of the direct - hire workforce and develop a plan for reshaping the workforce along those lines . conduct an individual skills profile of the existing workforce and analyze it in the context of the desired general composition of the direct - hire workforce . system to simplify , reduce , and thereby broaden categories . eastern caribbean and windward islands grenada montserrat st. kitts and nevis st. lucia st. vincent and the grenadines suriname trinidad and tobago turks and caicos islands uruguay venezuela usaid regional service platforms . lack of training . hired and what should be contracted . limited hiring of entry - level staff . agency's program budget increased , but its workforce decreased for 10 years . usaid has significant barriers to workforce planning . establish a workforce planning committee to identify program needs on a continuing basis . reduce the number of personnel backstops and develop qualifications in multiple skills categories . human resources department is not effective . develop definitions and requirements so and maintained was not up to date , consistent , totally accurate , or complete . reported data is on time , consistent , accurate , and complete . provide training for staff members who enter and correct personnel data . develop procedures for missions to attest to the accuracy of their workforce data . institute process to collect data on the reasons for employee attrition . develop workforce plans for usaid's civil and nondirect - hire workforce . usaid office of the inspector general , audit of usaid's workforce planning for procurement officers , audit report number 9-000-03-001-p ( washington , d.c.: nov. 13 , 2002 ) . usaid has not developed a comprehensive workforce plan that covers its entire procurement workforce . usaid needs to develop a comprehensive workforce plan for the usaid procurement workforce . u.s. general accounting office , foreign assistance: disaster recovery program addressed intended purposes but usaid needs greater flexibility to improve its response capability , gao - 02-787 ( washington , d.c.: july 24 , 2002 ) . affected the initial pace of program implementation . usaid lacked a “surge capacity” to quickly design and implement a large - scale program with relatively short time frames . implement procedures to ( 1 ) allow usaid to quickly reassign key personnel , ( 2 ) allow missions to expedite the hiring of contractor staff , and ( 3 ) facilitate coordination with other u.s. government agencies involved in reconstruction . foreign and civil service new hires must precedence over long - term workforce planning needs . possess managerial and analytical skills . create an inventory of staff work history , experience , skills , and abilities . adopt a single unified personnel system . u.s. general accounting office , foreign assistance: aid strategic direction and continued management improvements needed , gao / nsiad - 93-106 ( washington , d.c.: june 11 , 1993 ) . develop and implement a comprehensive changing . workforce lacked needed skills .