we disagree . we conducted this analysis in an effort to gain some perspective on the percent of fsis annual appropriation for inspection devoted to humane handling and estimated that it has been above 1 percent of fsis's total annual inspection appropriation . fsis officials informed us that 80 percent of their time should be devoted to food safety and 20 percent to humane handling inspection and other activities . because fsis cannot track humane handling funds separately , the agency was unable to provide the amount of funds that it devotes to humane handling activities . to provide context for the reader , we estimated the percentage of the total annual inspection appropriations dedicated to hmsa enforcement . we modified the text to expand the definition of fsis inspection fund to include other activities such as livestock slaughter , poultry slaughter , processing inspection , egg inspection , import inspection , in - commerce compliance , district office activities and food safety enforcement activities . however , this clarification does not change the calculation . we disagree . while the oig report states that “events that occurred at hallmark were not a systemic failure of the inspection processes / system as designed by fsis,” it is important to note that its scope was based on observations at 10 cull cow ( older and weaker ) slaughter facilities . nevertheless , the oig report presented 25 recommendations to strengthen fsis activities , and fsis accepted all of these recommendations . specifically , oig recommended that fsis needs to “reassess the inhumane handling risks associated with cull slaughter establishments and determine if more frequent or in - depth reviews need to be conducted.” the report also recommended “that a structured training and development program , with a continuing education component , be developed for both its inspection and management resources.” furthermore , our survey results and analysis of hmsa enforcement data — that inspectors did not consistently identify and take enforcement action for humane handling violations for the period we reviewed — indicate a more widespread problem . therefore , we continue to believe that it is difficult to know whether these incidents are isolated or not , and the extent of such incidents is difficult to determine because fsis does not evaluate the narrative in noncompliance reports . in addition to the individual named above , other key contributors to this report were thomas m. cook , assistant director ; nanette j. barton ; michele e. lockhart ; beverly a. peterson ; carol herrnstadt shulman ; and tyra j. thompson . important contributions were also made by kevin s. bray , michele c. fejfar , justin fisher , carol henn , kirsten lauber , and ying long . we found no discrepancies or errors . therefore , these results clearly demonstrate that inspectors - in - charge may not have been sufficiently trained . the national academies' institute of medicine study found weaknesses in the noncompliance reports , and as we stated , the institute recommended testing and improved training with special emphasis on the quality and consistency of noncompliance reports for food safety issues .