resources . the success of the commission is dependent on having the adequate resources to carry out its purpose and any potential recommendations . generally , one concern regarding commissions may be whether or not there is sufficient buy - in from key stakeholders on the purpose of the commission along with a commitment to act on any resulting recommendations . any recommendations by a commission in a final report are generally advisory in nature and may not automatically result in any public policy changes . congressional action through subsequent legislation with presidential support may be necessary for the commission's recommendations to be implemented and for any changes to occur . accountability . clear accountability for a commission can help foster specific , useful outputs that could help inform the public and provide specific policy options and , hopefully , recommendations for congress and the president . food safety concerns not only continue but will likely become more urgent in view of changing demographics and consumption patterns . clearly , fda plays a critical role in the federal oversight of food safety because of the breadth of its responsibilities . thus its ability to carry out those responsibilities is necessary to help ensure the safety of the nation's food supply in the most efficient , effective , accountable , and sustainable way . nevertheless , in light of the federal government's long - term fiscal challenges , agencies , including fda , need to seek out opportunities to better leverage their resources . fda's food protection plan is a step in the right direction and proposes to implement many of the recommendations made by gao . however , additional information on the strategies and resources needed to implement the plan can help congress assess the likelihood of its success . further , concerns over fda's management challenges , such as those identified by the science board could hinder the implementation of the plan . tools such as commissions and positions like a coo / cmo can help agencies address management challenges and make needed progress to achieve their missions . continued congressional oversight , including today's hearing , and additional legislative action are key to achieving that progress and to promoting the safety and integrity of the nation's food supply . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . for further information about this testimony , please contact lisa shames , director , natural resources and environment at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or shamesl@gao.gov . key contributors to this statement were candace carpenter , bart fischer , josé alfredo gómez , and alison o'neill . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . import inspections . fda and usda both inspect shipments of imported food at ports of entry and also visit foreign countries that export food to the united states .