gao - 14-49 . particular , given that dod continues to lack an understanding of how the establishment of the dha will affect staff levels , its challenges in identifying cost savings and a clear mission for its education reforms could result in increases in staff levels without any savings . ( see fig . since first becoming operational in 2010 , metc has created 14 new consolidated courses while 22 of its courses were consolidated prior to metc's creation . metc trains , on average , about 20,000 students annually and is estimated to cost almost $27 million in fiscal year 2015 . see appendix i for a list of courses taught at metc and course participants . defense medical readiness training institute ( dmrti ) : tri - service organization that is staffed by servicemembers from the army , the navy , and the air force as well as department of the army civilians and according to officials , had a $1.4 million budget in fiscal year 2013 . this organization offers resident and nonresident joint medical readiness training courses as well as professional medical programs that enable military medical personnel , both active duty and reserve , to better perform a wide range of medical and health support missions they face throughout the world . courses include trauma care , burn care , public health emergency preparedness , humanitarian assistance , and emergency response to chemical , biological , nuclear , and other events . during fiscal year 2013 , approximately 3,600 students participated in 122 course iterations in 51 different locations . according to officials , besides providing medical readiness training to u.s. servicemembers , dmrti has provided this training to officials in 38 countries at the request of a combatant command . joint medical executive skills institute ( jmesi ) : tri - service organization that provides military health care leaders with executive management skill programs , products , and services that are designed to enhance their performance as managers and leaders in the military healthcare environment . the training jmesi provides centers on the core curriculum which is a collection of 35 executive administrative competencies required of a military hospital commander that tri - service senior leaders are responsible for reviewing and updating every 3 years . each year approximately 200 managers graduate from jmesi's healthcare management seminar and mhs capstone symposium , and nearly 20,000 students participate in its online , distance learning program . in addition to tri - service training , each of the services operates its own education and training entities that provide additional training to their medical servicemembers . the army and navy education and training entities are constituent commands of the army medical command and the bureau of medicine and surgery , respectively , which are headed by surgeons general . the air force education and training entities conduct a wide variety of training , including nonmedical training , and do not report directly to the air force surgeon general . these organizations include the following: army medical department center and school ( amedd c&s ) : army training headquarters located at fort sam houston , texas . the center formulates the army medical department's medical organization , tactics , doctrine , and equipment .