usaid concurred with our recommendations . we also received technical comments from usaid and state , which we incorporated in our report as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the administrator of usaid , the secretary of state , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6881 or bairj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . we performed our work under the authority of the comptroller general to conduct work to assist congress with its oversight responsibilities . this report ( 1 ) examines the status of the u.s. agency for international development's ( usaid ) reform efforts and ( 2 ) assesses the extent to which usaid has addressed key practices and considerations critical to the successful planning and implementation of agency reform efforts . the scope of our review was limited to usaid's internal reform efforts and did not include government - wide or interagency reform proposals , such as those referenced in the office of management and budget's delivering government solutions in the 21st century report . for both objectives , we reviewed usaid's reform plans , proposals , and related documents and interviewed officials involved in usaid's reform efforts . we conducted this performance audit from february 2018 to september 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in response to executive order 13781 , usaid established the transformation task team ( t3 ) in june 2017 to plan and lead the agency's reform efforts . as noted in a previous gao report , usaid launched several internal reform efforts and participated in a joint state - usaid redesign process during mid - 2017 , which resulted in a joint reform plan . usaid also developed a supplemental reform plan that focused on issues internal to usaid . state and usaid submitted these plans to omb in september 2017 . in january 2018 , usaid suspended its participation in the joint state – usaid redesign process and continued to plan and implement its own internal reforms . according to usaid , its reform efforts are intended to support its bilateral partners to become more self - reliant and capable of leading their own development , with the ultimate goal of ending the need for foreign assistance . to achieve this goal , usaid identified five objectives , referred to as “desired outcomes,” as the basis for its reform efforts .