there have been no appeals regarding volunteer claims . for 85 volunteer claims , the claimants had received medical or cash benefits , and for 23 of these claims , the claimants were receiving continuing cash benefits . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for information regarding this testimony , please contact robert e. robertson , director , or brett s. fallavollita , assistant director , education , workforce , and income security at ( 202 ) 512-7215 . individuals making contributions to this testimony include linda l. siegel , kenneth j. adams , tonnye conner - white , margie armen , and amy buck . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . gao incorporated these comments as appropriate . the new york state workers' compensation board administers the state workers' compensation program and processes claims for workers' compensation benefits . these benefits go to workers who are injured at work or become ill because of workplace conditions and to survivors of workers who die because of their work - related injury or illness . new york state requires employers to provide workers' compensation insurance — either from the state insurance fund ( sif ) , a private insurance carrier , or self - insurance — to pay cash and / or provide medical benefits for workers who qualify for coverage . because some employers do not comply with this requirement , the state maintains a uef to provide workers' compensation benefits for workers associated with uninsured employers . to administer the state workers' compensation program , the board reviews claims to determine whether a worker is eligible to receive workers' compensation benefits . in simplified form , the workers' compensation claims process includes the following steps: an individual files a claim . an insurer can challenge the claim if it questions the validity of the claim . the board resolves some cases without a hearing , while for others the board holds a hearing or a series of hearings before a workers' compensation administrative law judge with interested parties present , such as claimants , employers , and insurance carriers . the board makes a final decision whether or not benefits are to be awarded to the claimant . for claims approved , insurance carriers , self - insured employers , or the uef makes direct payments to the claimant . either the claimant or insurer can appeal this decision . the appeal process involves successively higher levels of appeal ; the highest level is the new york state court of appeals . as a result of the september 11 terrorist attacks , congress appropriated $175 million in federal funds to assist the new york state workers' compensation board with the resulting workers' compensation claims .