continuous maintenance . continuous maintenance periods are to conduct maintenance outside of the longer cno maintenance periods that can be done in short periods typically scheduled to be 2 to 6 weeks in duration . according to navy officials , the schedules of these periods can vary , and commanders can adjust , postpone , or cancel them based on operational demands . voyage repair . voyage repair maintenance periods are solely to accomplish corrective maintenance of a mission - or safety - essential nature necessary for a ship to deploy or continue its deployment . for example , ships based in the united states that are deployed overseas on a temporary basis schedule mid - deployment voyage repair to ensure they can continue their deployment . the process for planning surface ship depot - level maintenance periods ( i.e. , cno maintenance periods ) , whether the ship is based overseas or in the united states , is contained in the navy's joint fleet maintenance manual . in general , the navy begins planning for a ship's depot - level maintenance period 720 days — or roughly 2 years — before the planned start of the maintenance period . during this time , a variety of organizations within the navy plan what will be repaired , how long it will take , where the work will be done , as well as select the contractors to perform the work , among other things . this process also includes activities to close out the maintenance period once it is complete , which overlap with the start of the planning cycle for the next maintenance period . for example , certain milestones serve both planning and closeout purposes — such as the life - cycle planning conference meeting , which is to both closeout a ship's completed maintenance period and to begin planning for the next one by reviewing the maintenance requirements , deferred work , and planned schedules ( see figure 3 ) . naval supply systems command's fleet logistics centers offices overseas are responsible for soliciting and awarding maintenance contracts , for ships based overseas , among other things . the navy has developed different maintenance capacity and approaches to maintain the 38 surface ships based in japan , spain , and bahrain . the navy maintains these ships through a mix of navy , host government , and contractor industrial base facilities and resources that are different at each location . the navy has tailored the maintenance approaches it uses at each homeport considering the available navy and contractor capacity , as well as the number and type of ships , according to navy documents and officials . table 1 provides an overview of the navy and contractor industrial base capacity for depot - level maintenance of surface ships based at the four main overseas homeports . naval ship repair facility and japan regional maintenance center ( srf - jrmc ) , yokosuka , japan . the navy's largest overseas maintenance facility , srf - jrmc is located in yokosuka and is responsible for the maintenance of 12 surface ships homeported there — including the most destroyers and the only cruisers based outside of the united states .