ii ) . in addition , treasury developed materials , such as an educator's guide and video that could be used by community based organizations to educate check recipients about the eta . treasury's other efforts include developing eta promotional materials such as brochures , posters , and pens with the eta logo for distribution to financial institutions and community organizations promoting the eta , as well as public service advertising for newspapers , radio , and television . in addition , treasury sponsors what it calls “strategic alliance meetings” about a dozen times a year at different locations around the country . at these meetings , treasury educates representatives of community - based organizations , eta providers , financial institutions , local federal program offices ( for example , ssa and va ) , and local government officials about the benefits of the eta and promotes collaborative efforts locally . most financial institutions do not offer them . because some of the nation's biggest banks , which typically have the greatest number of branches , have enrolled in the eta program , opportunities to reach eta prospects have increased . but these banks often market the eta only on a limited basis , as they do not see the account as profitable . smaller banks that focus on specific community or ethnic groups often do make special efforts to market the eta but open fewer accounts . further , potential eta users may choose not to participate in the program because they prefer other means of cashing their checks or feel that the eta does not offer enough features — for example , a payment mechanism . given the current number of eta holders , it is unclear whether the eta can generate savings sufficient to offset the costs of maintaining and promoting the program . treasury considers the eta important because it is the preferred method of fulfilling the 1996 debt collection improvement act's intention that unbanked benefit recipients use eft to receive their payments . however , providing low - cost electronic services that are attractive to both the unbanked recipient population and financial institutions presented treasury with a major challenge , especially when eft became optional . in response to congressional concerns and concerns expressed by consumer and community - based organizations , federal agencies , and recipients , treasury established a broad waiver policy emphasizing consumer choice , essentially allowing beneficiaries to decide for themselves whether they wanted to open an eta . key contributors to this report include sonja bensen , emily chalmers , kyong h. lee , grant mallie , mark ramage , and carl ramirez . an overall objective of this report is to describe how treasury complied with the 1996 debt collection improvement act's mandate to promote the use of electronic funds transfer ( eft ) payments to federal beneficiaries and to identify obstacles to increasing the use of direct deposit .