constant term . a random disturbance term ( residual ) . ( 2 ) ols:yi = θ + xβ + cδ + λα + ε2i the dependent variable ( premium paid to shareholders of the target company ) . “shareholder wealth gains through better corporate governance: the case of european lbo - transactions.” financial markets and portfolio management , vol . bargeron , leonce , frederik schlingemann , rene m stulz and chad zutter . “why do private acquirers pay so little compared to public acquirers ? ” national bureau of economic research working paper , no . betzer , andré . “why private equity investors buy dear or cheap in european leveraged buyout transactions.” kredit und kapital , vol . cao , jerry x . “a study of lbo premium.” unpublished working paper ( nov. 24 , 2007 ) . cao , jerry and josh lerner . “the performance of reverse leveraged buyouts” national bureau of economic research working paper , no . cressy , robert , federico munari and alessandro malipiero . “playing to their strengths: evidence that specialization in the private equity industry conveys competitive advantage.” journal of corporate finance , vol . davis , steven j. , josh lerner , john haltiwanger , javier miranda and ron jarmin . “private equity and employment” in the global economic impact of private equity report 2008 , ed . anuradha gurung and josh lerner ( geneva , switzerland: world economic forum , 2008 ) . gottschalg , oliver . private equity and leveraged buy - outs , study ip / a / econ / ic / 2007-25 , european parliament , policy department , economic and scientific policy ( 2007 ) . guo , shourun , edith hotchkiss and weihong song . do buyouts ( still ) create value ? unpublished working paper ( 2007 ) . lerner , josh , morten sørenson and per strömberg . “private equity and long - run investment: the case of innovation.” in the global economic impact of private equity report 2008 , ed . anuradha gurung and josh lerner ( geneva , switzerland: world economic forum , 2008 ) . levis , mario . private equity backed ipos in uk . unpublished working paper ( 2008 ) . meuleman , miguel and mike wright . “industry concentration , syndication networks and competition in the uk private equity market for management buy - outs.” unpublished working paper ( 2006 ) . renneboog , luc , tomas simons and mike wright . “why do public firms go private in the uk ? the impact of private equity investors , incentive realignment , and undervaluation.” journal of corporate finance , vol . strömberg , per . “the new demography of private equity” in the global economic impact of private equity report 2008 , ed . anuradha gurung and josh lerner ( geneva , switzerland: world economic forum , 2008 ) . our econometric methodology exploits standard ordinary least squares ( ols ) and maximum likelihood ( ml ) procedures to investigate the following questions: what attributes of the target company or deal characteristics increase the probability that the transaction will be a club deal ( multiple private equity firms will join together to acquire the target company ) ?