, the service ) . 2.14 reduce injury compensation costs by developing joint strategies with owcp , such as an accelerated private sector placement program that reduces time for private sector outplacement of injured service employees from up to 2 years to less than 1 year . ( see app . ii for details on mail volumes and revenues in the first 2 quarters of fiscal year 2002. ) what information should the service be required to provide congress and the public on its performance , including areas such as financial performance , productivity , and mail delivery ? another issue we have noted , related to transparency and accountability , involves improvements needed in the service's financial reporting . the principles for the service's financial information are the same as those in our recent testimony on financial reporting issues: financial statements , which are at the center of present - day business reporting , must be timely , relevant , and reliable to be useful for decision - making . we have recently reported that the service's financial outlook was repeatedly revised in fiscal year 2001 with little or no public explanation and that greater transparency is needed regarding the service's financial and operating results and projections . accordingly , we have recommended that the service improve the transparency of its financial information by providing monthly and quarterly financial reports in a user - friendly format on its web site in a more timely manner . the service has agreed with our recommendation to improve the transparency of its financial data and stated that it was providing financial reports on its web site in a more timely and user - friendly manner . to date , the service has begun to provide monthly financial reports on its web site . it has also provided one quarterly financial report — for the third quarter of fiscal year 2001 . currently , the service has posted on its web site the chief financial officer's financial presentation for the second quarter of fiscal year 2002 . this presentation has less information than the previous publicly available quarterly report — it does not include cash flow data , year - to - date analysis , or changes in outlook . in our opinion , this publicly available information has not provided sufficiently detailed information for stakeholders to understand the service's current and projected financial condition or how its financial outlook has changed . more timely , accessible , and reliable financial information is sorely needed . stakeholders are looking for positive , constructive ways to work through difficult postal transformation issues and the service's transformation plan was a good start . many postal transformation issues are complex , and consensus is likely to be hard to achieve on key areas such as a new definition of universal postal service , the associated infrastructure , human capital , governance , accountability , and transparency issues , among others . further , a successful transformation of the service will require shared sacrifice . however , given the vital role of our postal system in communications and commerce , and the service's declining financial outlook , it's time for all stakeholders to roll up their sleeves and engage in postal transformation issues .