dot agreed with all three recommendations . as of june 2020 , faa has fully addressed one of our recommendations and taken partial action on two other recommendations . specifically , faa fully responded to our recommendation that faa disclose the process it uses for prioritizing and selecting research projects by updating in 2018 its internal guidance documents to allow better transparency over project selection . in partially responding to our recommendation to take a more strategic approach to identifying research priorities across the agency , in june 2019 , faa issued a redesigned national aviation research plan ( narp ) for 2017-2018 . the redesigned plan is a good first step . also as part of an effort to be more strategic , faa is beginning to take actions to understand emerging aviation issues requiring faa's research attention . this recommendation has not been fully addressed as , according to faa officials , the agency is still developing guidance to ensure that future narps take a strategic approach and incorporate emerging issues into future plans . faa officials told us they plan to finalize the guidance by the end of 2020 . similarly , with respect to our recommendation aimed at achieving compliance with statutory reporting requirements , the redesigned 2017-2018 narp included a list of agreements with federal and nonfederal entities on research activities , resource allocation decisions , and a description of technology transfer to government , industry , and academia , among other items . officials told us that they are finalizing the 2019 r&d annual review , which has been redesigned to address other statutory reporting requirements , and will develop guidance to ensure that future documents meet those requirements . faa has sponsored limited federal research into disease transmission onboard aircraft and in airports . faa's research goals focus on areas like improving airport operations and air space management , and developing new technologies , which faa has aligned to dot's strategic goals related to safety , infrastructure , and innovation . based on our prior work and interviews with faa officials , we found that faa's research in cabin safety for crew and passengers does not focus on disease transmission . for example , according to faa officials , as of june 2020 , ongoing research that most closely relates to disease contamination is research related to monitoring the quality of “bleed air,” which is outside air that is drawn through jet engines into an aircraft cabin . faa officials said that its civil aerospace medical institute is participating in this research . even so , faa has funded some programs that are relevant to mitigating communicable disease transmission at airports and on aircraft . for example , in 2015 the transportation research board's airports cooperative research program ( acrp ) , which is funded by faa's airport improvement program ( aip ) , decided to hold a series of workshops on topics that are of significance to airports and that are not being addressed by other federal research programs . the decision to hold the first acrp workshop on communicable disease occurred toward the end of the ebola virus outbreak . acrp has also issued reports on reducing communicable disease transmission at airports and aircraft .