clarifying regulatory responsibilities . experts we spoke with during the course of our review in 2011 expressed concern that there was a lack of clarity about the division of responsibility between federal and state regulators , particularly regarding cybersecurity . while jurisdictional responsibility has historically been determined by whether a technology is located on the transmission or distribution system , experts raised concerns that smart grid technology may blur these lines because , for example , devices deployed on parts of the grid traditionally subject to state jurisdiction could , in the aggregate , affect the reliability of the transmission system , which falls under federal jurisdiction . experts also noted concern about the ability of regulatory bodies to respond quickly to evolving cybersecurity threats . clarifying these responsibilities could help improve the effectiveness of efforts to protect smart grid technology from cyber threats . taking a comprehensive approach to cybersecurity . to secure their systems and information , entities should adopt an integrated , organization - wide program for managing information security risk . such an approach helps ensure that risk management decisions are aligned strategically with the organization's mission and security controls are effectively implemented . however , as we reported in 2011 , experts told us that the existing federal and state regulatory environment had created a culture within the utility industry of focusing on compliance with regulatory requirements instead of one focused on achieving comprehensive and effective cybersecurity . by taking such a comprehensive approach , utilities could better mitigate cybersecurity risk . ensuring that smart grid systems have built - in security features . information systems should be securely configured , including having the ability to record events that take place on networks to allow for detecting and analyzing potential attacks . nonetheless , experts told us that certain currently available smart meters had not been designed with a strong security architecture and lacked important security features , such as event logging . by ensuring that smart grid systems are securely designed , utilities could enhance their ability to detect and analyze attacks , reducing the risk that attacks will succeed and helping to prevent them from recurring . effectively sharing cybersecurity information . information sharing is a key element in the model established by federal policy for protecting critical infrastructure . however , the electric industry lacked an effective mechanism to disclose information about cybersecurity vulnerabilities , incidents , threats , lessons learned , and best practices . for example , experts we spoke with stated that while the industry had an information - sharing center , it did not fully address these information needs . establishing quality processes for information sharing will help provide utilities with the information needed to adequately protect cyber assets against attackers . establishing metrics for evaluating cybersecurity . metrics are important for comparing the effectiveness of competing cybersecurity solutions and determining what mix of solutions will make the most secure system . the electric industry , however , was challenged by a lack of cybersecurity metrics , making it difficult to determine the extent to which investments in cybersecurity improve the security of smart grid systems . developing such metrics could provide utilities with key information for making informed and cost - effective decisions on cybersecurity investments .