a. lucas . “response to regulatory stringency: the case of antipsychotic medication use in nursing homes.” health economics , vol . briesacher , b . a. , j. tjia , t. field , k. m. mazor , j. l. donovan , a. o. kanaan , l. r. harrold , c. a. lemay , and j. h. gurwitz . “ nationwide variation in nursing home antipsychotic use , staffing and quality of care.” abstracts of the 28th icpe 2012 , ( 2012 ) . ( see fig . residents with dementia accounted for a significant proportion of all nursing home residents . in 2012 , about 38 percent , or almost 1.1 million of the 2.8 million nursing home residents that year , were diagnosed with dementia . examining this more comprehensive database of nursing home residents also allowed us to compare the antipsychotic drug prescribing rates of long - stay residents and short - stay residents — those residents who spent 100 days or less in the nursing home . the proportion of residents diagnosed with dementia who were prescribed an antipsychotic drug was greater for long - stay residents than for short - stay residents ( about 33 percent versus 23 percent , respectively ) . ( see table 2. ) variation in prescribing rates across resident characteristics was similar to the variation found in the medicare part d enrollee long - stay nursing home population . of those medicare part d enrollees with dementia in settings outside of the nursing home , about one in seven ( 14 percent ) were prescribed an antipsychotic . ( see fig . for example , delaware showed a 27 percent reduction — from 21.3 to 15.5 percent — in the prevalence of antipsychotic drug use from 2011 through 2013 , while nevada saw a smaller reduction of 2.7 percent — from 20.3 to 19.7 percent — during the same period . the national partnership is working with state coalitions , as well as nursing homes to reduce this rate even further . in september 2014 , cms established a new set of national goals to reduce the use antipsychotic drugs in long - stay nursing home residents by 25 percent by the end of 2015 and 30 percent by the end of 2016 , which , assuming a baseline of 23.8 percent , would lead to a prescribing rate of 16.7 percent . beginning in january 2015 , cms's five - star quality rating system for nursing homes will be based , in part , on this measure of the extent to which antipsychotic drugs are used in the nursing home . the five - star quality rating system provides a way for consumers to compare nursing homes on the medicare web site . previously , the measure was displayed , but not included in the calculation of each nursing home's overall quality score . person - centered care is an approach to care that focuses on residents as individuals and supports caregivers working most closely with them . it involves a continual process of listening , testing new approaches , and changing routines and organizational approaches in an effort to individualize and de - institutionalize the care environment .