reducing denied boardings . in 2019 , we reported that selected airlines have taken a range of actions , aimed at reducing involuntary denied boardings . some of these actions also provide additional incentives for passengers to volunteer to be denied boarding . actions include reducing or eliminating overbookings ; improving software to better predict passenger no - shows ; requesting volunteers earlier ( eg , at check - in instead of at the gate ) ; increasing compensation for volunteers ; and conducting reverse auctions to solicit volunteers . less mishandled baggage . as we reported in 2018 , representatives from almost all airlines we interviewed reported investing resources to improve baggage - handling efforts and minimize the effects to passengers whose bags are lost or delayed . among other actions , airline representatives told us they upgraded baggage technology ; modernized the claims process , so passengers could complete forms on - line ; and instituted replacement baggage programs , where passengers can get a replacement bag at the airport . one airline also invested several million dollars to use radio frequency identification technology to track bags , as well as allowing passengers to track their baggage via an application on their smartphone . efforts to minimize flight disruptions . in 2018 , we also reported that selected airlines had taken numerous actions to improve on - time performance or mitigate challenges for passengers associated with flight delays and cancellations . for example , one airline began tracking flights that were “at - risk” of meeting dot's definition of a chronically delayed flight , so it could , among other things , swap crews or substitute aircraft and avoid these types of delays . other airlines told us they use technology , such as text - messaging updates , to communicate with passengers during delays and cancellations or increased the number of circumstances for which passengers are compensated during delays and cancellations . our prior work has shown that passengers may be affected to varying degrees by airline operational issues , and that incidents can be costly and disruptive for some passengers . airlines are required by dot regulations to provide compensation or certain amenities to inconvenienced passengers under certain circumstances . for example , some passengers who are denied boarding involuntarily are entitled to compensation , with the amount varying based on certain factors . airlines are also required by dot's interpretation of the statutory prohibition on unfair and deceptive practices to provide refunds for canceled and significantly delayed flights , if a passenger chooses to cancel his or her trip . beyond those requirements , dot officials previously told us that airlines are not obligated to provide accommodations for flight disruptions , such as cancellations and delays , unless specified in an airline's contract of carriage , although as mentioned above , some voluntarily choose to do so in certain situations . this may result in significant inconveniences for passengers , who may incur costs for lodging , meals and transportation . as the population continues to age , the likelihood of this group needing assistance may increase .