lack of space . once the hiring process was completed , officials at four of the five vamcs and all five cbocs we visited reported difficulties getting mental health hires in place to provide care due to a lack of sufficient space . all of the vamcs we visited had either recently completed or were in the process of undergoing expansions of mental health space in their vamc or cboc buildings . officials at one of the cbocs we visited said that although they moved into their current facility in july 2014 , by april 2015 , they were already struggling with space constraints . lack of support staff . four vamcs we visited reported that a lack of non - clinical support staff resulted in providers taking on some of the administrative burden , which reduced their clinical availability . for example , officials at one vamc said that while the recent hiring initiatives added staff to improve access , without a corresponding initiative for hiring support staff , providers are now also scheduling patient appointments , addressing office equipment issues , and handling phone calls about administrative issues , in addition to their clinical duties . nationwide shortage of mental health professionals . officials at three vamcs we visited reported that the nationwide shortage in mental health professionals also presented a hiring challenge . according to the department of health & human services' ( hhs ) substance abuse and mental health services administration , the nation faces a current shortage in the mental health and addiction services workforce , and that shortage is expected to continue . as of july 2015 , there were about 4,000 areas designated as having a shortage of mental health professionals , which hhs's health resources and services administration projected would require almost 2,700 additional mental health providers to fill the need in these underserved areas . additional staff likely will be needed to meet vha's continuing demand for mental health care . previous reports from us and others have highlighted inefficiencies in non - va care delivery . concern about appropriateness of care . vamc and visn officials also expressed concern about the appropriateness and effectiveness of referring to community providers for mental health care , and had concerns about the ability of community providers to provide culturally competent and high - quality care to veterans . vamc and cmhc officials noted the importance of having providers provide culturally competent mental health care for veterans , and some vamcs were reported to have provided such training to community providers . some vha officials expressed concern about whether sufficient providers in certain areas have the necessary training and experience to treat certain types of veterans and one vamc established guidelines regarding which veterans were eligible to be referred for non - va care and which were not . vamc officials said that some veterans preferred receiving care through vha rather than through a cmhc . together these factors may have contributed to veterans generally choosing to remain within the vha system for mental health care .