that unit . as of february 1 , 2015 , there was one preventive medicine unit available to conduct oehs activities in iraq and one in afghanistan , which reported to usarcent and u.s. forces - afghanistan , respectively . each of the military services has a public health surveillance center that provides support and technical guidance on reporting on potential environmental risks to combatant commands and their subordinate commands . these public health surveillance centers include the u.s. army public health command , the u.s. air force school of aerospace medicine , and the navy & marine corps public health center . in addition , these centers provide technical expertise and support for the subordinate commands' preventive medicine units in theater . these surveillance centers have also developed and adapted military exposure guidelines for deployment using existing u.s. national standards for human health exposure limits and technical monitoring procedures ( eg , standards of the u.s. environmental protection agency and the national institute for occupational safety and health ) . as part of dod's health surveillance framework , force health protection & readiness deployment health policies require the preventive medicine units to regularly collect and report a variety of data during deployments to identify and respond to health threats that servicemembers may have encountered . health surveillance during deployments includes identifying the deployed population at risk , recognizing and assessing potentially hazardous health exposures and conditions , employing specific preventive countermeasures , daily monitoring of real - time health outcomes , and reporting of disease and injury data . dod collects and stores three types of data during deployments: ( 1 ) daily individual servicemember location data — such as the duty station — which is stored by dod's defense manpower data center ; ( 2 ) medical data — including data on health outcomes acquired from servicemember medical records — which is stored by dod's armed forces health surveillance center ; and ( 3 ) oehs data , including ambient air , water , and soil samples . once collected , dod currently uses two separate it systems for the storage of oehs data — mesl and doehrs: mesl , originally implemented in 2003 , contains both classified and unclassified documents that have been scanned and uploaded into the system . officials can use mesl for submitting oehs documents , conducting searches based on key words , and downloading oehs documents . dod subsequently began implementing doehrs in 2006 . unlike mesl , doehrs is a database that incorporates additional functionalities including oehs data collection , management , and assessment — including the ability to query data — in a single system . it allows users in theatre to capture field data , such as air , water , and soil samples ; compare sample results with exposure guidelines ; report sampling data ; and view laboratory data instantly once data are loaded into the system . unlike mesl , doehrs only contains unclassified data . while there are some departmental requirements for some oehs reports for deployment sites — such as an initial assessment — the total number of oehs reports for each deployment site varies because these reports reflect the specific occupational and environmental circumstances unique to each location .