originally 62,000 . of the more than 82,000 chemicals currently in the tsca inventory , approximately 20,000 were added to the inventory since epa began reviewing chemicals in 1979 . eu officials estimated the number of chemicals with production or import levels of at least 1 metric ton ( 2,205 pounds ) to be about 30,000 . chemical registration will be phased in over 11 years after enactment of reach . companies are required to notify epa prior to manufacturing a new chemical . companies notify epa of its intent to manufacture a new chemical through submission of a premanufacture notice ( pmn ) or of an application for exemption . after the pmn review period has expired and within 30 days of the chemical's manufacture , companies submit a notice of commencement of manufacture or import to epa . the chemical is then added to the tsca inventory , and the chemical is classified as an existing chemical . tsca generally does not require chemical companies to notify epa of changes in use or production volume . however , every 5 years companies are required to update epa on information such as the processing , use , and production volume of chemicals produced at over 25,000 pounds . in general , reach treats new and existing chemicals the same . chemical companies register chemicals with the european chemicals agency once production or import of a chemical reaches 1 metric ton ( 2,205 pounds ) . companies must also notify epa if the company obtains information that reasonably supports the conclusion that the chemical presents a substantial risk to human health or the environment . after registration , companies are required to immediately notify the european chemicals agency of significant changes in use or production volumes of the registered chemical . based on information compiled through a series of steps , including a chemical review strategy meeting , structure - activity relationship analysis , and exposure - based reviews , epa makes a decision ranging from “dropping” a chemical for further review to banning a chemical pending further information . tsca does not require epa to systematically prioritize and assess existing chemicals . the european chemicals agency will develop the criteria for prioritizing chemicals for further review based on , among other things , hazard data , exposure data , and production volume . however , tsca established an interagency testing committee — an advisory committee created to identify chemicals for which there are suspicions of toxicity or exposure and for which there are few , if any ecological effects , environmental fate , or health - effects testing data — to recommend chemicals to which epa should give priority consideration in promulgating test rules . member states may use these criteria when developing their list of chemicals to be reviewed . epa also plans to use the high production volume ( hpv ) challenge program and the information under the inventory update rule to help the agency prioritize the chemicals it will review . new chemicals once they have commenced manufacture are added to the tsca inventory .