( recommendation 5 ) . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of agriculture , the secretary of housing and urban development , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or garciadiazd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . our objectives were to examine the rural housing service's ( rhs ) efforts to ( 1 ) estimate the dates that properties may exit the rural rental housing program due to mortgage maturity , and ( 2 ) preserve the affordability of rural rental properties with maturing mortgages . to examine rhs's efforts to estimate property exit dates , we analyzed rhs documentation and interviewed rhs officials about the data the agency uses to identify and preserve properties with maturing mortgages . to determine what steps rhs has taken to help ensure the accuracy and reliability of rhs's multi - family housing property preservation tool ( preservation tool ) , we reviewed documentation that included the preservation tool's user guide , and the capabilities it offered the agency and the public . we also conducted interviews with rhs national and state office officials about the preservation tool and about how the agency's automated multi - family housing accounting system ( amas ) and the multi - family housing information system ( mfis ) operate . management of maturing mortgages — rhs has not analyzed or responded to risks involving staff management of maturing mortgages . for example , the agency's national office said that staff attrition and turnover in the national , state , and field offices that manage mortgages have resulted in fewer staff managing its program in general and that they were not sure what the effect of maturing mortgages would have on staff workloads . rhs staff in some of the states we visited expressed concern that workloads are already heavy and that any increase caused by maturing mortgages , including smaller numbers occurring now , might affect their ability to be responsive to program needs . similarly , some state office staff expressed concerns that they were not trained for managing and responding to properties with maturing mortgages and needed additional guidance from the national office . rhs national office officials said that while the agency does not provide training specific to maturing mortgages , it does provide training on loan servicing , which includes the use of preservation options , and the national office conducts monthly conference calls that all state offices participate in , which have included maturing mortgages as a topic and which can be used to answer staff questions about maturing mortgages . rehabilitation costs — rhs has commissioned two studies on the risks that program - wide rehabilitation costs pose to its ability to preserve its program , but has not analyzed or planned for how it would address the estimated $5.6 billion needed to rehabilitate its aging portfolio of properties .