effectiveness of finra's rules . transparency of finra's governance and activities . section 964 also specified that gao was to conduct an initial review no later than 2 years after the enactment of the dodd - frank act and every 3 years thereafter . we issued our first report in 2012 and the second in 2015 . the first report examined how sec conducted oversight of finra and planned to enhance such oversight and the second report included an examination of sec's implementation of a risk - based framework for overseeing finra . this report generally focuses on sec oversight of finra's governance . specifically , this report ( 1 ) determines if sec oversight of finra operations and programs since fiscal year 2015 included the 10 areas specified in section 964 of the dodd - frank act , ( 2 ) evaluates the extent to which selected sec internal guidance on conducting examinations of finra follows generally accepted government auditing standards , and ( 3 ) evaluates the extent to which sec examinations of finra's governance practices followed sec's internal guidelines . to assess sec oversight of finra since fiscal year 2015 as it relates to section 964 areas , we requested and reviewed materials for sec examinations ( a term we use to include program inspections , examinations , and oversight activities stemming from tips and referrals ) that addressed those areas . to determine the extent to which selected sec internal guidance for finra examinations followed generally accepted government auditing standards , we compared the current version of sec's internal guidance ( examination manual ) to an earlier version that we previously determined had done so . any differences or additions were then assessed for compliance with government auditing standards . to determine the extent to which sec's program inspections of finra's governance ( in fiscal years 2015 – 2017 ) followed sec's internal guidance , we compared sec internal guidance ( examination manual ) with examination documents that included scope memorandums , letters to finra describing any deficiencies found , and closing letters to the file explaining disposition of examinations . we only reviewed the extent to which examinations followed specified guidelines and did not evaluate the analysis , findings , or disposition of the examinations . we also interviewed sec staff about the examination process and documentation requirements . we conducted this performance audit from november 2017 to july 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the office of compliance inspections and examinations ( ocie ) administers sec's nationwide examination and inspection program for registered sros , broker - dealers , transfer agents , clearing agencies , investment companies , and investment advisers . ocie conducts examinations and inspections to improve compliance , prevent fraud , monitor risk , and inform policy . executive compensation practices of finra . sec oversees sros to ensure that they carry out their regulatory responsibilities .