( see fig . as found in our previous work , states , schools , and teachers continue to focus instruction time on subjects other than geography . specifically , as schools spend more time improving students' reading , math , and science skills to meet federal accountability requirements , there are concerns that other subjects might be reduced or eliminated . similarly , prior studies from education show that instruction time in reading / english and math has increased over past decades , while instruction time in social studies — the vehicle through which geography is generally taught — has declined . officials from national organizations we interviewed also expressed concern that geography education has not been given the same national priority as reading , math , and science — subjects associated with federal testing requirements under title i , part a of esea . we conducted outreach with four states , which were selected to provide variation in geography requirements . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report by testing it for accuracy and completeness , reviewing documentation about systems used to produce the data , and interviewing agency officials . we also conducted interviews with officials from the department of education , state officials , and a nonrepresentative group of k - 12 social studies and geography teachers . to determine the federal role with respect to geography education , we reviewed relevant federal laws , including the most recent reauthorization of the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 and the national assessment of educational progress authorization act . we also reviewed relevant federal policies and guidance related to geography education . to address the extent to which k - 12 students are proficient in and have access to geography education , we analyzed department of education data from nationally representative samples of public and nonpublic school students in grades 4 , 8 , and 12 from the national assessment of educational progress ( naep ) in geography for 1994 , 2001 , 2010 , and 2014 — the years in which the naep assessments in geography were administered . in this report , we presented data on eighth grade students as it was the only grade for which data were available from 1994 through 2014 , the most recent naep assessment in geography . we compared differences in proficiency in and access to geography education across student demographics , including race , gender , and poverty measures . our analysis was based on reported proficiency as determined by the national naep geography assessment scores as well as data collected from the naep student , teacher , and school survey questionnaires . in addition , we reviewed selected studies and research reports , including a report with results from a 50-state survey of geography requirements . eighty - five percent of teachers who responded to the 2014 naep teacher questionnaire only taught social studies , while the remaining taught all or most subjects or taught in teams .