no visa is required . according to a department of justice oig report , abuse of the program poses a threat to national security and increases illegal immigration . the report found that aliens used stolen passports from visa waiver countries to illegally enter the united states . in one case , the oig found that 27 stolen icelandic passports had been used to smuggle children into the united states.although the passport numbers of the stolen icelandic passports had been entered into a lookout database , ins airport inspectors were not entering the passport numbers of passengers arriving with icelandic passports into the lookout database . ins officials told the oig investigators that manually keying in these passport numbers into the system would take too long and would hamper ins' ability to inspect all passengers from a flight within 45 minutes , as mandated by law . an ins contractor that evaluated ins' immigration benefits process in 1999 found that ins needed to strengthen the integrity of the process . the study found that ins had no standard quality control program for ensuring that applications were processed consistently . although some adjudicators believed the number of fraudulent applications submitted was significantly higher than the number they were detecting , they received little training in fraud detection . according to the report , some management and operations personnel indicated that performance evaluations in large part are based on the quantity of applications processed . the report concluded that whether employees receive incentives and rewards depends more on the quantity of applications processed rather than on fraud detection . therefore , adjudicators had no incentives to actively search out fraud . as we reported in our applications processing report , despite these pressures to complete applications more quickly , ins' backlog of applications increased to about 4 million applications by the end of fiscal year 2000 , a four - fold increase since 1994 . as of september 30 , 2001 about 767,000 applicants out of almost 3 million with pending applications had been waiting at least 21 months for ins to process their application . in our 1997 management report , we found that poor communication was a problem , especially between headquarters and field units . for example , field and policy manuals were out of date and there was not one place that program staff could go for direction . over one half of the employees we surveyed in preparing that report believed that ins had poor communications and that information was disseminated poorly . as noted earlier in our testimony , how ins' office of programs and office of field operations were to coordinate was still unclear . while ins has some important information technology management capabilities in place , it has to do considerable work to fully implement mature and effective processes . the department of justice agreed with our recommendation that ins develop and submit a plan to justice for implementing investment management process improvements . ins is in the process of developing this plan . the lack of adequate information technology systems has significantly impacted ins' ability to perform its core missions .