designing evaluations . gao / pemd - 10.1.4 . washington , d.c.: march 1991 . private prisons: cost savings and bop's statutory authority need to be resolved . gao / ggd - 91-21 . washington , d.c.: feb. 7 , 1991 . we requested this information from the private sector . as our report notes , private contractors do not maintain similar data , because bop does not require them to report or collect the data it requires of its own facilities . bop also provided technical comments , which we considered , and we have amended our report to incorporate these clarifications , where appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the attorney general and the director of omb . copies will also be made available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6510 or larencee@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors are listed in appendix iii . bop further reported that program data were not comparable . for example , according to bop officials , private contractors reported that inmates completed the u.s. general educational development program , when the program actually completed by the inmates was a mexican equivalent of the program . additionally , private contractors we spoke with told us that they maintain some facility characteristic and quality of service data , but the data are not maintained in the same format as bop facility data and are not readily available because they are only maintained in hard copies at some of the facilities contractors manage . bop officials provided two reasons why they do not collect or require contractors to collect comparable data that would facilitate a comparison of the cost of confining inmates in low and minimum security bop and private facilities: ( 1 ) federal regulations do not require such data as a means for selecting among competing contractors , and ( 2 ) bop believes collecting comparable data from contractors could add costs . however , bop officials had not evaluated the probable amount of added costs . when choosing among private contractors , federal regulations do not require bop to collect comparable facility characteristic or quality of service information from private facilities . according to bop officials , all bop private contracts in our review are firm - fixed price and , under federal regulations for competing contracts , bop does not need this information for technical evaluations of the proposals . bop officials added that during the acquisition process , bop maintains data needed to evaluate proposed contract prices , such as the price to manage and operate each facility and the government's estimate of the price , in accordance with the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) . the far requires the contracting official to determine if proposed prices are fair and reasonable and further states that the performance of a cost analysis is not needed if there is adequate price competition .