citizenship and immigration services . ( recommendation 21 ) the director of the u.s . citizenship and immigration services conducts a workforce assessment to account for an independent requirements organization's workforce needs . ( recommendation 22 ) the director of the u.s . citizenship and immigration services establishes component specific training for requirements development . ( recommendation 23 ) the jrc collaborate with components on their requirements development policies and , in partnership with the under secretary for management , provide oversight to promote consistency across the components . ( recommendation 24 ) in addition , the secretary of dhs should ensure that training for requirements development is consistent by establishing training and certification standards for dhs and the components' requirements development workforces . ( recommendation 25 ) . we provided a draft of this report for review and comment to dhs . dhs provided written comments , which are reproduced in appendix ii . in its comments , dhs concurred with all 25 of our recommendations and identified actions it plans to take to address them . dhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and the secretary of homeland security . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or makm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . this report discusses ( 1 ) how often selected department of homeland security ( dhs ) programs changed requirements ; and assesses the extent to which the selected components have ( 2 ) developed policies for requirements development , ( 3 ) established independent requirements organizations , and ( 4 ) taken steps to assess and train a requirements workforce . our focus for this report was on the dhs components , as they are responsible for developing the requirements to meet end user needs . to conduct our work , we reviewed the dhs master acquisition oversight list as of april 2017 and selected seven dhs components with level 1 and level 2 major acquisition programs and cover a broad range of missions . the seven components are as follows: customs and border protection federal emergency management agency national protection and programs directorate u.s . citizenship and immigration services from these seven components , we selected 14 major acquisition programs with dhs - approved key performance parameters to serve as case studies for our review . we selected a non - generalizable sample of programs based on different factors , including their acquisition phase , component , acquisition level , and whether they were information technology ( it ) or non - it . we selected the programs on these factors to reflect the broad spectrum of dhs components' operations .