ii ) . with respect to costs for psychotropic medication , this was the one line item whose related costs showed a downward trend . according to bop officials , the decline in psychotropic medication costs is likely a result of a number of these medications becoming available in a generic version , which often means lower costs . including all the same elements in table 3 , we projected costs through fiscal year 2015 , and expect that mental health services costs will continue to increase ( see table 4 ) . in estimating annual future costs , we used fiscal year 2012 as a baseline and discussed with bop officials their projections for underlying factors that would affect future changes in costs . within correctional programs , we looked at the obligated funds for psychology services , psychology staff training , drug abuse treatment programs , and sex offender management programs . to determine the per capita costs for the same time period , we divided the total cost by the inmate population at the end of the fiscal year in all bop - operated institutions . in addition , to project future costs , we discussed with these same officials their methods for cost projections and independently examined bop's population projection and expected staffing positions for fiscal years 2013 through 2015 . we limited our projections to 3 years , since the further into the future an estimate is , the less reliable it becomes . additionally , there could be future changes in law or agency initiatives that may significantly impact the integrity of longer - term projections . to determine projected costs , we used the total cost of inmate mental health services for fiscal year 2012 as the baseline , and adjusted this by bop's projected population and the ihs global insight outlook inflation factor . for the projected per capita costs , we divided the projected cost by the projected population . to assess the reliability of bop's obligation data , we ( 1 ) performed electronic data testing and looked for obvious errors in accuracy and completeness , and ( 2 ) interviewed agency officials knowledgeable about bop's budget to determine the processes in place to ensure the integrity of the data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . gao , standards for internal control in the federal government , gao / aimd - 00-21.3.1 ( washington , d.c.: november 1999 ) , and project management institute , a guide to the project management body of knowledge , fifth edition © ( newtown square , pennsylvania: 2013 ) . a guide to the project management body of knowledge provides standards for project managers . provided to inmates and oversight of staff working at the institutional level . we also interviewed officials from bop's office of research and evaluation ( ore ) to determine what evaluations ore has conducted of psychology treatment programs in the past and what evaluations are ongoing or planned for the future . we assessed bop's evaluation planning against project management standards .