contract out the work . if employers cannot fill vacancies for employees in certain occupations , it may contract out those tasks to another firm . turn down work . if a firm has exhausted other means to mitigate its hiring challenges and vacancies persist , it may choose to turn down work . companies we interviewed took some of the above actions in direct response to a perceived labor shortage . for example , 10 of the 16 companies that reported hiring difficulties increased recruiting efforts — including using social media and attending career fairs . many companies also made use of specialty websites that advertise aviation jobs as well as staffing and recruiting agencies that offer short - term contract workers and contract - to - hire options . almost half of the companies we interviewed — including those that did not cite challenges hiring — also developed and leveraged relationships with local schools as a means to recruit workers . according to one company , its location made attracting employees difficult and there were no local schools from which to recruit . in response , it built a relationship with a local technical college with an automotive - maintenance - training program and hired and trained its students — with aptitude in painting and certain machinery — for related aviation tasks . almost all companies we interviewed reported training workers for the job , though few reported providing the initial training to become a mechanic , instead many offered a&p mechanics they employed the opportunity for training in areas specific to the work they were doing for the company . for example , 18 of the 22 companies that reported providing training to its employees sent employees to training courses specific to the make or model of aircraft that the company repaired , or to courses that would build company capabilities on topics such as composites or non - destructive testing . only one company we interviewed reported hiring individuals without formal training , training them on - the - job , and paying for their a&p testing . another company reported hiring former military members and sending them for refresher courses to prepare them for the a&p certification exam . approximately one - third of companies reported reducing their minimum standards for employment . for example , three companies lowered the number of years of experience it required of applicants and another said that it would like to do so in the future to expand its hiring pool . however , 10 of the companies we interviewed said they would not lower standards ; they reasoned that doing so might reduce the quality of their work and they were not willing to expose themselves or their clients to those risks , or that doing so would , in the end , be more expensive for them because non - certificated mechanics need to be under the supervision of a certificated mechanic . nine of the companies we interviewed that had challenges attracting workers also reported having to turn down work because of staffing constraints , though the frequency varied . according to some of these companies , turning down work was a last resort .