our results cannot be generalized to other facilities . to determine the adequacy of the key screening requirements , we examined whether these screening requirements were complete , and whether va applied them to all practitioners it intended to hire , practitioners currently employed in va , contract health care staff , medical residents , and volunteers . we also interviewed representatives of state licensing boards and national certifying organizations and officials and representatives of organizations that operate national databases containing information on state licenses and national certificates . we did our work from august 2003 through march 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , we identified key va screening requirements and found mixed compliance with these requirements in the four facilities we visited . the key screening requirements are those that are intended to ensure that va facilities employ health care practitioners who have valid professional credentials and personal backgrounds to safely deliver health care to veterans . while we found that all facilities generally checked , on a periodic basis , the professional credentials of practitioners currently employed in va , they did not verify all of the credentials of all of the practitioners they intended to hire . furthermore , va facilities varied in how quickly they took action after obtaining the results of background investigations . during the site visit at one facility , we discovered returned background investigation results that were over a year old but had not been reviewed . we brought them to the attention of facility officials , who reviewed the reports and then terminated a nursing assistant who had been fired by a previous non - va employer for patient abuse . we also found gaps in the key va screening requirements that va officials used to verify the professional credentials and personal backgrounds of health care practitioners . we found adequate screening requirements for certain practitioners , such as physicians and dentists , for whom facilities are required to verify all licenses by contacting state licensing boards . however , existing screening requirements for others , such as nurses currently employed in va , are less stringent because they do not require that facilities verify all state licenses that a nurse may holdonly one must be checkedand they require only physical inspection of the license rather than contacting the state licensing board to verify the status of the license . va also does not require verifying national certificatesthe credentials held by other health care practitioners , such as respiratory therapistsby contacting the national certifying organizations for practitioners va intends to hire and periodically for those employed in va . physical inspection alone can be misleading ; not all professional credentials indicate whether they have had disciplinary actions taken against them , and credentials can be forged . va also does not require facility officials to query a national database , for other than physicians and dentists , that contains reports of professional disciplinary actions and criminal convictions , involving all licensed practitioners . in addition , many practitioners with direct patient care access , such as medical residents , are not required to undergo background investigations , including fingerprinting to check for criminal histories .