two examples follow . we reported in february 2006 that tsa , in developing and managing its secure flight program , had not conducted critical activities in accordance with best practices for large scale information technology programs . program officials stated that they used a rapid development method that was intended to enable them to develop the program more quickly . however , as a result of this approach , the development process has been ad hoc , with project activities conducted out of sequence . tsa officials have acknowledged that they have not followed a disciplined life cycle approach in developing secure flight , and stated that they are currently rebaselining the program to follow their standard systems development life cycle process , including defining system requirements . tsa officials also told us they are taking steps to strengthen contractor oversight for the secure flight program . for example , the program is using one of tsa's support contractors to help track contractors' progress in the areas of cost , schedule , and performance and the number of tsa staff with oversight responsibilities for secure flight contracts has been increased . tsa reports it has identified contract management as a key risk factor associated with the development and implementation of secure flight . the coast guard's ability to meet its responsibilities depends on the capability of its deepwater fleet , which consists of aircraft and vessels of various sizes and capabilities . in 2002 , the coast guard began a major acquisition program to replace or modernize these assets , known as the deepwater program . deepwater is currently estimated to cost $24 billion . we have reported that the coast guard's acquisition strategy of relying on a prime contractor ( “system integrator” ) to identify and deliver the assets needed carries substantial risks . we found that well into the contract's second year , key components for managing the program and overseeing the system integrator's performance had not been effectively implemented . as we recently observed , the coast guard has made progress in addressing our recommendations , but there are aspects of the deepwater program that will require continued attention . the program continues to face a degree of underlying risk , in part because of the unique , system - of - systems approach with the contractor acting as overall integrator , and in part because it is so heavily tied to precise year - to year funding requirements over the next two decades . further , a project of this magnitude will likely continue to experience other concerns and challenges beyond those that have emerged so far . it will be important for coast guard managers to carefully monitor contractor performance and to continue addressing program management concerns as they arise . in closing , i believe that dhs has taken strides toward putting in place an acquisition organization that contains many promising elements . however , the steps taken so far are not enough to ensure that the department is effectively managing the acquisition of the multitude of goods and services it needs to meet its mission .