we disagree . our draft report noted that the december 2008 contract represented an accelerated schedule of emptying , cleaning , and closing the 22 tanks without secondary containment 5 years sooner than the date in the agreement between doe , epa , and south carolina . nevertheless , the contract performance baseline that was approved in august 2010 contained a 44 percent increase greater than the cost in the contract . in addition , as our draft report noted , between 2 and 7 fewer tanks may be closed by 2017 than originally called for in the contract . in our view , it is not unreasonable to expect contracts entered into by doe , or indeed any federal agency , to accurately reflect the costs and schedule to accomplish the goals outlined in the contract . in this case , however , doe's contractor identified a $1.4 billion cost increase before performing any work under the contract , doe ultimately approved a contract performance baseline that contained a $1.4 billion cost increase , and the department took more than a year to approve the baseline once the contractor began work . even though more than $600 million of this cost increase is due to pension cost increases caused by economic conditions outside of doe's control , we believe doe's failure to ensure the december 2008 contract accurately reflected increased costs and doe's delays approving a contract performance baseline are examples of continued contract mismanagement by the department . doe agreed with our recommendation that specific policies and procedures are needed for operating activities , including savannah river site tank closure activities . doe commented that a framework for managing and reporting progress for operating activities has been established , and doe's sites have been directed that the project management principles contained in doe order 413.3a will still apply in a tailored manner . in addition , doe partially agreed with our recommendation that department guidance should be revised to ensure it includes a detailed process by which contract performance baselines are to be reviewed and approved and include milestones to help ensure that review and approval occur in a timely manner . specifically , doe stated that while the department agrees that a timeline is needed to add discipline and rigor to the process for review and approval of contract performance baselines , it already has a rigorous and detailed process established under doe order 413.3a . however , as our draft report noted , doe has exempted many tank closure activities at the savannah river site from the full requirements of doe order 413.3a . doe stated that it will expedite the issuance of guidance for contract performance baseline review for operating activities exempted from doe order 413.3a . with regard to our recommendation that doe revise its contract management guidance to ensure it includes provisions that detail how contract cost increases should be requested by contractors and the specific process doe should undertake to review and approve the increases , doe commented that such guidance would be inappropriate to include in departmental policy and redundant to contract clauses required by federal acquisition regulations .