enforcement . fda and ftc both take enforcement actions against dietary supplement products and firms if they identify violations . once fda identifies a concern , it may take enforcement action against a firm through advisory and regulatory actions . advisory actions — such as sending a warning or untitled letter to a dietary supplement firm that manufactures , distributes , or packs a dietary supplement — notify firms that fda has found the firm uncompliant with dietary supplement manufacturing or labeling regulations . regulatory actions are actions that either restrain dietary supplement firms from manufacturing dietary supplements or remove specific dietary supplements from the market , or prevent entry into u.s. commerce of imported products . among the regulatory actions available to fda are administrative enforcement tools such as issuing a mandatory recall , suspending a firm's registration , administratively detaining a product , or refusing entry to an imported product ; judicial court actions such as seeking an injunction against a firm , initiating prosecution of a firm , or filing a seizure action against products that are adulterated , misbranded , or otherwise in violation of federal law ; and conducting rulemaking to restrict or prohibit the use of a specific ingredient . in any of these cases fda must demonstrate that the relevant statutory standard has been met . for example , fda can take a variety of the above actions if a dietary supplement is adulterated , which can be established by , for example , demonstrating that it , or a dietary ingredient contained within , presents a significant or unreasonable risk of illness or injury . under its responsibilities , once ftc identifies potentially deceptive or untruthful advertising , it may take enforcement action against a firm or individual through administrative court actions or judicial court actions . before taking such action , ftc may compel firms to produce documents and other information , such as marketing and labeling materials , sales information , and relevant substantiation materials . administrative court actions are complaints issued by ftc that are adjudicated before an administrative law judge . these complaints may result in settlements through consent decrees or , in subsequent actions in a federal judicial court to enforce administrative orders , injunctions , and civil penalties . federal judicial court actions are direct challenges in a district court and can result in injunctions and monetary relief . outreach . to help inform the public — including both consumers and industry — about potential health or safety issues related to dietary supplements , fda and ftc conduct various outreach efforts . such efforts can be educational outreach or outreach conducted in response to a specific enforcement action taken by one or both of the agencies . examples of key outreach efforts include consumer or public education ( such as alerts about internet scams or safety problems ) , guidance for industry or consumers ( such as on how firms can make sure their dietary supplement claims have appropriate scientific support ) , and publicly available press releases ( such as those informing the public about the results of enforcement actions like court injunctions or product recalls that warn the public and , according to fda officials , aim to prevent similar violations in the future ) .