separations . for the 9-month period july 1 , 2014 , through march 31 , 2015 , we tested the key control activities for all eight separated employees . we assessed the design of these key internal control activities by comparing them to the criteria in standards for internal control in the federal government to determine whether these key internal control activities were consistent with federal internal control standards . we tested these key control activities by inspecting the following: management's review and approval of the separated employee's opm request for personnel action , management's review of monthly detailed spreadsheets attesting to the removal of the employee , and management's review of monthly reports attesting to the removal of the employee's salary . outside employment . for the 9-month period july 1 , 2014 , through march 31 , 2015 , we tested the key control activities for all four employees who applied for outside employment . we assessed the design of these key internal control activities by comparing them to the criteria in standards for internal control in the federal government to determine whether these internal control activities were consistent with federal internal control standards . we tested these key control activities by inspecting the following: the employee's completed outside employment application ; management's review and approval of the employee's completed outside employment application ; and a legal opinion prepared by the general counsel , which included a review of applicable statutory and regulatory provisions to ensure that the employee was in compliance with applicable laws and regulations . to test the implementation of internal controls over contracting practices , we conducted tests of key internal control activities on a randomly selected statistical sample of 37 contracting disbursement transactions , as described in the section below . to determine the extent to which the foundation designed effective internal control over its receipts and disbursements activity ( consisting of payroll , contracting , and other expense transactions ) , we interviewed foundation officials , reviewed written internal control policies and procedures , and performed walkthroughs of specific transactions . we also obtained , analyzed , and summarized the foundation's written internal control policies and procedures related to receipts and disbursements activity for the 9-month period july 1 , 2014 , through march 31 , 2015 , and compared them to the criteria in standards for internal control in the federal government to determine whether these key control activities were consistent with federal internal control standards . table 1 summarizes the receipts and disbursements activity for the 9- month period july 1 , 2014 , to march 31 , 2015 , and randomly selected statistical sample sizes for each area . as noted above , we conducted internal control - related walkthroughs and interviews , all of which indicated that the designed internal controls were implemented . we incorporated assurances gained from these additional audit steps into sample size determinations to improve efficiency while maintaining effectiveness . we planned our testing of each area to be 95 percent confident that the actual error rate associated with sampling error inherent in these statistical samples is less than or equal to 6.9 percent .