hhs has not needed the property for many years . in april 2001 , we reported that the property had significantly deteriorated and had environmental and historic preservation issues that would need to be addressed in order for the property to be disposed of or transferred to another federal agency . in the last year , the general services administration ( gsa ) , the district of columbia ( the district ) , hhs , and various public interest groups have been working to resolve the situation at st. elizabeths . in may 2002 , the urban land institute formed an advisory panel that reported on several options for redeveloping the site . the panel recommended that the federal government transfer the west campus to the district and that the district should identify a master developer for the site . the panel further recommended that the master developer consider redeveloping the site into four campus areas without changing the character of the surrounding neighborhoods and without displacing existing residents . the panel recommended preserving the historic buildings through adaptive use and sensitive addition of new buildings . in addition to the panel , an executive steering committee and a working group , each consisting of representatives from the district , hhs , gsa , and public interest groups , have been established and hhs and gsa have proceeded with a number of actions to prepare the property for disposal . these include preparing the property for “mothballing,” which is work done to minimize further deterioration of the property while the disposal process proceeds ; determining the extent of environmental remediation needed ; and conducting community outreach . figure 2 shows the vacant , boarded - up center building , which opened in 1855 and served as the main hospital building . the former chicago main post office building is a 2.5 million square foot facility that was vacated when it was replaced with a new facility in 1997 . postal service ( usps ) is incurring about $2 million in annual holding costs for the property . dod concurred and began taking action . since 1996 , we have produced more than 60 reports and testimonies on the federal government's efforts to combat terrorism . several of these reports have recommended that the federal government use risk management as an important element in developing a national strategy . we have also reported extensively on the security problems and challenges at individual real property - holding agencies . our high - risk report identifies the problems and challenges faced by state , dod , interior , gsa , usps , and isc . more recently , we testified on security conditions of overseas diplomatic facilities . we found that state has done much over the last 4 years to improve physical security at overseas posts by , for example , constructing perimeter walls , anti - ram barriers , and access controls at many facilities . however , even with these improvements , most office facilities do not meet security standards . as a result , thousands of u.s. government employees may be more vulnerable to terrorist attacks . furthermore , our work has shown that agency coordination is critical to addressing security challenges .