see pub . l. 110-289 , division b §§ 2141-2150 . hud revised title i to increase loan amount limits and amend credit underwriting requirements , among other changes . see title i letters ti 481 and ti 484 . also , in response to the fha modernization act , pub . l. 110-289 , division b , §§ 2101 – 2133 , hud made manufactured homes eligible for title ii insurance if treated as real estate by the local authority , even if not treated as real estate for purposes of state taxation , as well as individual manufactured housing units in condominium projects . see mortgagee letter 2009-16. guaranteed loans on manufactured homes with permanent foundations perform worse than all rhs single family guaranteed loans . however , this analysis did not control for other factors that might explain these differences , such as borrower and property characteristics . fha collects such data , which should permit a more rigorous analysis of loan performance . further , fha officials stated that they evaluate title i manufactured housing loan performance and the title i insurance fund to ensure that premiums are sufficient to cover program expenses , as required by the housing economic recovery act 2008 ( hera ) . however , fha has not analyzed the performance of title i and title ii manufactured housing loans to understand the different participation levels in the programs and lacks a plan for doing so . as noted earlier , standards for internal control emphasize the need for federal agencies to establish plans to help ensure goals and objectives can be met , including compliance with applicable laws and regulations . such research could further hud's understanding of the relationship between loan performance and property type , providing information that it could potentially use to encourage lenders to participate in the federal program . the act also requires hud to conduct research and make other efforts to encourage the enterprises and ginnie mae to actively develop and implement secondary market securitization programs for federally insured loans for manufactured homes , as well as those of other loan programs , in order to promote the availability of affordable manufactured homes . as we have seen , industry officials have cited the lack of a viable secondary market for manufactured housing loans as a factor in higher financing costs , especially for chattel loans . however , hud was unable to identify any efforts , other than the discussions with ginnie mae , which it had undertaken to encourage the enterprise to do more to help securitize additional manufactured home loans . a ginnie mae official pointed to their prior experience in working with issuers of securities backed by manufactured home loans insured under the fha title i program . specifically , he cited experience with lenders that were unable to fulfill their commitments , requiring ginnie mae to pick up servicing of their portfolios . the official also noted that lenders might not want to securitize their loans through ginnie mae because they had other sources of funding and wished to keep these loans in their portfolio .