testing . the osc booster successfully demonstrated the performance needed for the gmd mission through a series of flight tests . beginning with integrated flight test 14 , which is scheduled for 4q fy 2004 , the osc booster will be used in all intercept attempts for the remainder of block 2004 . the lockheed bv+ booster , however , was flight tested in its new configuration in january 2004 after an 11-month slip . according to mda officials , its use in flight testing and fielding has been deferred to the end of fiscal year 2005 . production . because delayed test events are often indicative of development problems , these delays increase the uncertainty of whether the contractors will be able to meet their production goals for ido and block 2004 . additionally , accidents at a subcontractor's facility have jeopardized the delivery of lockheed bv+ boosters for gmd's initial deployment . to fulfill the congressional mandate in the authorization act , we addressed the following question in this report: to what extent has mda and its elements progressed in achieving stated goals through their fiscal year 2003 activities ? as a result , mda is accelerating the production of osc boosters to compensate for the undelivered lockheed bv+ boosters . it is unclear , however , whether osc has the capacity to produce the additional boosters necessary for ido . kill vehicle development is proceeding in parallel with development of the boosters . in fiscal year 2003 , the program focused on developing and producing kill vehicles for flight tests scheduled in fiscal year 2004 . similar production - representative articles will be deployed as part of the ido and the block 2004 defensive capability . kill vehicle development and production , however , represent challenges for the gmd program in meeting its block 2004 goals . for example , the contractor has yet to demonstrate that it can increase the production rate of kill vehicles by 50 percent . as a result of developmental and production issues with the kill vehicle and boosters , the gmd program likely will not be able to meet its goal of delivering 20 interceptors required for the block 2004 inventory or its upper - end goal of delivering 10 interceptors for ido . the thaad program office is on track to develop , demonstrate , and field the block 2008 thaad element within schedule and cost estimates , provided that the contractor performs as efficiently as it has in the past . one risk area that covers the entire bmds for block 2004 ( and future blocks ) is whether the capabilities being developed and fielded will work as intended . as discussed above , testing to date has done little to demonstrate system effectiveness , because production - representative hardware is still being developed and has yet to be flight tested . furthermore , tests to date have been developmental in nature and , accordingly , engagement conditions were repetitive and scripted . in the future , mda is taking a number of actions to increase testing complexity and realism . however , it has no plans to conduct operational testing on the ido or block 2004 configurations being fielded .