you requested that we review the services' lodging programs . our objectives were to ( 1 ) describe how each military service manages , funds , and assesses the performance of its lodging program to meet short - and long - term needs ; and ( 2 ) assess the effect that privatization of lodging would have on the cost to the army , and on its capability to maintain and recapitalize lodging facilities . additionally , we are providing information concerning the status of gao's prior recommendations regarding dod lodging programs . dod has approximately 82,000 transient lodging rooms . in 2004 , the army revised its estimate to about $1.1 billion for lodging revitalization in its u.s. facilities . using the more recent 2004 estimate , gao analysis determined that the lodging wellness program would take approximately 20 years or more to bring all lodging facilities up to adequate standards . gao calculations estimate that the lodging surcharge generates $52.2 million annually in income . even though the army lodging fund showed a positive balance of $133.6 million in fiscal year 2005 , some of these funds are already committed to revitalize lodging facilities overseas . the army and the air force each manages its tdy and pcs lodging under the same organization , while the navy and marine corps both opt to have separate organizations manage tdy lodges and pcs facilities . over the past decade the army , air force , and navy have entered into limited public - private ventures to construct and operate lodging facilities . recently , the army announced plans to privatize its entire domestic lodging program utilizing the alternative authority for acquisition and improvement of military housing legislation , commonly referred to as military housing privatization initiative ( mhpi ) legislation . to determine how the military services manage and fund their lodging programs , we reviewed dod and military service lodging policies and regulations and interviewed key officials in the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) and the military services responsible for lodging programs . we analyzed the appropriated and nonappropriated fund support for lodging between fiscal years 2003 and 2005 . the major differences between tdy and pcs lodges are the number of rooms in their inventory and the type of traveler they primarily serve . table 1 shows the magnitude of dod's lodging programs . transient lodging serves various military and civilian travelers . tdy lodges serve mainly individual military or civilian travelers who are temporarily assigned to a duty station other than their home station . pcs lodges mainly serve military personnel and their families who are changing permanent duty stations . on a space - available basis , tdy and pcs lodges can accommodate some kinds of “unofficial travelers,” such as military retirees and relatives and guests of service members assigned to the installation . total occupancy rates vary by program , ranging from 75 to 92 percent for fiscal year 2005 . in addition , lodging occupancy by official and unofficial travelers varies by service . the army serves the highest percentage of official travelers , and the marine corps the lowest , as table 2 shows . funds provided for lodging operations originate from two sources: appropriated funds and nonappropriated funds .