, military ) positions . further , of the 23 agencies that had established procedures , 6 agencies did not address one or more of seven activities required by opm in their procedures . for example , the agencies' procedures did not include activities to review all filled and vacant positions and annotate reviewed position descriptions with the appropriate work role code . in addition , dod had not established procedures for identifying and assigning work role codes to noncivilian ( i.e. , military ) positions . our june 2018 report included 20 recommendations to eight agencies to establish or update their procedures to fully address the required activities in opm's guidance . to assess the reliability of coding data from opm's system , we reviewed these data to determine its completeness , and asked officials responsible for entering and reviewing the work role coding data a series of questions about the accuracy and reliability of the data . in addition , we examined the enterprise human resources integration it , cybersecurity , or cyber - related coding data to determine the number of positions the 24 agencies had assigned the “000” code to positions in the 2210 it management occupational series as of may 2018 . we reviewed positions from the 2210 it management occupational series because those positions are likely to perform it , cybersecurity , or cyber - related functions . in the report , we note some challenges with the reliability of these data and are careful to present our data in line with these limitations . we then identified a subset of the 24 agencies and performed an additional review of these agencies' work role coding efforts . we selected these agencies based on their total cybersecurity spending for fiscal year 2016 , as reported by the office of management and budget ( omb ) in its federal information security modernization act annual report . we sorted the 24 agencies' it cybersecurity spending from highest to lowest and then divided them into three equal groups of high , medium , and low . we then selected the top two agencies from each group . based on these factors , we selected six agencies: the ( 1 ) department of defense ( dod ) , ( 2 ) dhs , ( 3 ) department of state ( state ) , ( 4 ) national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , ( 5 ) environmental protection agency ( epa ) , and ( 6 ) general services administration ( gsa ) .we performed an additional review of the agencies' work role coding efforts . we did this by evaluating the six selected agencies' coding processes against their established procedures and opm requirements . we also obtained and reviewed coding data that included the assigned work role codes for civilian employees from each agency's human resources system . to assess the reliability of coding data from the selected six agencies' systems , we reviewed related documentation such as the agencies' coding procedures , processing guides , personnel bulletins , and system screen shots . we also conducted electronic testing for missing data , duplicate data , or obvious errors .