export assistance centers . the overseas resource allocation model includes factors associated with market structure and size . market structure captures the impact of variables representing such factors as the openness of a market , the level of development and country risk , and other factors that measure the level of difficulty that u.s. businesses may have in marketing their goods and services . the more open a country's market structure , the higher its ranking and the more likely it is to get resources . market size relates to the scale of export opportunity for u.s. firms related to a particular country and includes such measures as a country's total imports , gross domestic product , and investment flows . larger markets are generally ranked higher . in general , cs's model is weighted 60 percent toward market structure and 40 percent toward market size . while most of the model's 20 variables are based on historical trade data , a few are based on projections , including estimates of future imports by a trading partner . a score for each country is computed based on a percentage of the total market potential , and the countries are ranked accordingly . 1 for the different time frames cs estimates for achieving export success depending on the experience level of the exporter. ) v for the average annual u.s. exports to partner countries for calendar years 2008 through 2010 , by country groupings. ) we analyzed the degree to which the overseas model's export potential scores were generally consistent with nei priorities . while the nei gives highest priority to high - growth and next - tier emerging markets , the outcome of the fiscal year 2011 overseas resource allocation model showed that traditional markets — the european union 15 and japan , and free trade agreement ( fta ) countries — still represent high export potential for u.s. companies ( see fig . 3 ) ; this can be seen in terms of average country scores ( 1.39 and 0.84 , respectively ) and in the combined shares of the traditional market groups ( 35 percent in the pie chart in fig . it also showed that on average the next - tier emerging markets have a lower market potential score ( 0.67 ) , and thus may require a longer - term outlook and would contribute less toward short - term goals like doubling u.s. exports by 2014 . all “other” countries ranked in the model also had low average scores , though as a grouping they account for a large share of the total ( 54 percent ) because of the large number of countries in the group . the overlapping ranges of individual country scores show that the market potential within many groupings varies significantly .  cost - benefit model . cs's cost - benefit model seeks to measure the cost effectiveness of posts in the more than 75 countries where cs operates . in contrast to the overseas resource allocation model , which seeks to establish market potential , this model seeks to capture actual cs results .