development . after leases , permits , and other authorizations are obtained , the construction of the oil and gas well or renewable project can begin . a variety of factors , including shortcomings in bia's management of indian energy development , have hindered development of indian energy resources , according to some of the literature we reviewed and several stakeholders we interviewed . in particular , bia does not have comprehensive data to identify ownership and resources available for development , does not have a documented process or data to track and monitor its review and response times , and some offices do not have the skills or adequate staff resources to effectively review energy - related documents . additional factors , generally outside of bia's management responsibilities , have also hindered indian energy development , including ( 1 ) a complex regulatory framework , ( 2 ) fractionated ownership interests , ( 3 ) tribes' limited access to capital and federal tax credits , ( 4 ) dual taxation by states and tribes , ( 5 ) tribal capacity , and ( 6 ) infrastructure limitations . bia does not have the data it needs to verify ownership of some oil and gas resources , easily identify resources available for lease , or easily identify where leases are in effect . tribes . interior's office of inspector general ( ig ) has also identified weaknesses in bia's management and oversight of indian energy resources . for instance , in 2012 , interior's ig found that weaknesses in bia's management of oil and gas resources contributed to a general preference by industry to acquire oil and gas leases on non - indian lands over indian lands . in addition , in 2014 , interior's ig found that two of the three bia offices it reviewed had records management deficiencies , including one office with incorrect property records , incomplete and outdated row files , and incomplete well files . you asked us to review the development of indian energy resources . this report examines ( 1 ) factors that have hindered indian energy resource development , ( 2 ) factors that have deterred tribes from seeking teras , and ( 3 ) the effectiveness of tedc grants to build tribes' capacity to enter into teras . to examine the factors that have hindered indian energy development and deterred tribes from seeking teras , we reviewed and synthesized literature that included more than 40 reports , conference proceedings , hearings statements , and other publications from federal and tribal governments ; industry ; academics ; and nonprofit organizations . to identify literature , we searched web - based databases , including energy industry specific databases , and other resources containing general academic articles , law review articles , and government resources , such as reports and hearing statements . for energy development that requires use of surface lands , leases for use of the lands are generally submitted to bia for review , after ownership has been determined . permitting and other government actions . multiple permits and other approvals can be required throughout the development process , and types of permits vary by project .