( see fig . some manufacturers calculated the net price as their price to the wholesaler , reduced by both the prompt payment discount and the chargeback amount for those drugs , when determining best price and amp . other manufacturers , however , considered any prompt payment discount given to the wholesaler separately from any chargeback amount and thus did not incorporate the effect of both price reductions when determining best price and amp . some of these manufacturers indicated that they did not combine these price reductions because the price reductions occurred in two unrelated transactions to two separate purchasers . in some cases , not accounting for the effect of both price reductions — the prompt payment discount and the chargeback — in the determination of best price and amp reduced rebates below what they otherwise would have been . for example , rebates for three drugs in our sample would have been 3 to 5 percent higher had the manufacturers considered the effects of both price reductions when determining the best prices and amps ; for seven other drugs , rebates would not have changed . the ultimate impact on rebates to states depends on how many manufacturers adopted this approach as well as the sales prices and utilization of the relevant drugs . when determining best price and amp , some manufacturers adopted methods that could have raised rebates . for example , although the rebate agreement excludes from amp sales through the federal supply schedule and direct sales to hospitals and hmos , which often involve relatively low prices , one manufacturer included these sales in its calculations . however , the manufacturer used list prices in the calculation of amp instead of the actual prices associated with the sales that were to be excluded from the calculation . this approach , which diverged from the rebate agreement and applicable cms program memoranda , could have resulted in artificially high amps , which in turn could have raised rebates . in addition , some manufacturers included in the determination of best price the contract prices they had negotiated with purchasers , even if they made no sales at those prices during the reporting quarter . this practice resulted in a lower best price in some cases , which may have increased rebates to states . one manufacturer , however , indicated that it later might revise this practice and request recalculations to recoup any excess rebates it had already paid . manufacturers have up to 3 years to make such revisions . the rebates that manufacturers pay to states are based on a range of prices and financial concessions that manufacturers make available to entities that purchase their drugs , but may not reflect certain financial concessions manufacturers offer to other entities in today's complex market . in particular , the rebate program does not clearly address certain concessions that are negotiated by pbms on behalf of third - party payers . the rebate program did not initially address these types of concessions , which are relatively new to the market . cms's subsequent guidance to manufacturers has not clearly stated how manufacturers should treat these concessions in their determinations of best price and amp .