omb . appendix i lists the names of the panel members . the legislation mandating the panel's creation required that the panel complete its work and report the results of its study to the congress no later than may 1 , 2002 . the panel's report was published on april 30 , 2002 . in establishing the panel , a number of steps were taken to ensure representation from all major stakeholders as well as to ensure a fair and balanced process . this began with my selection of panel members , which was then followed by the panel's establishment of a process to guide its work . to ensure a broad array of views on the panel , we used a federal register notice to seek suggestions on the panel's composition . on the basis of the nominations received in response to that notice , as well as the need to include the broad representation outlined in legislation , i personally interviewed a number of potential panel members before selecting other members to serve on the panel . i believe that we selected a group of outstanding individuals representative of diverse interest groups from the public and private sectors , labor unions , academia , and members with experience in dealing with sourcing decisions at the local government level . once convened , the panel , as a group , took a number of steps at the outset to guide its deliberations and ensure a full and balanced consideration of issues . the first step was the adoption of the following mission statement: mission of the commercial activities panel the mission of the commercial activities panel is to improve the current sourcing framework and processes so that they reflect a balance among taxpayer interests , government needs , employee rights , and contractor concerns . the panel also agreed that all of its findings and recommendations would require the agreement of at least a two - thirds supermajority of the panel in order to be adopted . the panel further decided that each panel member would have the option of having a brief statement included in the report explaining the member's position on the matters considered by the panel . in addition to the federal register notice soliciting input on issues to be considered by the panel , the panel held 11 meetings over the period of may 2001 to march 2002 , 3 of which were public hearings in washington , d.c. ; indianapolis , indiana ; and san antonio , texas . in the public hearings , panel members heard testimony from scores of representatives of the public and private sectors , state and local governments , unions , contractors , academia , and others . panelists heard first - hand about the current process , primarily the cost comparison process conducted under omb circular a - 76 , as well as alternatives to that process . appendix ii provides more detail on the topics and concerns raised at the public hearings . the panel also maintained an e - mail account to receive written comments from any source .