performance plan . in addition , none of the four goals in the dpr scorecard were included in the dpr contract , and three of the four goals were not in the fy 2000 performance plan . for mpd , 10 of the 23 performance goals that were attached to the contract were not included in the fy 2000 plan . although two of the four goals in the mpd scorecard were included in the mpd contract , these two goals have different deadlines in the scorecard and contract . the scorecard has a december 2000 deadline for the two goals , but the contract has the end of fiscal year 2000 as the goals' completion date . dmv's performance contract contains nine fy 2000 goals , eight of which are in the fy 2000 plan . however , for seven of these contract goals , the targets have been revised and therefore differ from those in the fy 2000 plan . three of dmv's four scorecard goals are in the contract and the fy 2000 plan . according to an official in the mayor's office , the mayor appointed new directors to dmv and dpr in the summer of 1999 and they established new goals . the challenge confronting the district is by no means unique . this hearing comes at a particularly opportune time . two of our recent reviews on different aspects of the city's performance management system show that the williams administration , although having made important progress , is still facing many challenges in improving the management and performance of the district government.we look forward to continuing to work with the members of this subcommittee , mayor williams , and other district officials to address the performance challenges facing our nation's capital . as agreed with the subcommittee , my testimony will cover three areas . first , i will compare the key elements of the district's performance management system with common elements we found from systems used by leading organizations around the country and the world . as part of that comparison , i will report on whether the district met the 29 performance goals that it scheduled for completion by the end of fiscal year 2000 that the subcommittee selected from the over 400 performance measures contained in the mayor's fiscal year 2001 budget request . i will also report on whether the district provided evidence that the performance data are sufficiently reliable for measuring progress toward goals . second , i will discuss opportunities for the district to better align its various performance plans to ensure that it is sending district employees , managers , citizens , congress , and other stakeholders consistent messages about the results the district wants to achieve , how the alignment will be done , and how progress will be measured . finally , i will highlight how to improve the usefulness of the annual performance plan and report that federal law requires the mayor to send to congress no later than march 1 of every year . the federal law requiring the district to prepare annual plans and reports is similar to the approach in the government performance and results act ( gpra ) .