( app . i presents , by state , data on older units' electricity generation , emissions per megawatt - hour of electricity generated , and aggregate emissions. ) figures 3 , 4 , and 5 show the location of older units and the amount of sulfur dioxide , nitrogen oxides , and carbon dioxide they emitted in 2000 . older units that burned coal released a disproportionate share of emissions for the electricity they produced , compared with units burning natural gas and oil . coal - burning units emitted 99 percent of the sulfur dioxide , 88 percent of the nitrogen oxides , and 85 percent of the carbon dioxide from older units nationwide , while generating 79 percent of the total electricity from older units . older units generally do not have to meet the standards applicable to newer units , and in 2000 , many of the older units emitted sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides at levels higher than what is permitted under the standards applicable to newer units for one or both of the pollutants . in that year , 36 percent of older units emitted sulfur dioxide at levels above the new source standard for that pollutant , and 73 percent emitted nitrogen oxides at levels above the new source standard . approximately 31 percent of all older units emitted both pollutants at levels above the new source standards . as shown in figure 6 , in 2000 , 34 percent of the total sulfur dioxide emissions ( 2.13 million of 6.34 million tons ) and 60 percent of the total nitrogen oxide emissions ( 1.41 million of 2.35 million tons ) from older units were “additional” emissions — that is , emissions at levels above the standards applicable to newer units . the additional sulfur dioxide emissions represented 20 percent of the sulfur dioxide emissions from fossil - fuel units ( older and newer ) , and the additional emissions of nitrogen oxides represented 28 percent of the emissions of nitrogen oxides from fossil - fuel units . most of the additional emissions — 91 percent of the sulfur dioxide and 78 percent of the nitrogen oxides — came from units located in the mid - atlantic , midwest , and southeast . figures 7 and 8 show the level of additional emissions at older units in 2000 . the majority of these emissions — 99 percent of the sulfur dioxide and 91 percent of the nitrogen oxides — were from coal units , while other fossil fuel - burning units accounted for the remainder . as noted , the additional emissions shown in figure 6 represent the emissions by older units above the limits applicable to new sources . if the same older units had generated the same quantity of electricity in 2000 but had met the new source standards , total emissions would have been lowered by an amount equal to the computed additional emissions . however , a requirement that older units meet the standards could have reduced the quantity of electricity generated , raised the price of electricity , and / or shifted generation among units . among other things , owners might have chosen to retire some older units rather than incur the costs of meeting the standards .