identify the ccp . identify a point , step , or procedure in the production process where controls can be applied to prevent , eliminate , or reduce to an acceptable level a food safety hazard that is reasonably likely to occur . establish critical limits for each ccp . set the maximum or minimum value at which parameters , such as cooking time and temperature , must be controlled at each ccp to prevent , eliminate , or reduce the hazard to an acceptable level . monitor each ccp . establish monitoring activities that will ensure that the process is under control at each ccp . establish corrective actions . define actions to be taken when monitoring discloses a deviation from established critical limits . establish verification procedures . establish verification procedures to ensure that haccp plans accomplish their intended goal — that is , ensuring the production of safe products . establish record - keeping and documentation procedures . maintain documentation , including the haccp plan ; ccp monitoring ; corrective actions ; and verification activities . under the haccp regulations , seafood - processing firms are responsible for conducting a hazard analysis and for developing and implementing haccp plans for hazards that are determined to be reasonably likely to occur . these hazards may include marine toxins , microbiological contamination , chemical contamination , pesticides , drug residues , decomposition in certain species , parasites , the unapproved use of food or color additives , and physical hazards . for each hazard identified , the firms must establish ccps to prevent or reduce contamination . firms also must establish and monitor sanitation procedures to ensure , among other things , the ( 1 ) general cleanliness of food contact surfaces , including utensils , gloves , and outer garments , and ( 2 ) control of employee health conditions . as we reported in 2001 , fda has four approaches to verify compliance with haccp regulations and ensure the safety of imported seafood . fda has the authority to enter into voluntary agreements with individual countries on the basis of a determination of equivalence of their seafood safety systems with u.s. haccp requirements . first , under the provisions of the world trade organization agreement on the application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures , to which the united states is a signatory , fda is obligated to enter into consultations with the aim of achieving equivalence agreements upon the request of other world trade organization member nations . fda considers other systems to be equivalent when it finds one or more of an exporting country's food safety measures — such as laws , regulations , guidance , and procedures — to be equivalent to our own . u.s. importers can demonstrate haccp compliance by acquiring seafood from countries with these agreements . second , in the absence of such agreements , importers are responsible for demonstrating , through documentation , that the seafood they import into the united states is produced under systems that are compliant with u.s. haccp requirements . during its periodic inspections , fda reviews this documentation to determine whether importers have met their responsibilities under the haccp regulations .