the rest of the states did not have any such requirements . ( see fig . in states that did not have these requirements , the certified special education teachers who were assigned to instruct core academic subjects might not be positioned to meet the nclba requirements . to meet nclba teacher requirements , these teachers would need to demonstrate subject matter competency by the end of the 2005-2006 school year . the extent to which special education teachers were required to meet nclba subject matter competency requirements depended upon their instructional roles , which could sometimes be difficult for prospective teachers to determine . special education teachers often attained their certification prior to being hired by local school districts for specific grade levels , subjects , or instructional roles . therefore , these individuals might not be positioned to meet nclba teacher requirements for their future instructional roles . furthermore , any special education teacher who was assigned to teach a different subject from one year to the next might meet subject matter competency requirements one year but not the next . according to education officials , these challenges are not specific to special education teachers and will require school districts to be more mindful of teacher qualifications , including subject matter mastery , when assigning teachers to various teaching roles . according to survey respondents , 31 states provided alternative routes to certification for prospective special education teachers . states have developed such routes to meet specific teacher shortages as well as to allow professionals in related fields to become teachers . the alternative routes to certification programs that we reviewed were generally administered by the state education agencies , often through institutions of higher education . however , this was not always the case: in maryland , for example , one county contracted with sylvan learning center and the new teacher project to provide its alternative route to certification program . most of the states that provided alternative routes to certification required that the graduates from such alternative route to certification programs fulfill the same certification requirements as graduates from traditional special education teacher preparation programs , such as having a bachelor's degree and passing teacher licensing examinations . in general , prospective teachers in alternative route to certification programs were required to receive more practical teaching experience before being certified than were teachers in traditional programs . for example , candidates in an alternative route to certification program in illinois were required to complete a 1-year mentored teaching internship , while most traditional certification programs for special education teachers required teaching candidates to complete a 9- to 18-week supervised student teaching assignment . this additional teaching experience has been required because individuals in some alternative programs have not received courses in pedagogy and instructional techniques . ( see app . i for state special education alternative route to certification program contact information. ) state officials indicated that implementing the core academic subject competency requirements of nclba would be difficult and cited factors that have facilitated or impeded application of this requirement to special education teachers .