program management . nnsa program managers are responsible for completing a set of activities by employing a working knowledge of such diverse areas as contracting , budgeting , and engineering . recognizing the important role of program managers , nnsa has taken several actions , such as developing a program management policy . however , nnsa has yet to identify all of its program managers or train them to a certified level of competency . indeed , doe's most recent performance and accountability report for fiscal year 2006 showed that nnsa fully met only about 52 percent of its program goals while the rest of doe achieved about a 79- percent success rate . human capital . nnsa has made progress in developing a human capital strategy . however , doe and nnsa have not conducted a systematic , detailed analysis of how many staff nnsa needs in relation to doe . as a result , we identified areas where potential staff imbalances have affected nnsa's ability to operate separately from doe . for example , nnsa's office of general counsel has 35 attorneys , including the general counsel , to provide nnsa legal analysis , while the rest of doe has 277 attorneys . according to nnsa's general counsel , his office would need 15 to 20 additional attorneys to fully handle nnsa's legal workload with minimal assistance from doe . currently , nnsa relies on doe's office of general counsel to perform a significant portion of its legal work . project management . while both doe and nnsa have initiated efforts to improve project management , nnsa reported in november 2006 that about 16 percent of nnsa projects were at risk of breaching their cost baseline , schedule baseline or both . we identified seven areas for improvement that would foster a stronger culture for effective project management . for example , doe's project assessment and reporting system — a web - based system for keeping doe senior managers apprised of the performance of projects costing more than $5 million — does not include four major nnsa projects , estimated to cost over $100 million each . consequently , these projects do not receive the senior management oversight that can be provided through that system . financial management . nnsa has made significant progress in implementing its ppbe process over the last 4 years , as mandated by the nnsa act . however , several areas of improvement still have not been fully addressed . for example , nnsa has issued policy letters on ppbe , but some of these letters are still in draft form because , in part , nnsa is waiting to obtain doe's views on certain matters . in addition , nnsa's ppbe mechanism for centralized resource allocation relies on collegial decision making among senior nnsa managers , with the administrator resolving disputes and deciding on the final resource allocation . however , the administrator does not have an independent group to review program proposals , confirm cost estimates , and analyze alternatives . according to a 2003 doe inspector general report , most senior managers believe that such an analytical group would be of value .