data . fta is also responsible for maintaining the ntd , which was established by congress to be the primary source for information and statistics on the nation's transit systems . oversight . as part of dot's oversight , fta conducts general and special oversight reviews to evaluate the use of funds and adherence to civil rights laws , among other things , by recipients of urbanized area formula program grants ( grantee ) use of funds and adherence to civil rights laws , among other things . civil rights reviews are one of five types of special reviews . fta's office of civil rights is responsible for civil rights compliance and monitoring to ensure nondiscriminatory provision of transit services . ada compliance reviews are a subset of civil rights special reviews , and can be targeted to one of three specific ada areas: fixed - route compliance , rail station compliance , and ada paratransit service compliance . fta also provides technical assistance to transit agencies on fulfilling ada requirements and investigates discrimination complaints filed by the public . recipients or beneficiaries of certain grants from fta are required to submit data to the ntd on information such as their operating expenses , revenue , and services . transit agencies reporting to ntd are required to provide two data points related to ada paratransit services: the number of ada paratransit trips provided annually and total annual expenditures for paratransit services that are attributable to ada requirements . enforcement . doj's ada enforcement responsibility generally involves either filing a federal lawsuit upon referral of a finding of noncompliance by dot or by intervening in a privately filed lawsuit . doj may also resolve complaints of ada noncompliance through settlement agreements and consent decrees with public transit agencies aimed at obtaining ada compliance . there is no national level information to accurately measure the extent to which agencies providing ada paratransit service are complying with ada's paratransit service requirements . however , as a condition of receiving federal funds , every transit agency has to self - certify and assure that it is complying with the dot ada regulations . according to fta , this certification and assurance is its starting point for assessing transit agencies' compliance with ada requirements . additionally , every urbanized area formula program grantee receives the general oversight fta triennial review once every 3 years , which is one of the primary means fta uses to evaluate whether grantees are meeting federal requirements . although the triennial reviews include a review of the grantee's compliance with ada requirements , they provide no detailed information about ada paratransit compliance because ada compliance is 1 of 24 areas of transit operations covered in the review . according to fta officials , negative triennial review findings may be considered in selecting transit agencies for a specialized ada paratransit review . fta's specialized ada paratransit compliance reviews examine multiple aspects of a transit agency's paratransit service . compliance reviews include an examination of the selected transit agency's policies and standards for providing ada complementary paratransit services . reviews also include a determination of whether capacity constraints or areas of non - compliance exist .