forces korea . according to u.s . forces korea officials , many of the facilities there are obsolete , poorly maintained , and in disrepair to the extent that the living and working conditions in south korea are considered to be the worst in the department of defense ( dod ) . we observed many of these conditions during our visits to u.s. facilities and installations in south korea . while improvements have been made in recent years , u.s. military personnel still use , as shown in figure 1 , some korean war - era quonset huts for housing . improving overall facilities used by the united states in south korea will require an enormous investment . during the initial phase of our review we identified funding and other management challenges that could adversely affect the implementation of the land partnership plan . as we considered these issues in light of the potential for even greater basing changes , we recognized that they could also affect the associated u.s. military construction projects throughout south korea . first , the lpp is dependent on substantial amounts of funding that south korea expects to realize through land sales from property returned by the united states , host - nation - funded construction , and u.s. military construction funds . forces korea officials expect to build on this lpp framework for likely additional basing changes , the details have not been finalized for the broader changes . forces korea revises its plans , competition for limited funding for other priorities could become an issue . second , u.s . specifically , the lpp covered about 37 percent of the construction costs planned at u.s. military installations in south korea over the next 10 years , encompassing about $2 billion of the $5.6 billion that the u.s. military and south korea planned to spend to improve the u.s. military infrastructure in south korea from 2002 through 2011 . it was intended to resolve 55 percent , or 49 , of the 89 separate land disputes that were pending in south korea in january 2003 , which was considered a significant step forward . one example of a land dispute that would be resolved under the lpp involves camp hialeah , located on the southern tip of the korean peninsula in the port city of pusan , south korea's second largest city . according to press reports , south korea wanted this base returned because of its proximity to the port and the impediments it posed to urban redevelopment . however , no relocation agreement could be reached until the lpp included an agreement to begin relocating camp hialeah's functions to a new site in noksan , south korea , in 2008 and to close camp hialeah in 2011 . according to press reports attributed to an official from the south korean ministry of foreign affairs and trade , relocating in - city bases like camp hialeah would help lessen the potential tension between u.s. forces and neighboring communities . although the plan was considered a major step forward , it was not designed to resolve a number of significant land disputes . as far back as far as 1982 , negotiations over some land returns have been deadlocked and left unresolved .