specific drug trend assessments . pursuant to the ondcp reauthorization act of 2006 , the national drug control strategy was required to include assessments of the reduction of the consequences of illicit drug use and availability and the reduction of illicit drug availability . we testified in march 2019 that the 2019 national drug control strategy did not include these assessments . our subsequent analysis of the three companion documents showed that the 2019 data supplement provided more information to address the required assessments but did not address all of the requirements . for example , the assessment of the reduction of the consequences of illicit drug use and availability was to include , among other things , the annual national health care cost of illicit drug use . however , the most recent national health care cost data in the 2019 data supplement is from 2007 , and ondcp did not indicate in the supplement whether more recent data were available . for example , it does not describe a performance measurement system that identifies major programs and activities of the national drug control program agencies that support the goals and annual objectives of the national drug control strategy . such programs and activities could indicate how ondcp expects to achieve these objectives , such as how to educate the public about the dangers of drug use , or how to expand access to evidence - based treatment . pursuant to 21 u.s.c . § 1708a ( b ) , we have periodically assessed ondcp's programs and operations . this report assesses the extent to which ( 1 ) ondcp met selected statutory requirements related to the national drug control strategy for 2017 , 2018 , and 2019 , and ( 2 ) ondcp has planned or implemented actions to meet selected new requirements of the support act . in march and may 2019 , we provided testimony on our preliminary findings regarding the extent to which ondcp's 2019 national drug control strategy met selected statutory requirements . to assess the extent to which ondcp met selected statutory requirements related to the strategy for 2017 , 2018 , and 2019 , we reviewed the current national drug control strategy and three associated companion documents that ondcp stated are intended to fulfill their statutory requirements , and assessed these documents against selected provisions of the ondcp reauthorization act of 2006 . ondcp officials told us that they began preparing the current national drug control strategy , which they issued on january 31 , 2019 , in early 2018 — prior to the enactment of the support act in october 2018 . officials stated that they intended for the 2019 national drug control strategy to respond to the requirements of the ondcp reauthorization act of 2006 because this was the applicable law at the time that they began drafting the strategy . in light of ondcp's stated approach , we based our analysis of the 2019 strategy and companion documents on requirements in the ondcp reauthorization act of 2006 , focusing on the same four provisions we discussed in our march and may 2019 testimonies .