we have ongoing work to assess these actions . ensuring proper adherence to the requirements of foia . federal agencies' use of web 2.0 technologies could pose challenges in appropriately responding to foia requests . determining whether web 2.0 records qualify as “agency records” under foia's definition is a complex question . foia's definition focuses on the extent to which the government controls the information in question . according to the department of justice's foia guidance , courts apply a four - part test to determine whether an agency exercises control over a record . they examine: ( a ) who created the record and the intent of the record creator ; ( b ) whether the agency intended to relinquish control ; ( c ) the agency's ability to use or dispose of the record ; and ( d ) the extent to which the record is integrated into the agency's files . agency “control” is also the predominant consideration in determining whether information generated or maintained by a government contractor is subject to foia's requirements . given the complexity of these criteria , agencies may be challenged in making appropriate foia determinations about information generated or disseminated via web 2.0 technologies . if not handled properly , such information may become unavailable for public access . as federal agencies have increasingly adopted web 2.0 technologies , often by making use of commercially provided services , information technology officials have begun to consider the array of privacy , security , records management , and freedom of information issues that such usage poses . once these issues are understood , measures can then be developed and implemented to address them . several steps have been taken to identify these issues and to begin developing processes and procedures to address them: in june 2009 , dhs hosted a two - day public workshop to discuss ● leading practices for the use of social media technologies to further the president's transparency and open government initiative . the workshop consisted of panels of academic , private - sector , and public - sector experts and included discussions on social media activities of federal agencies and the impact of those activities on privacy and security . in november 2009 , dhs released a report summarizing the findings of the panels and highlighting potential solutions . according to a dhs official involved in coordinating the workshop , the array of issues raised during the workshop — which are reflected in the challenges i have discussed today — remain critically important to effective agency use of web 2.0 technologies and have not yet been fully addressed across the government . ● nara has issued guidance outlining issues related to the management of government information associated with web 2.0 use . the agency recently released a brief document , implications of recent web technologies for nara web guidance , as a supplement to its guidance to federal agencies on managing web - based records . the document discusses web technologies used by federal agencies — including web portals , blogs , and wikis — and their impact on records management .