this is not a new issue for interior . specifically , in 2015 , an interior contractor reported on an evaluation of interior's process for disbursing funds and identified opportunities for improvement . consistent with our findings , the report also found that , among other things , the process used by interior to disburse funds is a manual process that does not include a real - time tracking mechanism . without such a mechanism , the report found that officials must spend time trying to determine the status of documents and finding misplaced or lost documents . for example , the report found that in fiscal year 2014 , interior had more than 6,000 scanned documents that required up to 6 signatures each , for a total of up to 36,000 signatures , to disburse funds including funds to tribes for self - determination contracts or self - governance compacts . to finalize these documents , the report estimates that 600 hours of staff time were spent scanning , uploading , and printing the documents . several interior officials told us they conduct monitoring activities within a specific bia region or bia agency office , such as tracking disbursement information through an excel spreadsheet , but these activities were not part of a systematic process . an interior official told us there are no plans to develop a real - time tracking mechanism . interior officials we interviewed cited several reasons why some funds associated with self - determination contracts and self - governance compacts were not disbursed in accordance with time frames outlined in its model agreement or negotiated in funding agreements . the reasons include the following: interior's financial data management system . interior officials told us that the agency's financial data management system is used for all of interior and is not equipped for the unique aspects of self - determination contracts and self - governance compacts — making it difficult to properly track and monitor key actions . prior use of an inefficient process . an interior official told us that prior to fiscal year 2017 , bia used several spreadsheets to coordinate tpa information for distributions . the official stated that these spreadsheets were over 15 years old , and they made the process inefficient and time - consuming . to distribute funds , officials would use one spreadsheet to gather information and another to summarize the amounts by functional area and region . the official stated that bia updated the process in fiscal year 2018 and does not expect it to delay funding in the future . staff shortages in key positions . this process can be repeated multiple times before interior considers the tribe's proposed leasing regulations to be final . in contrast , a tribal stakeholder told us that interior's interpretation of how to measure the time frame is inconsistent with the tribe's interpretation of the statutory time frame . the tribal stakeholder told us that a tribe considers its leasing regulations initially submitted to interior as final , although the tribe understands that bia and the solicitor's office may request revisions .