the foundation provided some furniture . the chief of staff also stated that mrs. reagan supplied a computer used by one of the staff who assists her , and she purchases her own office supplies . mrs. reagan does not have an office in the office of former president reagan . does the staff receive compensation from nonfederal sources ? are the staffs involved with political fund - raising activities ? to respond to your request , we researched applicable laws , reviewed gsa files , toured each of the former presidents' offices and interviewed gsa and u.s. secret service officials and staff from each of the former presidents' offices . in addition , to provide context for the information we are reporting , we reviewed and discussed with gsa and secret service officials , applicable laws authorizing benefits for former presidents and gsa's correspondence to one former president relating to the use of appropriated funds . this report provides information on private funding that was provided by the offices of the former presidents . gsa is not required to collect or verify this information , nor are the offices of former presidents required to report it . during the period in which we conducted our review former president reagan's office was in the process of relocating to a smaller office complex . is there any involvement between entities such as presidential foundations and the former presidents' offices ? this relocation was expected to be completed during september 2001 . where possible , we have also provided information concerning his future office . at the time we last visited former president clinton's office , it had not been completed . where possible , we have included information about his office based on information provided by gsa officials responsible for establishing the office . some of this information was still preliminary at the time we completed our work and is subject to change . the presidential transition act , the former presidents act , presidential protection legislation , and other legislation authorize federal government benefits for former presidents , their spouses , and children . the presidential transition act and the former presidents act authorize office space and office operating costs to a former president . the former presidents act authorizes pensions for a former president and his surviving widow . much of the information contained in this report about former president reagan's office is based upon the location of his office as of june 1 , 2001 . the protection legislation authorizes the secret service to provide protection for former presidents , their spouses , and children and specifies the length of time each is entitled to receive protection . the act authorizes gsa to provide former presidents the following support: suitable office space , appropriately furnished and equipped as determined by the gsa administrator at a place within the united states specified by the former president ; compensation for members of their office staff , not to exceed for any one person the amount provided for an executive level iv position ( currently that amount is $125,700 ) ; an allowance for travel expenses and subsistence ; communications services ; and printing , binding , and postage expenses .