these data are updated monthly . according to vba , the office of performance analysis and integrity reviews and validates brokering data . we also assessed the reliability of vba's fiscal year 2004 benefit entitlement accuracy data and found that the data were sufficiently reliable to show the range in accuracy between vba's most and least accurate offices , but not to make further distinctions in accuracy among regional offices . we interviewed officials responsible for vba's systematic technical accuracy review ( star ) program and discussed their procedures for requesting cases for review . we obtained data by regional office on the number of cases requested and reviewed . we found that vba's star unit had requested , but never received or reviewed , hundreds of sampled cases from its regional offices . this could have affected regional office accuracy scores for fiscal year 2004 . for example , the washington regional office's score was reported as 77 percent . these claims are filed by survivors of service members who die while in military service . vba consolidated these claims as part of its efforts to provide expedited service to these survivors , including service members who died in operations enduring freedom and iraqi freedom . vba has also consolidated the processing of decisions remanded on appeal by va's board of veterans appeals . effective february 2002 , va issued a new regulation to streamline and expedite the appeals process . the new regulation allowed the board to process remanded decisions without having to send them back to vba regional offices . to implement this regulation , the board established a unit to process remanded appeals . however , in may 2003 , the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit held that the board could not , except in certain statutorily authorized exceptions , decide appeals in cases in which the board had developed evidence . as a result , vba regained responsibility for evidence development and adjudication work on remands , and chose to establish a centralized appeals management center at its washington regional office . according to vba officials , remand processing was consolidated because a consolidated unit , focusing only on remands , could process them faster and more consistently , and with better accountability , than the individual regional offices . vba's washington regional office was chosen because of its proximity to the board's headquarters . the appeals management center was established in july 2003 , and was , according to vba officials , fully operational by february 2004 . according to a vba official , it was staffed largely through transfers from regional offices and with staff from the board's former remand processing unit . vba continues to consolidate specific types of claims processing work . vba is in the process of consolidating decision making on benefits delivery at discharge claims , which are generally original claims for disability compensation , at the salt lake city and winston - salem regional offices . vba established this program to expedite decisions on disability compensation claims from newly separated service members . a service member can file a bdd claim up to 180 days before separation ; vba staff performs some development work on the claim before separation .