this information is important because it has cost implications . specifically , while items may fall into the same category , the cost to reset can vary broadly depending on the vehicle type . for example , both the m1200 knight ( an armored security vehicle ) and the m1151 hmmwv are categorized as tactical wheeled vehicles in the army's monthly reports to congress . for planning purposes , in 2010 the army requested over $500,000 for the repair of each m1200 , while requesting about $154,000 for the repair of each m1151 . however , in 2010 more m1200s were repaired than planned , thus accounting for a larger share of the budgeted reset funds . at the same time , with fewer funds remaining , some equipment planned and budgeted for repair was not reset , pushing that workload to future fiscal years . conversely , if fewer m1200s had been reset than were planned , the $500,000 estimated reset liability for each m1200 would be incurred in a future fiscal year , as they would still require reset eventually . further details about our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit between january 2010 and may 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . since 2006 , the army has relied on the practice known as reset to restore equipment readiness through a variation of repair , recapitalization , and replacement of equipment activities . the army defines reset as: “actions taken to restore equipment to a desired level of combat capability commensurate with a unit's future mission . it encompasses maintenance and supply activities that restore and enhance combat capability to unit and pre - positioned equipment that was destroyed , damaged , stressed , or worn out beyond economic repair due to combat operations by repairing , rebuilding , or procuring replacement equipment.” figure 1 provides the appropriations typically used to fund various kinds of reset and definitions of the four categories that make up the army's reset activities . in 2007 , the army established the reset task force to monitor and track reset requirements and expenditures to ensure that reset dollars are properly managed and reported , and to monitor the status of reset to include repair , replacement , and recapitalization . this task force is chaired by the office of the deputy chief of staff , g - 8 ( programs ) force development directorate , which has overall responsibility for the preparation of monthly congressional reset reports , and for reporting on the status of the army reset program to congress and the department of the army .