interfaces . our analysis of ecss and deams risk management processes found that even when risks were identified at lower levels within a program , the level of detail at the program level was not always sufficient to provide program managers with the visibility needed to effectively assess and manage certain risks at those levels . although the ecss and deams program management offices identified interfaces as potential areas of risk at lower levels within the program , we found that neither program management office consistently identified interfaces as a risk at the program level . in the case of deams , the information in the program level risk management system did not disclose that 70 key interfaces must be dealt with in order to implement the system , even though this level of detail was maintained at a lower level by the deams interface and conversion group . without visibility of risks identified at all levels of a program , it is difficult , if not impossible , for the program manager or other senior - level officials to ascertain if the various risks that are associated with a program of this magnitude are effectively identified and managed . we have previously reported that interfaces are critical elements necessary to successfully implement a new system and failure to properly address risk in interface areas has contributed to the system failures of previous agency efforts . data conversion . in implementing ecss and deams , the air force will have to expend considerable resources to clean - up and transfer the data in the existing legacy systems to ecss or deams . however , we found that only the ecss risk management program identified data quality as an issue in its discussion of data conversion . much like system interfaces , each effort to convert data needs to be separately identified and managed so that ( 1 ) the risks associated with a given effort can be identified , ( 2 ) adequate mitigating actions can be developed for those risks , and ( 3 ) the effectiveness of the mitigating actions can be monitored . for example , in june 2005 , we reported that data conversion problems seriously affected the army's ability to implement its logistics modernization program at the tobyhanna army depot , tobyhanna , pennsylvania . these problems affected reporting of revenue earned , accountability over orders received from customers , and prepared billings . as discussed in our july 2007 report , the army and its contractor still had not resolved the issues of customers being improperly billed . change management . the deams program management office did not identify change management as a risk in its risk management system ; however , it was included as a risk by the ecss program management office . change management is the process of preparing users for the changes that should occur with the implementation of a new system . it involves engaging users and communicating the nature of anticipated changes to system users through training on how jobs will change . this is necessary because commercial products are created with the developers' expectations of how they will be used , and the products' functionality may require the organization implementing the system to change existing business processes .