the new policy will eliminate this inconsistency . second , differences exist in how funding is obtained for lodging modernization and new construction . lodging revenues in the army and air force ( which operate their lodges as category a mission - sustaining activities ) must be sufficient to fund current operating expenses , periodic refurbishment of the lodging interiors , major renovations to the building exteriors , and the construction of any new or replacement lodges . however , the formula used by these two services to set lodging rates does not include factors for renovation or new construction . therefore , the army and air force lodging programs have added a nightly surcharge to their room rates to pay for these types of capital improvements . the navy and marine corps ( which operate their lodges as category c revenue - generating activities ) have greater flexibility to set lodging rates to generate additional revenue for capital improvements or other purposes . they are aware , for example , that the navy and marine corps have expanded existing lodges and built new ones that exceed the needs of pcs and other official travelers . because dod's current guidance allows this , osd officials state that they have little recourse but to approve the projects as long as sufficient financial resources are available . this creates an inconsistency in how lodging funds can be used . third , the degree of appropriated support provided at the local installation level ( eg , minor repairs and grounds maintenance ) varies greatly . staff acknowledgements are listed in appendix iii . to determine the potential impact of the policy change on service mwr programs , we interviewed and received briefings on the policy change and its impact from key officials in the osd who are responsible for developing mwr and lodging policy and from appropriate military service headquarters personnel who manage the services' mwr and lodging operations . we also obtained dod and service headquarters overviews of their pcs and tdy lodging operations in addition to their policies and regulations that govern mwr and lodge funding and operations , as well as nonappropriated funds and nonappropriated fund instrumentality management and control . we also obtained and reviewed financial reports and other lodging and mwr revenue and expense data . in addition , we obtained and reviewed the marine corps community services' annual report for 1999 , which included an unqualified opinion on its financial statements by an independent public accountant . we analyzed this information and identified additional impacts on both the services' mwr programs as well as their lodging programs . we used the impacts on the army's programs to compare with the potential impacts on the marine corps' programs and to help us propose options for maintaining the health of the marine corps' mwr and lodging programs . to determine to what extent dod will accomplish its management objectives with the policy change , we first interviewed osd officials to determine what they hoped to accomplish with the policy change and what they saw as the future of dod's and the services' lodging programs . osd officials were aware that the proposed policy change would have a limited effect and discussed this issue with us .