the reservoirs are then refilled with tritium and returned to dod . despite the fact that the pacific northwest national laboratory has redesigned several components within the tpbars to reduce the amount of tritium permeating into the reactor coolant at the watts bar 1 reactor , tritium is still leaking from the tpbars at higher - than - expected rates . as a result , significantly fewer tpbars than planned are being irradiated in the reactor , which has considerably reduced the amount of tritium nnsa is producing . nnsa and tva officials told us that they are developing plans to increase the number of tpbars being irradiated and the number of reactors participating in tritium production , as well as plans to modify the reactors to better manage tritium releases to the environment . however , to date , these plans have not been actively coordinated with nrc , which ultimately must approve any modifications to reactor operations . nnsa has been unable to solve the technical challenges it has been experiencing producing tritium . specifically , tritium is permeating from the tpbars at higher - than - expected rates into the water used to cool the reactor core at tva's watts bar 1 nuclear plant rather than being captured in the tpbars as designed . watts bar's operating license is based on the assumption that 2,304 tpbars would be loaded into the reactor and that tritium would permeate from the tpbars into the reactor coolant at an average rate of 1.0 curie of tritium per year per tpbar . however , according to nnsa reports , tritium is permeating from the tpbars at levels of up to 4.2 curies of tritium per year per tpbar out of a total of 10,000 curies produced by one tpbar . to keep the total amount of tritium released into the reactor coolant below regulatory limits , tva has limited the number of tpbars being irradiated in the watts bar 1 reactor , according to tva officials . nnsa's original plans called for irradiating 1,160 tpbars per reactor fueling cycle by 2010 before ramping up to nearly 2,700 tpbars per fueling cycle by 2013 using both the watts bar 1 reactor and tva's sequoyah 1 reactor . however , as a result of the tritium permeation problem , tva currently irradiates only 240 tpbars per fueling cycle using only the watts bar 1 reactor . while the interagency agreement between doe and tva allows nnsa to use the two sequoyah reactors to irradiate tpbars , tva officials told us that tva is reluctant to allow nnsa to use these reactors because , among other things , tva would prefer to meet tritium requirements using only a single reactor . the pacific northwest national laboratory has redesigned several components within the tpbars in an attempt to reduce the amount of tritium permeating into the reactor coolant . for example , national laboratory researchers have modified the nickel - plated “getter” in the tpbar to better capture tritium within the rod . however , despite this redesign , no discernable improvement in tpbar performance was made and tritium is still permeating from the tpbars at higher - than - expected rates .