( see fig . this specialty care clinic had specific templates depending on the patient's symptoms . ( see appendix i for examples of other templates used by the gastroenterology clinic at this vamc. ) after completing the template , the requesting provider electronically submits the consult for the specialty care provider to review . according to vha's guideline , the specialty care provider is to review and determine whether to accept a consult within 7 days of the request . typically , the provider's review involves determining whether to accept the consult — that the consult is needed and appropriate — and if the consult is accepted , determining its relative urgency — a process known as triaging . when reviewing a consult request , a specialty care provider may decide not to accept it , and will send the consult back to the requesting provider . this is referred to as discontinuing the consult , which a specialty care provider may decide to do for several reasons , including that the care is not needed , the patient refuses care , or the patient is deceased . in other cases the specialty care provider may determine that additional information is needed before accepting the consult ; in such cases , the specialty care provider will send the consult back to the requesting provider , who can resubmit it with the needed information . if the provider accepts the consult , an attempt is made to contact the patient and schedule an appointment . appointments resulting from outpatient consults , like other outpatient medical appointments , are subject to vha's scheduling policy . this policy is designed to help vamcs meet their commitment of scheduling medical appointments with no undue waits or delays for patients . according to vha officials , the scheduler is to take into account the relative urgency of the consult , that is , the result of the reviewing specialty provider's triage decision , when attempting to schedule the appointment . if an appointment resulting from a consult is scheduled and held , vha's policy requires the specialty care provider to appropriately document the results in the consult system , which would then close out the consult as completed . to do so , the provider updates the consult with the results of the appointment by entering a clinical progress note in the consult system . if the provider does not perform this step , or does not perform it appropriately , the consult remains open in the consult system . if an appointment is not held , specialty care clinic staff members are to document why they were unable to complete the consult . according to vha's national consult policy , vha central office officials have overall oversight responsibility for the consult process , including the measurement and monitoring of ongoing performance . the policy also requires visn leadership to oversee the consult processes for vamcs in their networks , and requires each vamc to manage individual consults consistent with vha's timeliness guidelines . to evaluate the timeliness of resolving consults across vamcs , in september 2012 , vha created a national consult database from the information contained in its electronic consult system .