( recommendation 6 ) . we provided a draft of the report to opm , eeoc , labor , omb , doj , sba , and ssa for review and comment . omb did not provide comments on the draft . opm concurred with our recommendation to routinely track and report retention data for employees with disabilities and make such data available to federal agencies . opm stated that it already routinely tracks retention data for persons with disabilities by agency . in addition , opm responded that retention data for employees with disabilities by agency and gs level pay groupings for fiscal years 2017 and 2018 can be obtained by federal agencies through the max.gov website . however , opm did not provide any supporting documentary evidence or further details to explain its tracking efforts or which data are available to federal agencies . sba disagreed with the retention data we present in figure 8 , showing that approximately 65 percent of employees with disabilities hired at sba between 2011 through 2017 stayed less than one year . in its written comments , sba stated that under hiring authorities it uses in responding to disasters , appointments are generally not to exceed one year . as indicated in our report , we acknowledge that each of our retention analyses include full - time permanent hires and part - time or temporary hires . we also include a specific statement regarding temporary hires at sba's office of disaster assistance . sba concurred with our recommendation to assess and track the impact of training provided to agency hiring managers and human resources staff on schedule a hiring authority . sba responded that it will formally evaluate the impact of training to ensure hiring managers understand the use of schedule a hiring authority and assess hiring trends and retention . sba partially concurred with our recommendation to obtain employee feedback about its reasonable accommodation efforts . sba stated that its procedures require supervisors to contact the disability employment program manager with concerns about the effectiveness of a provided accommodation and work together to make any necessary adjustment . sba further stated that the procedures have been revised and will include a requirement for completing a feedback survey aimed to determine the effectiveness of the reasonable accommodation program and make any adjustments required . sba stated that it also established an internal mailbox for reasonable accommodation communications that is monitored daily . effective implementation of sba's plans , including administering a survey , would meet the intent of the recommendation . ssa concurred with our recommendation to assess and track the impact of training provided to agency hiring managers and human resources staff on schedule a hiring authority . ssa stated that it is revising its framework to include outcome - based evaluations for training related to the employment and support of individuals with disabilities , including schedule a hiring . doj did not agree or disagree with the recommendations . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the director of opm , the chair of eeoc , the secretary of labor , the director of omb , the attorney general of doj , the administrator of sba , and the commissioner of ssa .