pub . 112-95 , § 213 ( c ) ( 1 ) , ( 2 ) , 126 stat. amendments from the regional and national prioritization processes . this would allow faa to make minor changes to existing — but potentially underused — rnav arrival and departure procedures more expeditiously . this could be an efficient and cost - effective way for faa to increase pbn usage . 3 ) to what extent is faa measuring and demonstrating midterm nextgen benefits and assessing outcomes ? to address these three questions , we reviewed agency - provided documentation , including planning documents such as faa's 2012 nextgen implementation plan , internal reports related to nextgen initiatives , and faa process and procedure documentation . we met with faa officials across multiple offices that have a role in implementing nextgen , including units within the nextgen office , the office of aviation safety , and air traffic organization ( ato ) . we also interviewed aviation stakeholders and experts with knowledge and experience related to nextgen implementation , including representatives from industry associations ( such as rtca and airlines for america ) , airlines , airports , avionics and aircraft manufacturers , and other aviation vendors , as well as air traffic controllers . to identify key nextgen operational improvements that use existing technology to deliver benefits through 2018 , we reviewed the recommendations made by the rtca task force report and by the nac work group . these recommendations identify operational improvements faa should prioritize and where those improvements should be implemented in the midterm , but do not include all operational improvements in faa's 2012 nextgen implementation plan . we grouped these operational improvements into three key improvement areas for midterm nextgen implementation: 1 . performance based navigation ( pbn ) , 2. enhanced airborne and surface traffic management , and 3. additional or revised aviation safety standards . table 1 provides a listing of the operational improvements recommended by the rtca task force and nac work group . operational improvements are grouped by the implementation portfolios used by faa in its planning documents . to determine how faa is addressing known obstacles to the implementation of nextgen operational improvements , we identified obstacles and challenges to developing , implementing , or fully using key nextgen improvements primarily from findings and recommendations made by the rtca task force and an faa study on obstacles to pbn implementation . to obtain information about faa efforts to address these obstacles , we reviewed agency reports and documents , including faa's report on efforts to streamline the process for developing and implementing flight procedures , and spoke with officials from relevant program offices and facilities , including environmental review specialists and air - traffic control facilities . to assess agency progress toward addressing these obstacles and identify ongoing challenges , we spoke with industry experts and stakeholders , including airport officials , airline representatives , avionics manufacturers , members of the nac work group and the performance based operations aviation rulemaking committee , and air traffic controllers . we also assessed certain faa efforts against established criteria , including best practices for stakeholder involvement from the airport cooperative research program ( acrp ) and for organizational goal - setting and performance measurement .