change the rating categories . under tea - 21 , fta assigns summary ratings of “highly recommended,” “recommended,” and “not recommended” to projects requesting new starts funding . the senate reauthorization proposal would revise the current rating system and implement five levels of ratings: “high,” “medium - high,” “medium,” “medium - low,” and “low.” the house proposal would maintain the current ratings system . project sponsors were unsure of the impact of the proposed changes , and a few requested clearly defined criteria for each new rating category . some sponsors told us they were not concerned with the ratings scale as long as it was clearly defined . other project sponsors said they did not care what the new rating categories were called — they just want to know what rating is needed to secure an ffga . in addition , two sponsors said the new system could be more easily conveyed to local officials . maintain a maximum new starts share at 80 percent . currently , tea - 21 allows a maximum new starts share of 80 percent for individual projects . both the house and the senate versions of the tea - 21 reauthorization proposals would maintain the maximum new starts share at 80 percent , in contrast to the administration's reauthorization proposal , which would lower the maximum new starts share to 50 percent . furthermore , the house bill specifically prohibits fta from requiring a nonfederal share that is more than 20 percent of the project's cost . currently , fta is encouraging project sponsors to request no more than 50 percent in new starts funding for their projects . as noted earlier , some project sponsors we interviewed were concerned about the potential impact of reducing the new starts share to 50 percent , including the effect of this change on the balance between highway and transit project funding . all 26 projects with existing ffgas have not received funds as scheduled — that is , the amount of funding appropriated was less than the amount scheduled in the ffga . ffgas are multiyear contractual agreements between fta and project sponsors for a specified amount of funding , which are subject to the annual appropriations process . the full amount of funding is committed to the projects over a set period , and the ffga contains a schedule of annual federal payments to fulfill fta's commitment . according to fta , all completed new starts projects received the total ffga amount but not necessarily according to the original ffga schedule . fta will continue to request funds to be appropriated to meet the amounts authorized in existing ffgas . as of march 2004 , the 26 projects have received a total of $294 million , or 5 percent , less than the amount authorized by the projects' ffgas . the amount and timing of the differences in funding varied for each project , but all 26 projects with ffgas received less than the scheduled amount at some point . as of march 2004 , 7 had received over 10 percent less than the scheduled amount , 2 had received between 5 and 10 percent less than scheduled , and 17 projects had received up to 5 percent less than scheduled .