we made recommendations in each of these areas . in addition , in recent years , other entities have conducted reviews and made recommendations to ntsb related to information security practices . our testimony addresses ntsb's progress in ( 1 ) following leading practices in management areas such as strategic planning , human capital management , and financial management ; ( 2 ) increasing the efficiency of activities related to investigating accidents , issuing recommendations , and conducting safety studies ; ( 3 ) increasing the utilization of its training center ; and ( 4 ) responding to recommendations from an independent information security audit . in discussing ntsb's progress in these areas , we will also provide views on several related provisions in the agency's reauthorization proposal . our testimony is based on our analysis of policies and procedures developed by ntsb in response to recommendations made by gao and the independent audit , updates to information we reported in 2006 , and our analysis of provisions in ntsb's reauthorization proposal . we considered ntsb to have made limited progress in implementing a recommendation when the agency was in the early planning stages and documents or milestones for actions did not exist or they did not follow leading practices . recognizing that many recommendations may take considerable time and effort to fully implement , we considered ntsb to have made significant progress in implementing a recommendation if the agency had taken steps beyond the early planning stages toward addressing the concerns . in this case , documents or policies had been developed that , for the most part , followed leading practices . we considered ntsb to have fully implemented a recommendation when the agency had fully implemented plans or processes that followed leading practices . we undertook this work in response to a legislative mandate that we conduct an annual audit of ntsb . appendix i provides additional information on the recommendations discussed below . overall , ntsb has made progress in following leading management practices in the eight areas in which we made recommendations in 2006 . our recommendations are based on leading practices identified through our government wide work that are important for managing an agency . to improve agency performance in it management , we recommended that ntsb develop plans or policies for it . the it plan should include a strategy to guide it acquisitions . our assessment of ntsb's progress ntsb has made progress in implementing this recommendation . in august 2007 , ntsb issued an it strategic plan that takes the following steps to address the concerns that led to the recommendation: it establishes goals and milestones for developing an enterprise architecture by 2012 . ( in november 2007 , ntsb hired an enterprise architect to lead this effort. ) it includes a draft investment management process . it establishes goals for implementing key aspects of the investment management process by 2008 and the full process by 2012 . it establishes the goal of reaching capability maturity model integration level 2 ( the level at which it acquisitions and development can be said to be “managed” rather than “chaotic” ) by 2012 . to fully implement our recommendation , ntsb needs to improve one important aspect of its it strategic plan .