however , these limits are not specific to ssns . see appendix i for more information on these laws . we reviewed selected legislative documents of 18 states and found that at least 6 states have enacted their own legislation to restrict either the display or use of ssns by the private sector . notably , in 2001 , california enacted senate bill ( sb ) 168 , restricting private sector use of ssns . agencies responsible for collecting and maintaining data for statistical programs that are required by statute , make use of ssns . in some cases , these data are compiled using information provided for another purpose . for example , the bureau of the census prepares annual population estimates for states and counties using individual income tax return data linked over time by ssn to determine immigration rates between localities . ssns also provide government agencies and others with an effective mechanism for linking data on program participation with data from other sources to help evaluate the outcomes or effectiveness of government programs . again , in some cases , federal law requires that ssns be placed in certain records that courts maintain , such as child support orders . in our prior report , we looked at the extent and nature of federal , state , and county governments' use of ssns when they are contained in public records , and the options available to better safeguard ssns that are found in these public records . patients will be generally asked to sign or otherwise acknowledge receipt of the privacy notice . our findings led us to suggest that congress consider addressing ssn security and display issues in state and local government and in public records , including those maintained by the judicial branch of government at all levels . we proposed that congress convene a representative group of officials from all levels of government to develop a unified approach to safeguard ssns used in all levels of government and particularly those displayed in public records . at the request of this subcommittee , gao was asked what types of public records ssns are stored in , how are those records maintained , and to what extent ssns are displayed inside those records . to do this work , we are surveying over 2,500 officials in state and local government agencies , including officials in all 50 states and the district of columbia , and are conducting structured interviews of federal agencies . our preliminary survey data show that the types of records most likely to contain ssns and be made available to the general public by state government entities are court records , death records , ucc filings , and professional licensing records . at the local level , court records and land records are those most often cited as containing ssns and being available to the general public . preliminary data analysis indicates that identity verification is the most frequently given reason by both state and local respondents for collecting or using ssns that are in records available to the public . data matching and complying with state laws or regulations are also frequently cited as reasons for the collection or use of the ssn .