we agree with both of these points . our central point , however , was that given the timing and extent of goal revision , and the absence of a discussion about those changes , the usefulness of the report for understanding performance as measured against the final goals , is limited . the deputy mayor said that the information we reported on the timing of the final set of agency goals appears to exaggerate the amount of time that agency goals were in a state of flux — leading to the impression that all of the district's goals were changing until june 2000 . we report that goals for the critical agencies were finalized by march 2000 and that goals for other ( noncritical ) agencies were revised at other times ; the district could not specify when these goals were finalized . it could only suggest that 30 to 40 percent of these agencies' goals were revised . however , we revised our report to reflect that although some goals were finalized earlier , they were not submitted to congress until june 2000 . in response to our recommendation that the district accelerate efforts to settle upon a consistent set of goals , the deputy mayor said that the district anticipates consolidating its goals during the fiscal year 2003 planning , budgeting , and reporting cycle . he further stated that goals for fiscal years 2001 and 2002 are likely to change as the district updates its agency - specific and citywide strategic plans in the summer of 2001 . as we note in this report , it can be beneficial to periodically reassess and revise goals . however , it is critical that the district makes every effort to accelerate the process of settling upon its final goals early in a fiscal year to ensure that the performance assessment and report are meaningful . the deputy mayor concurs with our recommendation that specific information should be provided in the district's performance reports for each goal that changed . the deputy mayor also concurs with our recommendation to include in each year's accountability report the performance of all significant activities of the district . he said that the district will seek to expand the coverage of its fiscal year 2001 report to more fully comply with its mandated reporting requirements . he also stated that although the district cannot compel independent agencies not under the authority of the mayor ( including the d.c. public schools ) to report on performance , it plans to work with them in developing performance information . we are sending copies of this report to the mayor of the district of columbia . copies will be made available to others upon request . key contributors to this report were kathy cunningham , chad holmes , boris kachura , and bill reinsberg . please contact me or mr. kachura on ( 202 ) 512-6806 if you have any questions on the material in this report . the first copy of each gao report is free . additional copies of reports are $2 each . a check or money order should be made out to the superintendent of documents . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .