hrd - 80-102 . washington , d.c.: september 16 , 1980 . ogc - 97-14 . whd assigns these inquiries to analysts as they are received . whd officials told us that the specific methodology of calculating a wage rate for a certain occupation in a certain geographic location can change from year to year based on a series of elements , such as the availability of survey data or an analysts professional judgment . while analysts do provide details to those who inquire , whd does not provide individual methodology worksheets in writing , stating that doing so would result in additional inquiries as to why rates are not calculated by the same method as in the previous year and take analysts away from their primary task of issuing new and revised wage determinations . stakeholders with concerns told us , however , that it would be helpful to them if more information about the process was made available . whd receives criticism that its wage determination rates do not reflect market conditions . some contractors say that private - sector wage data provide a more accurate measure of local labor market conditions than bls survey data that were not designed for the purpose of determining wages and fringe benefit rates . however , whd officials told us that to the extent its wage rates are perceived as not reflective of the market rate , one possible reason could be that whd sets internal parameters for wage determinations ( eg , not issuing a wage rate lower than or more than 10 percent above the previously issued rate ) to ensure consistency from year to year . as a result , while bls survey data may be lower or higher than the resulting wage determination , analysts manipulate wage rates to ensure a consistent wage structure . whd enforces sca by conducting contractor investigations , ensuring contractor payments to employees , and providing compliance assistance to stakeholders . whd investigates complaints from service contract employees , contractors , federal agencies , unions , and others who allege that contractors have failed to pay either the wages or fringe benefits , or both , specified in service contracts . whd collects violation data , but it does not fully use these data to plan compliance assistance , target specific service industries or geographic locations for sca investigation , or set strategic enforcement goals . when investigations find that contractors have failed to pay in accordance with contract wages or benefits , whd acts to ensure that contractor payments are made to employees . whd also provides compliance assistance to contractors , federal agencies , unions , and others to help them comply with sca requirements and avoid sca violations . sca investigations originate when contract employees , federal agencies , competitor contractors , or employee representatives complain to whd that a contractor has failed to comply with the wage or benefit requirements in a contract . whd investigators then consult and interview contractor officials , inspect the contract and contractor payroll records , and interview service contract employees . whd records investigation data , such as the name of the contractor , geographic location , industry , and the type of violation , in its whisard database .