to date , prepayment activity has been minimal . over 4,550 new properties entered the portfolio since the 1988 prepayment restrictions went into effect . this number far exceeded the number of properties that left the portfolio after prepayment . for example , rhs data for fiscal years 1998 through 2001 show that fewer than 100 properties , on average have left the portfolio each year . fiscal year 2001 is the only year when the number of prepayments exceeded the number of properties added to the portfolio . figure 2 details the key legislation . the legislation restricting prepayment of section 515 loans has resulted in litigation . owners of section 515 properties who wished to prepay the loan pursuant to their original loan agreements and remove their properties from the section 515 program have sued the federal government . the owners claim that the federal government , with the enactment of the legislation and the subsequent refusal by rhs to accept unfettered prepayment , committed a breach of contract and an unconstitutional taking of their properties . the federal government maintains that no such breach occurred . however , this exception reflects a decline in funding rather than an increase in prepayments . rhs officials noted that prepayment requests were particularly limited in 1995 after an rhs administrative notice , citing an application processing backlog and limited funding , resulted in discouraging owners from applying for prepayment . since 1988 , the impact of prepayment has been minimized by a statutory restriction on owners who prepay by stipulating that , under certain circumstances , the rents for tenants not be increased for as long as they remain in the units . during fiscal years 1999 through 2001 , the owners of 283 properties prepaid their loans . where data was available , we determined the number of properties whose loans were prepaid . we also collected detailed funding and unit production information to document changes in the section 515 portfolio since the program began . to estimate the impact of changing the legislation to allow prepayment without restrictions after 20 years , we planned to survey property owners about their prepayment intentions and obtain specific information from rhs on each property in the section 515 portfolio . however , rhs officials informed us that the information needed to survey the owners was not readily available because rhs's database did not identify specific owners . in addition , many of the properties are owned by large partnerships whose individual owners are not easily identifiable . while we interviewed a number of section 515 property owners on prepayment issues , we were unable to survey all property owners because the rhs database did not identify specific owners . therefore we do not know the extent that the views of the owners we interviewed are representative of all section 515 owners . rhs also informed us that specific information about individual properties was not readily available because the agency's accounting systems track loans rather than properties and most properties had more than one loan .