gao - 06-115 . october 6 , 2005 border security: strengthened visa process would benefit from improvements in staffing and information sharing . gao - 05-859 . september 13 , 2005 border security: actions needed to strengthen management of department of homeland security's visa security program . the visa waiver program has many benefits . the program was created to facilitate international travel without jeopardizing the welfare or security of the united states , according to the program's legislative history . border security: streamlined visas mantis program has lowered burden on foreign science students and scholars , but further refinements needed . gao - 05-198 . february 18 , 2005 . border security: state department rollout of biometric visas on schedule , but guidance is lagging . gao - 04-1001 . september 9 , 2004 . border security: additional actions needed to eliminate weaknesses in the visa revocation process . gao - 04-795 . according to economic and commercial officers at several of the u.s. embassies we visited , visa - free travel to the united states boosts international business travel and tourism , as well as airline revenues , and creates substantial economic benefits to the united states . the office received funding to conduct the country reviews in 2004 and 2005 ; however , oie officials indicated that a lack of funding and full - time staff has made it extremely difficult to conduct additional overseas fieldwork , as well as track ongoing issues of concern in the 27 visa waiver countries — a key limitation in dhs's ability to assess and mitigate the program's risks . according to oie officials , the unit developed a strategic plan to monitor the program , but has been unable to implement its plan with its current staffing of two full - time employees , as well as one temporary employee from another dhs component . without adequate resources , oie is unable to monitor and assess participating countries' compliance with the visa waiver program's statutory requirements . in addition to resource constraints , dhs has not clearly communicated its mission to stakeholders at overseas posts , nor identified points of contact within u.s. embassies , so it can communicate directly with field officials positioned to monitor countries' compliance with visa waiver program requirements and report on current events and issues of potential concern . in particular , within dhs's various components , we found that oie is largely an unknown entity and , therefore , is unable to leverage the expertise of dhs officials overseas . a senior dhs representative at one post showed us that her organizational directory did not contain contact information for oie . additionally , a senior dhs official in washington , d.c. , told us that he may find out about developments — either routine or emergent — in visa waiver countries by “happenstance.” due to the lack of outreach and clear communication about its mission , oie is limited in its ability to monitor the day - to - day law enforcement and security concerns posed by the visa waiver program , and the u.s. government is limited in its ability to influence visa waiver countries' progress in meeting requirements . dhs has taken some actions to mitigate the risks of the visa waiver program .