( see fig . fda officials estimated that reviewers spent the majority of their time reviewing and commenting on draft materials . however , we were unable to determine the number of final or draft materials fda reviewed , because fda did not track this information . in the case of final and draft broadcast materials , fda officials told us that the dtc group reviewed all of the materials it received ; in 2005 , it received 337 final and 146 draft broadcast materials . however , fda did not document whether these or other materials it received had been reviewed . as a result , fda could not determine how many materials it reviewed in a given year . we recommended in our 2006 report that the agency track which dtc materials had been reviewed . fda officials indicated to us in may 2008 that the agency still did not track this information . at the time of our 2006 report , fda officials identified informal criteria that the agency used to prioritize its reviews . fda officials told us that , to target available resources , the agency prioritized the review of the dtc advertising materials that had the greatest potential to negatively affect public health . we recommended that fda document its criteria for prioritizing its reviews of dtc advertising materials . fda informed us in may 2008 that it now has documented criteria to prioritize reviews . for example , its first priority is to review materials with “egregious” violations , such as those identified through complaints . in addition , fda places a high priority on reviewing television advertising materials . fda officials also told us that the agency places a high priority on reviewing draft materials because they provide the agency with an opportunity to identify problems and ask drug companies to correct them before the materials are disseminated to consumers . we reported in 2006 that fda did not systematically apply its criteria for prioritizing reviews to all of the materials that it received . specifically , we found in 2006 that , at the time fda received the materials , it recorded information about the drug being advertised and the type of material being submitted but did not screen the dtc materials to identify those that met its various informal criteria . fda officials told us that the agency did identify all final and draft broadcast materials that it received , but it did not have a system for identifying any other high - priority materials . absent such a system for all materials , fda relied on each of the reviewers — in consultation with other ddmac officials — to be aware of the materials that had been submitted and to accurately apply the criteria to determine the specific materials to review . this created the potential for reviewers to miss materials that the agency would consider to be a high priority for review . furthermore , because fda did not track information on its reviews , the agency could not determine whether a particular material had been reviewed . as a result , the agency could not ensure that it identified and reviewed the highest - priority materials .