they concurred with our recommendations and had no other comments . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of homeland security , fema administrator , and interested congressional committees . we will also provide copies to others on request . if you or your staff have any questions about this report or wish to discuss the matter further , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or jenkinswo@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . to determine the extent to which dhs collaborated with non - federal stakeholders , we first determined the revision process that dhs had planned to follow to revise the 2004 plan . we reviewed dhs's september 2006 revision work plan that had been approved by the domestic readiness group of white house's homeland security council and interviewed fema and non - federal officials who served in key positions in the revision process . we also reviewed applicable statutes , primarily the october 2006 post - katrina emergency management reform act , for statutory requirements related to the revision process . to determine what happened during the revision process and the extent to which dhs involved non - federal stakeholders in that process , we interviewed fema officials and non - federal stakeholders who served in key positions in the revision process and the chairman of fema's national advisory council ( nac ) . further , we reviewed dhs documentation citing the roles provided to non - federal stakeholders in the revision process and explaining how the actual revision process was conducted , fema documentation on the process and time frames related to the nac's establishment , nac documentation regarding its role in the revision process , and congressional testimony from non - federal stakeholders on how dhs conducted and included them in the revision process . to determine the extent to which fema had policies and procedures in place for future revisions of the nrf , we interviewed fema officials . the non - federal officials we interviewed represented state and local levels of government , emergency management associations , and other non - federal entities . while the statements and views of the stakeholders we interviewed are not generalizable to the some 230 non - federal stakeholders involved in the revision process , we chose to speak to them because of their assigned key roles . there is some uncertainty in our determination of the total number of non - federal members in the 12 work groups , and thus the total number of work group members , due to duplication or the lack of adequate information identifying a member as federal in the data provided by fema . however , because dhs's inclusion of non - federal members in the revision process is the focus of this report , we took steps to correctly determine the number and composition of the 224 non - federal members . based on our analysis of fema's data for federal members , we believe the total of 486 federal members is a reasonable approximation , and therefore , the grand total of 710 work group members is also a reasonable approximation .