australia . this fta negotiation represents the greatest immediate commercial benefit of any single ongoing fta , with 1.2 percent of total u.s. trade in 2002 . a u.s. - australia fta would add to the regional distribution of ftas for the united states and would strengthen u.s. ties to a valued ally . the increased u.s. access to australia's market would likely increase trade in goods and services , enhance employment opportunities , and encourage additional two - way investment . bahrain . although bahrain represents a small share of u.s. trade , an fta with this u.s. ally and moderate muslim nation would support u.s. security and political goals by fostering prosperity in the region . as a stepping - stone to an eventual middle east free trade area , bahrain could become the hub of a subregional block of countries with closer trading relationships with the united states . an fta with bahrain might be completed relatively quickly due to bahrain's reform - minded outlook . central american free trade agreement . the commercial benefit of an fta with five central american countries would be 0.95 percent of total u.s. trade . in the united states - caribbean basin trade partnership act , the congress declared that it was the policy of the united states to seek the participation of caribbean basin beneficiary countries in the ftaa or another fta , with the goal of achieving full participation in any such agreement by 2005 . cafta would provide regional balance among ftas and add to the momentum for the hemispherewide ftaa , a major u.s. trade priority . it would also help lock in and broaden reforms such as anticorruption and government accountability measures , support economic integration within the region , and enable the united states to increase exports and gain u.s. access to more affordable goods . dominican republic . if the dominican republic is added to the overall cafta region , it would bring the cafta trade from 0.95 percent to 1.32 percent of total u.s. trade in 2002 , slightly more than that of australia . the dominican republic had strong support in the congress for its addition to the cafta negotiations , in part because excluding it from cafta could lead to adverse economic consequences in the dominican republic . however , according to a key participant in the discussion , the decision to add the dominican republic also included careful consideration of u.s. concerns about its protection of intellectual property rights and its status as one of the worst offenders on human trafficking . morocco . although a u.s. - morocco fta would have minimal trade benefit to the united states , one ustr official stated that this fta would further the administration's goal of promoting openness , tolerance , and economic growth across the volatile middle east . morocco , a moderate muslim country , also signaled its readiness to enter into a comprehensive fta by demonstrating its willingness to liberalize its economy and make domestic reforms . southern africa customs union . responding to congressional guidance in the 2000 african growth and opportunity act , ustr inititated fta negotiations with sacu in november 2002 .