call for additional information . connect with gao on facebook , flickr , twitter , and youtube . subscribe to our rss feeds or e - mail updates . listen to our podcasts and read the watchblog . visit gao on the web at www.gao.gov . please print on recycled paper . nasa and treasury had no technical comments . we are sending copies of this report to the heads of the departments of health and human services , treasury , omb , commerce , justice , nasa , and nsf , as well as interested congressional committees and other interested parties . this report will also be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or sagerm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of our report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix vii . this report examines ( 1 ) the extent to which there are undisbursed balances remaining in expired grant accounts in the federal government's largest civilian payment management system — the payment management system ( pms ) administered by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) ; ( 2 ) the reasons selected agencies give for their grant accounts remaining open past their end dates ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which the office of management and budget ( omb ) monitors agency progress with regard to tracking and reporting on undisbursed balances in expired grant accounts . to address the first objective , we analyzed data from pms administered by hhs's program support center ( psc ) . federal payment systems facilitate the transfer of cash payments from federal awarding agencies to grantees . some agencies make grant payments directly to grantees using their own proprietary payment systems . others enter into arrangements with payment systems that serve multiple agencies to make payments on their behalf . pms was selected based on the following criteria: pms provides payment services to other federal departments and entities . in 2015 , offices from 12 federal departments and agencies used pms for making grant disbursements . pms accounts for a significant percentage of civilian federal grant disbursements . based on fiscal year 2014 data , the most recent available at the time of our selection , pms made about $429 billion in grant disbursements , or 74 percent of all civilian federal grants disbursements in fiscal year 2014 . pms is a centralized grant payment and cash management system , operated by psc in the division of payment management ( dpm ) at hhs . according to dpm , the main purpose of pms is to serve as the fiscal intermediary between awarding agencies and the recipients of grants and contracts . its main objectives are to expedite the flow of cash between the federal government and recipients , transmit recipient disbursement data back to the awarding agencies , and manage cash flow advances to grant recipients .