with these mutual benefits come challenges . support for the program from our international partners hinges in large part on expectations for financial returns , technology transfer , and information sharing . if these expectations are not met , that support could deteriorate . in addition , a large number of export authorizations are needed to share information and execute contracts . these authorizations must be done in a timely manner to maintain schedule and ensure competition . finally , transfer of sensitive u.s. military technologies needed to achieve commonality and interoperability goals will push the boundaries of u.s. disclosure policies . dod is not immune to efforts to address the fiscal imbalance confronting the nation and will continue to face challenges based on competing priorities , both within and external to its budget . this will require decisions based on a sound and sustainable business case for dod's acquisition programs based on clear priorities , comprehensive needs assessments , and a thorough analysis of available resources . in addition , it will require an acquisition process that provides for knowledge - based decisions at critical investment junctures in order to maximize available dollars . dod has instituted a new acquisition policy that embraces evolutionary and knowledge - based acquisition concepts . however , policy alone will not solve the problems dod faces . this will also require disciplined actions on the part of dod's leadership to employ the concepts established in its new policy . table 2 shows each spiral as currently planned . to complete the planned enhancements , the f / a - 22 will also need a new computer architecture and avionics processors . current architecture and processors will be upgraded to support enhancement through the global strike enhanced development spiral . however , because the current architecture and processors are old and obsolete and do not have sufficient capacity to meet the increased processing demands required for planned new air - to - ground capabilities beyond the global strike enhanced spiral , they must be replaced . rather than start a new development program , the f / a - 22 program office plans to leverage two other ongoing air force development or modification programs for this new processing capability: the new architecture being developed for the jsf and the new commercial off - the - shelf general - purpose processors designed for newer versions of the f - 16 . according to f / a - 22 program officials , they do not expect the new architecture to be fully developed and ready for installation in the f / a - 22 for at least 5 to 6 years . additional risks are likely because the new processor and architecture are being developed by other major aircraft programs and will require extensive integration and operational testing to ensure that the f / a - 22 program does not encounter similar problems that have delayed integration and testing of the f / a - 22's current avionics suite . f / a - 22 program officials acknowledge that this mass changeover of the f / a - 22 computer architecture and avionics processor will be a time - consuming and costly effort and will likely create additional program risks .