response . responding quickly to save lives , protect property and the environment , and meet basic human needs in the immediate aftermath of an incident . recovery . recovering through a focus on the timely restoration , strengthening , and revitalization of infrastructure , housing , and a sustainable economy , as well as the health , social , cultural , historic , and environment fabric of communities affected by an incident . since 2012 , dhs has produced a national preparedness report annually , which assesses progress toward the national preparedness goal of achieving a secure and resilient nation . a key element of the national preparedness report is that it evaluates and measures the extent to which jurisdictions have strengthened their 32 core capabilities . from 2012 to 2017 , all 50 states , district of columbia , and 5 territories were required to assess the preparedness levels of their 32 capabilities by providing a rating of 1 to 5 , with 5 being the highest preparedness rating . emergency management capabilities with a rating of 1 or 2 are considered to have the largest capability gaps . fema used this assessment process to inform the national preparedness report by illustrating which threats and hazards occurred in the past and which capabilities have the largest gaps . fema's national preparedness directorate , which includes the national preparedness assessment division , is responsible for assisting communities in becoming more resilient by developing the capabilities needed to prevent , protect against , respond to , recover from , and mitigate against all threats and hazards . the directorate provides guidance , programs , and processes to assist communities in completing the requirements associated with the national preparedness system . to help jurisdictions more comprehensively assess their gaps , fema required they complete the threat and hazard identification and risk assessment ( thira ) and stakeholders preparedness review ( spr ) . the thira is conducted by jurisdictions every 3 years to , in part , identify threats and hazards that are both reasonably likely to affect the community and would most challenge the community's ability to deliver one or more of its capabilities ; and estimate and describe the potential impacts of those threats and hazards . the types of threats and hazards are defined as ( 1 ) natural hazards or acts of nature ; ( 2 ) technological hazards that are accidents or failures of systems and structures ; and ( 3 ) human - caused incidents resulting from intentional actions . jurisdictions are to conduct the spr annually to , among other things , identify capability gaps by assessing the capabilities against the types of threats and hazards identified in the thira . in 2012-2013 , fema issued its initial guidance to jurisdictions to help them understand how to identify the threats and hazards through the thira , and assess their core capabilities . in 2018 , fema issued new guidance for the thira and spr requiring jurisdictions to change the methodology , moving away from proficiency - based ratings to a process that relies more on quantitative data to measure gaps across the core capabilities . fema's 10 regions provide technical assistance and training to help jurisdictions become more proficient in completing these capability assessments .