hospital type . we analyzed data on the following categorizations of hospital type: hospital classification . we determined whether hospitals were classified as acute care hospitals or critical access hospitals by using data from cms's hospital compare file . ownership type . we used data on ownership type from cms's hospital compare file to create three categories of ownership: ( a ) for - profit , ( b ) nonprofit , and ( c ) government - owned . health care professional characteristics . we analyzed data on the following categorizations of professional characteristics: health care professional specialty . we estimated the number of professionals in each practice by using data from cms's physician compare file . we subsequently created three practice size categories: ( a ) practice of 1 to 10 professionals , ( b ) practice of 11 to 50 professionals , and ( c ) practice of 51 or more professionals . we surveyed a nationally representative sample of providers who participated in the 2014 medicare ehr program about how they are providing patients with the ability to electronically access health information . the survey was designed to collect information from providers related to patient electronic access to health information , including the methods and specific technology providers use to give patients electronic access to their health information , the types of health information providers make available through these technologies , and any methods providers use to encourage patient electronic access . the survey was also designed to capture providers' perspectives on the benefits of patients having such electronic access to their health information — specifically whether providers saw it beneficial for patients to electronically view , download , or transmit certain types of health information . the target population for this survey was all hospitals and health care professionals who reported to the medicare ehr program that 5 percent or more of their patients viewed , downloaded , or transmitted their health information for the 2014 program year . using 2014 program data provided to us by cms , we identified 60,321 hospitals and health care professionals to be included in the population for this survey . we selected a stratified random sample of 1,867 hospitals and providers as described in table 4 below . we stratified the population by type ( hospitals and health care professionals ) and the reported percentage of patients who electronically accessed their health information in 2014 . we computed the sample sizes separately for hospitals and professionals needed to achieve a precision of plus or minus 5 percentage points or fewer at the 95 percent confidence level . we then increased the sample sizes in each group for expected response rates of about 50 and 30 percent for hospitals and health care professionals , respectively . ( see table 4. ) a link to this web - based survey was emailed to these 1,867 providers via the email addresses included in the program data provided by cms . we received valid responses from 428 ( 23 percent ) out of the 1,867 hospitals and health care professionals selected in our stratified random sample .