budgetary review . fha estimates and reestimates the net lifetime costs — known as credit subsidy costs — of the mortgages it insures as part of the mmi fund's annual budgetary review . under the federal credit reform act of 1990 ( fcra ) , fha and other federal agencies must estimate the credit subsidy costs of their direct loan or loan guarantee programs in their annual budgets . credit subsidy costs represent the present value of estimated cash flows to the government minus the present value of estimated cash flows from the government over the life of the loan , excluding administrative costs . for a mortgage insurance program , cash inflows consist primarily of insurance premiums charged to borrowers and proceeds from sales of foreclosed properties , and cash outflows consist mostly of insurance claim payments to lenders . annually , agencies estimate credit subsidy costs for new loan cohorts — the loans agencies commit to guarantee in a given fiscal year . when estimated cash inflows exceed expected cash outflows , a cohort is said to have a negative credit subsidy cost , meaning that the cohort is estimated to generate income . when the opposite is true , the cohort is said to have a positive credit subsidy cost . generally , agencies also are required to produce annual updates of their subsidy estimates — known as reestimates — for each loan cohort on the basis of information on actual performance and estimated changes in future loan performance . each additional year provides more historical data on loan performance that may influence estimates of the amount and timing of future claims . additionally , economic assumptions ( such as house prices and interest rates ) also can change from year to year , which would affect estimates of future loan performance . in recognition of the difficulty in making credit subsidy estimates that mirror actual loan performance , fcra provides permanent and indefinite budget authority for reestimates that reflect increased credit subsidy costs ( upward reestimates ) . while fha has had a number of upward reestimates , the only year in which the mmi fund has needed to draw on permanent and indefinite budget authority was fiscal year 2013 , when it received $1.69 billion . all other upward reestimates were covered by funds held in the mmi fund's capital reserve account . financial accounting review . the preparation of fha's financial statements also provides a review of the mmi fund . fha is required to prepare financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles for the federal government ( federal gaap ) . the financial statements provide information on the overall financial position of the mmi fund , including its assets , liabilities , and actual cash flows during the year . in addition , federal gaap requires fha to calculate a liability for loan guarantees , which represents the estimated net present value of expected future cash flows for outstanding insurance . in general , capital exists to absorb unexpected losses and allow a financial institution to continue operations during economic downturns . the mmi fund plays a key role during such periods by helping to maintain the flow of mortgage credit to areas that may be underserved by the private sector .