gao - 01-934 . washington , d.c.: september 28 , 2001 . ( see app . high - performing organizations use data to determine key performance objectives and goals that enable them to evaluate the success of their human capital approaches . collecting and analyzing data are fundamental building blocks for measuring the effectiveness of human capital approaches in support of the mission and goals of an agency . in our government performance and results act work , we raised concerns about dod's human capital performance measures . for example , the performance measures did not fully address the extent to which military forces are highly motivated or dod's efforts to develop personnel . the new military personnel strategy provides measures of effectiveness for each initiative ; however , these measures are not adequate to assess the success of dod's human capital approaches because they ( 1 ) do not describe the significance of outcomes in terms of programmatic goals and results , ( 2 ) are not always specific or stated as measurements , and ( 3 ) are activity - based rather than outcome - oriented . for example , one initiative calls for a study of sabbatical programs . however , the measure of effectiveness for this initiative is to implement guidance for a sabbatical - type program . the relationship between sabbatical programs and the goal of improving retention is not described . furthermore , the significance of sabbaticals in accomplishing dod's mission is not stated . what skills and abilities will be needed in dod's future military workforce to accomplish its mission , and what potential gaps exist between current and future workforce needs ? agencies must identify their current and future human capital needs and then create strategies for filling the gaps . agencies' strategic human capital planning must be results - oriented and data - driven , including , for example , information on the appropriate number and location of employees and their key competencies and skills . the new military personnel strategy does not address workforce requirements or gaps . how can benefits be more closely linked to the basic goals of recruiting and retaining a high - quality workforce ? our prior work has shown that retention decisions are highly personal in nature and that many factors , including benefits , may affect the decision of a servicemember to stay in the military or leave . the new military personnel strategy does not discuss which combinations of benefits , pay , and other factors have had the greatest influence on retention decisions . in the last dod - wide survey of active duty personnel in 1999 , key benefits such as housing and health care for families were not among the top reasons cited by military personnel for considering leaving . in fact , the family medical care benefit was cited as a top reason for staying . on the basis of the 1999 survey , we also found that increasing housing allowances would do little to increase retention . less than 1 percent of servicemembers cited housing allowances as a top reason to leave .