reinsurance . programs often use collected premiums to purchase reinsurance from the international market to cover another layer of losses . government backstop . governments are liable for a final layer of losses , possibly subject to a maximum coverage cap , if other participants have met their payment requirements and excess claims remain . each participant generally ( insurance industry , program reserves , private reinsurance , and the government ) pays for a certain share of claims throughout the multilayered process . if claim amounts exceed a layer's designated payment limit , the next layer of participants becomes liable for excess costs . we provided a draft of this report for review and comment to the treasury , including the federal insurance office and national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) . in addition , we provided relevant sections to the terrorism risk insurance programs of australia , austria , india , spain , and the united kingdom for their technical review . treasury and the terrorism risk insurance programs of australia , spain , and the united kingdom provided technical comments that we incorporated , as appropriate . we will send copies to treasury , naic , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or garciadiazd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . for terrorism risk insurance programs in the united states and selected foreign countries , the objectives of our report were to ( 1 ) compare the organizational structures and the role of government and ( 2 ) examine the loss - sharing arrangement between the government and private sector and the methods by which the programs are funded . to address these objectives , we reviewed the terrorism risk insurance act of 2002 ( tria ) , as amended , and the terrorism risk insurance program reauthorization act of 2015 , as well as prior gao reports on this topic . we also reviewed relevant documents from the organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) and its international e - platform on terrorism risk insurance ( oecd e - platform ) ; relevant industry reports ; and documents available on national terrorism risk insurance program websites , such as annual reports and program descriptions . coshares . a coshare is a set percentage of loss that the policyholder must continue to cover even after the deductible has been met . in the case of national terrorism risk insurance programs , it may be the insurers participating in the programs that pay the deductibles and coshares before coverage from other participants , such as reinsurers or the government , is triggered . many foreign governments offer financial support , sometimes referred to as a “government backstop,” to their national terrorism risk insurance programs or individual insurers to cover a certain threshold of claims . combination funding . programs also may use a combination of funding methods .