these evaluations were for 38 contractors . eighty - two of the 99 contract performance evaluations showed that fps assessed the quality of services provided by the majority of its guard contractors as satisfactory , very good , or exceptional . for the remaining 17 evaluations , 11 showed that the contractor's performance was marginal , 1 as unsatisfactory , and assessments for 5 contractors were not complete . according to applicable guidance , a contractor must meet contractual requirements to obtain a satisfactory evaluation and a contractor should receive an unsatisfactory evaluation if its performance does not meet most contract requirements and recovery in a timely manner is not likely . nevertheless , we found instances where some contractors received a satisfactory or better rating although they had not met some of the terms of the contract . for example , contractors receiving satisfactory or better ratings included the 7 contractors discussed above that had guards with expired certification and training records working at federal facilities . in addition , some performance evaluations that we reviewed did not include a justification for the rating and there was no other supporting documentation in the official contract file to explain the rating . moreover , there was no information in the contract file that indicated that the cotr had communicated any performance problems to the contracting officer . as of february 2010 , fps had yet to provide some of its guards with all of the required x - ray or magnetometer training . for example , we reported in july 2009 that in one region , fps has not provided the required x - ray or magnetometer training to 1,500 guards since 2004 . fps officials subsequently told us that the contract for this region requires that only guards who are assigned to work on posts that contain screening equipment are required to have 8 hours of x - ray and magnetometer training . however , in response to our july 2009 testimony , fps now requires all guards to receive 16 hours of x - ray and magnetometer training . as of february 2010 , these 1,500 guards had not received the 16 hours of training but continued to work at federal facilities in this region . fps plans to provide x - ray and magnetometer training to all guards by december 2010 . x - ray and magnetometer training is important because the majority of the guards are primarily responsible for using this equipment to monitor and control access points at federal facilities . controlling access to a facility helps ensure that only authorized personnel , vehicles , and materials are allowed to enter , move within , and leave the facility . fps currently does not have a fully reliable system for monitoring and verifying whether its 15,000 guards have the certifications and training to stand post at federal facilities . fps is developing a new system — risk assessment and management program ( ramp ) — to help it monitor and verify the status of guard certifications and training . however , in our july 2009 report , we raised concerns about the accuracy and reliability of the information that will be entered into ramp .