balance . deciding on the appropriate mechanism for determining the level of appropriations from the trust fund requires congress to weigh trade - offs between the amount available for appropriations from the trust fund , the amount of general revenues in a given year , and the overall level of faa expenditures , all while ensuring stable and sustainable funding for aviation investment . as we have previously suggested , a better mechanism may be needed to match actual revenues with trust - fund appropriations , and thereby help to protect the trust fund's uncommitted balance and provide congress , faa , and the larger aviation community with greater certainty about the trust fund's sustainability . congress will determine the future budget resources available to meet faa's operating and capital investments , including nextgen improvements . even within the currently constrained federal budget environment , it appears that based on the president's budget request estimates , faa expenditures will continue to exceed trust - fund revenues in future years . as federal budget resources continue to be constrained , congress may face some difficult choices about whether to reduce faa's appropriations , which could increase faa's total costs and delay the benefits associated with investments such as nextgen , or to either increase revenues going into the trust fund or increase appropriations from general revenues . we provided a draft of this report to omb , treasury , and dot for review and comment . each entity provided technical comments that we incorporated , as appropriate . as arranged with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days after the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the director of omb , the secretary of transportation , the acting administrator of faa , the secretary of the treasury , and other parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or flemings@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix i . in addition to the individual named above , key contributors to this report were paul aussendorf ( assistant director ) , heather krause ( assistant director ) , amy abramowitz , lauren calhoun , bess eisenstadt , bert japikse , carol henn , hannah laufe , sara ann moessbauer , joshua ormond , and rebecca rygg . because of these variations with the h.r . 658 option , general - revenue appropriations would also have to vary widely from year to year to maintain the same appropriation levels during that time frame . in addition , these options could result in the availability of fewer resources for some period of time than under current law , unless a general - revenue appropriation made up the difference .