( recommendation 3 ) . immaturity of ipv6 security processes . while ipv6 could offer enhanced security , nist states that its deployment could also lead to new challenges with respect to the types of threats facing an organization such as dod . for example , organizations in the process of transitioning to ipv6 may lack robust ipv6 security controls and may have security staff members who lack an overall understanding of ipv6 . this could allow attackers to exploit ipv6 assets or leverage ipv6 access to exploit ipv4 assets . while general security concepts are the same for both ipv4 and ipv6 protocols , it may take time and effort for transitioning organizations such as dod to acquire the level of operational experience and practical deployment solutions that have been developed for ipv4 over the years . in august 2005 , omb issued a memorandum to federal cios specifying a series of ipv6 transition planning and implementation requirements and associated due dates for federal agencies to enable the use of ipv6 . specific to planning for the transition , the memorandum required agencies to assign an official to lead and coordinate ipv6 transition planning efforts , complete an inventory of ip - compliant devices and technologies , and complete an impact analysis comprised of a cost estimate and a risk analysis by specific due dates during fiscal year 2006 . table 1 lists the transition planning requirements and due dates defined in the omb memorandum . aware of the limitations of ipv4 , dod first began planning for the implementation of ipv6 in june 2003 . at that time , the department's cio issued the memorandum , “internet protocol version 6 ( ipv6 ) .” according to this memorandum , the department's initial goal was to complete its transition to ipv6 by fiscal year 2008 . within a month of the issuance of dod's june 2003 memorandum , the department designated the defense research and engineering network ( dren ) as the first dod ipv6 pilot network . dren , being a research and development network , is not connected to dod's operational networks , such as the department's nonclassified ip router network , which transmits nonclassified operations traffic . according to a dod report about the dren pilot , the entire dren wide - area network was routinely supporting end - to - end ipv6 traffic by july 2005 . according to the department , dren remains dod's only ipv6-enabled network . further , dod's ig reported that the department had undertaken an initial transition effort that temporarily satisfied omb's august 2005 implementation requirement to demonstrate ipv6 on its infrastructure by the end of june 2008 . specifically , dod was able to demonstrate ipv6 within the department's defense information systems network . however , according to the report , the department's ipv6 transition manager said dod disabled ipv6 functionality due to a lack of trained personnel and potential security risks . we received additional information about why dod disabled the ipv6 functionality , but we are not including it in the report due to the information being marked as for official use only . enhanced mobility improves connectivity .