the challenges facing the u.s . postal service ( usps ) — that is , record declines in mail volumes for some high - margin products , difficulties in controlling costs and enhancing revenues , and increases in competition — are not temporary problems that will fade away . nevertheless , a common message voiced by many postal stakeholders is that although change is needed to address these and other significant challenges , the concept of universal postal service needs to be preserved . these stakeholders believe that providing universal postal service is the cornerstone of usps's mission ; is essential to the nation's communications network and economy ; and is vital to the american people , many of whom rely upon the consistency of mail delivery and convenient access to the retail postal network . the concept of universal postal service , however , is not clearly defined in law and has evolved over time with changes in technology , transportation , and communications . these changes are continuing today , raising some concerns about how they may affect future postal services — including those in rural areas . usps has noted that rural delivery continues to provide a vital link between urban and rural america . some members of congress have stated that post offices are fundamental to the identity of small towns , providing them with an economic and social anchor . a key discussion point in ongoing postal reform deliberations in congress is usps's ability to carry out its mission of providing universal mail delivery and postal retail services at reasonable rates . in april 2001 , we reported on the financial , operational , and human capital challenges that threaten usps's ability to carry out its mission in the 21st century and remain self - supporting through postal revenues . we placed usps's transformation efforts and long - term outlook on our high - risk list and recommended that usps develop a comprehensive plan to determine the actions needed to address its major challenges . usps issued its transformation plan a year later , which identified steps to guide future usps operations . this plan included specific actions aimed at making the delivery and retail networks more efficient and convenient for customers , including promoting more efficient delivery routes and utilizing low - cost retail transactions . the president also recognized the importance of usps's role and mission and established the president's commission on the united states postal service ( the president's commission ) to examine usps's future . the president's commission issued a report in july 2003 that put forward a proposed vision for usps and recommendations to ensure the future viability of postal services . the report emphasized the importance of maintaining 6-day - a - week , affordable , universal postal service and acknowledged that usps's mission is at risk in the current operating environment of increasing competition and decreasing mail volumes . in addition , congress is also interested in maintaining a high level of postal services for the american people and has held a number of hearings recently on postal reform issues .