iii ) . of the $13 million that was awarded to the u.s . postal service , doj deposited $390,000 into the three percent fund . amounts from the three percent fund are then allocated to doj components that requested funds for specified activities , such as tracking civil and criminal debt collection officials responsible for the three percent fund stated that litigation.they generally review and fund component requests at the beginning of the fiscal year . as shown in figure 2 , obligations of the three percent fund have generally risen with increased budgetary resources . specifically , from fiscal years 2009 through 2013 , obligations increased by about $74 million , while collections in the three percent fund have increased by almost $75 million over the same 5 years . doj officials stated that they have taken steps to manage the three percent fund and analyze the availability of funding for obligations such as allocations to components , the costs of managing the systems that collect and disburse civil collections , and administrative support . specifically , the collection resources allocation board ( crab ) — the body established by doj to allocate collections among eligible components to offset litigation and collection costs — manages the fund in several ways: the crab sets aside funding to operate the debt collection management staff for the following fiscal year prior to considering annual allocations for other debt – collection related activities . dcm is fully funded through three percent fund collections and receives no other appropriation . crab officials consider the longer - term viability of the program when making funding decisions by , for example , considering whether programs receiving funding may bring in additional three percent fund collections in future years . programs that have potential to bring in more funding to the three percent fund may be prioritized over programs that bring in less or no funding to the three percent fund . the crab informs components making requests that any employees hired should be term employees and not holders of permanent positions . crab officials stated this policy stresses to components that they should not rely on three percent fund allocations in the future , even if funds were allocated for such positions in the past . crab officials consider allocating resources for activities that may span multiple years and set aside more resources at the beginning of the year for these activities instead of funding new activities . crab officials identify a reserve , an amount needed in the three percent fund at the beginning of the following fiscal year . while crab officials have taken steps to manage the three percent fund , according to officials responsible for managing the fund , they do not know how , if at all , changes in unobligated balances affect identified future resource needs because they do not conduct analyses that include projected collections , reserves that align with doj priorities and stated needs , or the impact of previous obligation rates on unobligated balances . as shown in figure 3 , the crab's rate of allocations has resulted in a 12- point decrease in the percentage of unobligated balances remaining at the end of the following year from fiscal years 2009 through 2013 .