gps . a navigation satellite with a space - based radio - positioning system providing navigation and timing data to military and civilian users worldwide . the development delays of a ground control system capable of commanding several significant satellite capabilities , which are designed to ensure that military gps signals are secure , has delayed both testing and operational use of the capabilities . these capabilities could have been tested in 2005 if there had been no delays , but now they most likely will not be tested until 2010 . as a result , by the time operational testing can be conducted for these significant capabilities , the entire gps constellation ( block iir - m and iif satellites ) will have already been launched , eliminating the opportunity for operational testing to influence the development of those satellites before they launch . therefore , the overall lack of gps program synchronization limits the utility of operational testing . sbirs . a missile warning satellite designed to meet requirements in the missile warning , missile defense , technical intelligence , and battlespace characterization missions . the hardware for an important sensor capability was placed on the first increment of sbirs satellites , but because of problems , the associated software to enable full utilization of the sensor data will not be available . as a result , this sensor's data will be available years before it can be fully utilized . from a testing standpoint , this means that initial satellite capabilities cannot be tested in time to affect the subsequent increment of satellites . there has also been instability in the plan for the ground control system architecture because system requirements have continued to change . these requirements changes have led to ground software development delays and , from a test perspective , difficulties in developing an efficient test strategy . wgs . a communications satellite designed to provide essential communications services to u.s. warfighters , allies , and coalition partners during almost all levels of conflict . the mission planning system does not work as intended . it was acquired separately from the satellite , and its shortcomings affect the ability of the wideband satellite operations center to perform its missions . this affects the ability of testers to validate user operations . function: provide voice and data military satellite communications for nuclear and conventional forces as well as airborne and ground command posts . synchronization issue: two percent fielded by aehf ioc ( 2011 ) . ground element minimum essential emergency communication network function: fixed and deployable communication for alerting aircrew of emergencies on bombers , tankers , and reconnaissance aircraft . synchronization issue: sixty - four percent fielded by aehf ioc ( 2011 ) . aehf . a communications satellite intended to provide global , secure , jam - resistant communications capability for strategic and tactical warfighters . while user terminals will start to receive and process the signal as they begin to be fielded leading up to 2025 , the user equipment and terminals are not expected to be fully fielded and operational until that year .