we disagree . we believe that the ability to perform automated searches of millions of photos is fundamentally different in nature and scope than manual review of individual photos , and the potential impact on privacy is equally fundamentally different . by assessing the sorn development process and taking corrective actions to ensure timely development of future sorns , the public would have a better understanding of how personal information is being used and protected by doj components . the criminal justice information services ( cjis ) , which operates fbi's face recognition capabilities , has an audit program to evaluate compliance with restrictions on access to cjis systems and information by its users , such as the use of fingerprint records . however , at the time of our review , it had not completed audits of the use of ngi - ips or face services searches of external databases . state and local users have been accessing ngi - ips since december 2011 and have generated ips transaction records since then that would enable cjis to assess user compliance . in addition , the face services unit has used external databases that include primarily civil photos to support fbi investigations since august 2011 , but the fbi had not audited its use of these databases . standards for internal control in the federal government call for federal agencies to design and implement control activities to enforce management's directives and to monitor the effectiveness of those controls . in 2016 , we recommended that the fbi conduct audits to determine the extent to which users of ngi - ips and biometric images specialists in face services are conducting face image searches in accordance with cjis policy requirements . doj partially concurred with our recommendation . specifically , doj concurred with the portion of our recommendation related to the use of ngi - ips . doj officials stated that the fbi specified policy requirements with which it could audit ngi - ips users in late 2014 , completed a draft audit plan during the course of our review in summer 2015 , and expects to begin auditing use of ngi - ips in fiscal year 2016 . as of march 2017 , doj reported that the cjis audit unit began assessing ngi - ips requirements at participating states in conjunction with its triennial national identity services audit and that as of february 2017 , the unit had conducted ngi - ips audits of four states . at the time we issued our 2016 report , doj officials did not fully comment on the portion of our recommendation that the fbi audit the use of external databases , because fbi officials said the fbi does not have authority to audit these systems . as noted in the report , we understand the fbi may not have authority to audit the maintenance or operation of databases owned and managed by other agencies . however , the fbi does have a responsibility to oversee the use of the information by its own employees .