securitization . securitization — issuing bonds against future u.s. contributions — could increase the fund's earning potential by raising its balances through bond sales . however , securitization could also lead to lower balances and reduced fund income if interest owed on the bonds exceeds investment returns . in october , 2007 , the committee contracted for a study of securitization . the fsm trust fund committee has experienced management challenges in establishing the trust fund to maximize earnings and has not yet evaluated the fund's adequacy as a source of future revenue . contributions to the trust fund were initially placed in a low - interest savings account and were not invested until 22 months after the initial contribution . the months when the fund remained in a low - interest account prior to investment likely reduced its potential investment earnings significantly ; we estimate this loss at $720,000 per month , after taking into account stock market investment fees . as we reported in june 2007 , contractual delays and committee processes for reaching consensus and obtaining administrative support contributed to the time taken to establish and invest funds . the committee has since hired an executive administrator in september 2007 , and some steps were taken to improve committee processes ; however , the administrator reports that communication and administrative delays remain . also , despite the likely impact of market volatility and investment strategy , the trust fund committee's reports have not yet assessed the fund's potential adequacy as a source of revenue for meeting the fsm's long - term economic goals . since enactment of the amended compact , the u.s. and fsm governments have made efforts to meet new requirements for implementation , performance measurement , and oversight . however , after 5 years — one quarter of the amended compact's duration — the fsm faces significant challenges in working toward the compact goals of economic advancement and budgetary self - reliance . the fsm economy shows continued dependence on government spending of foreign assistance . however , despite the budgetary impact of declining annual grant assistance , the fsm has made little progress in implementing key reforms needed to improve tax income or increase private sector investment opportunities . the fsm has also been unable to utilize more than $67 million in infrastructure and almost $15 million in other sector grant monies . moreover , persistent deficiencies in needs assessment , long - term planning , and financial accountability continue to hinder the u.s. and fsm governments and jemco from ensuring effective implementation of those grants that have been spent . although oia has carried out various duties as administrator of compact grants , u.s. and fsm monitoring of grant operations remains deficient owing to continued problems with oversight authority in the fsm , consistently poor data and reporting , and unaddressed capacity constraints . further , the fsm trust fund committee has yet to assess the potential status of the trust fund as an ongoing source of revenue after compact grants end in 2023 .