government . most national systems assign responsibility for setting minimum wage rates to the government , via legislative or executive action , usually with some requirement for consultation . governments may be required to consult with social partners ( i.e. , workers and employers ) . the federal minimum wage — currently $7.25 — applies generally to any employee engaged in commerce and to workers employed in enterprises engaged in commerce or in the production of goods for commerce , with certain exemptions . however , u.s. states and territories , the district of columbia , and local governments may generally also set their own minimum wages , and many have done so , often at rates higher than the federal minimum wage . the flsa permits adoption of minimum wages at or above the federal level but prohibits payment of minimum wages below the federal level for workers covered by the flsa . see organization for economic co - operation and development , “oecd stat: real minimum wages,” accessed october 27 , 2016 , https: / / stats.oecd.org . specialized bodies . some national systems assign responsibility for setting minimum wages to specialized bodies , sometimes referred to as wage boards or councils and usually comprising representatives of workers , employers , and the public interest . for example , according to the ilo , in peru , minimum wage decisions are made by the national council for labor and employment promotion , which consists of government , worker , and employer representatives . alternatively , governments may be required to consult with specialized bodies . for instance , according to the ilo , the french government has the power to set minimum wages by decree , but before doing so , it must consult with the national collective bargaining commission , which includes representatives of the government , employers' and workers' organizations , and the social section of the council of state . collective bargaining . a small number of national systems , primarily in western europe , set minimum wages through collective bargaining . germany and finland are examples , according to the ilo . figure 12 shows the distribution of minimum wage – setting procedures among 145 countries , as reported by the ilo . a world bank - sponsored review of minimum wage - setting practices in latin american countries provides an illustration of variation among national systems in one region . the review identified 5 countries that set minimum wage rates by government decision , 6 that set rates by government decision with advice from wage boards or other nongovernmental groups , and 13 that rely on wage boards to set rates . bolivia is an example of a country that relies on the government ( in this case , the ministry of labor ) to set rates ; according to the ilo , bolivian law does not require consultation with social partners . according to the ilo , el salvador relies on a specialized body — the national minimum wage council — to act in an advisory role , while costa rica relies on its national wages council to determine wage rates . both of these bodies include government , worker , and employer representatives .