the council has not completed the evaluation . according to the plan , the evaluation is to include an analysis of whether and how existing authorities may be better utilized and could be used to develop recommendations for changes in legal authority . however , it does not state that the analysis should address whether the council itself is hampered in its mission by not having specific legislative authority that would allow it to direct its members to implement the national management plan . in the management plan , the council stated that many of the actions could be completed or at least initiated with current resources but that without significant additional resources for existing and new programs it would not be possible to accomplish the goals of the plan within the specified timeframes . the council also noted in its comments on the draft report that it believes the timeframes in the plan are optimistic given current resources . two of the actions in the plan called for federal agencies to request additional funding for separate management functions through the annual appropriations process beginning in fiscal year 2003 . according to a summary prepared by the council , the president's budget request for invasive species activities in fiscal year 2003 was at least 23 percent more than was requested in fiscal year 2002 ( although slightly less than congress appropriated in fiscal year 2002 ) . the council went on to say in the plan that estimates of the additional support required would depend on the details of implementation schedules developed by federal agencies and stakeholders . as we described above , however , the council and the advisory committee have only recently created the teams that will be responsible for working out the detailed plans for implementation . therefore , it is unclear what additional resources are needed and whether the requested appropriations will be adequate to implement the plan . in response to several of the questions in our survey , advisory committee members cited the lack of funding as a key reason for poor implementation of the council's management plan . ( we did not independently assess the adequacy of funding. ) of the 18 who said that the council was inadequately implementing the plan , 9 said that funding was insufficient . a typical comment was that the council members need to make a better case to get congress to support funding for an invasive species line item . over 70 percent of the respondents to another question said that they knew of instances where federal agencies do not have the resources to carry out actions in the national management plan . while several respondents gave details on specific examples of where they believe federal agencies have underfunded invasive species programs , four others said that none of the agencies have the resources to implement the management plan in its entirety . in addition , 19 of the 21 respondents to one question said that the council had inadequate staff resources to serve the needs of the council . ( the council has had a staff of five to seven people in the last 2 years. )