ii ) . although our comparisons showed variation among the 24 cfo agencies , the results were similar to those for the ses as a whole . we found that the percentages of women and minorities in most agencies' career ses were above the percentages of women and minorities in agency - specific rclfs that we developed . but the percentages of women and minority career ses employees were generally either below the percentages in the five remaining labor forces — the national clf , overall agency workforce , agency professional and administrative workforce , agency gs - 15 workforce , and u.s . postal service career executive corps — or else not significantly different from them . ja@ 5-5 afoaa chkfi ) ahe ? =i 9dejai - @k ? 5* ) 55 ) ses employee group percentage met or exceeded the percentage for the same employee group in the selected labor force . ses employee group percentage was either above , below , or the same as the percentage for the same employee group in the selected labor force , but the difference between the percentages was not statistically significant . ses employee group percentage was below the percentage for the same employee group in the selected labor force . the following tables provide data on the composition of the noncareer ses governmentwide and at each of the 24 cfo agencies . table vi.1 shows for each year over the 1990 through 1999 period the overall size of the noncareer ses as well as the number of women , men , minorities , and whites . table vi.2 shows the number of women and minorities for each year from 1990 through 1999 at each of the 24 agencies . the following tables provide data on the composition of the noncareer ses governmentwide and at each of the 24 cfo agencies . table vii.1 shows for each year over the 1990 through 1999 period the total number of noncareer ses appointments as well as the number of women , men , minorities , and whites . table vii.2 shows the total number of appointments to the noncareer ses each year over the 1990 through 1999 period at each of the 24 agencies and how many of the noncareer ses members appointed were women and minorities . tables vii.3 shows the number of minority group members , by race and ethnicity , appointed from 1990 through 1999 at each of the 24 agencies . the following is gao's comment on eeoc's attachments to its letter dated march 6 , 2001 . the data presented in eeoc's two attachments are virtually identical to the data we present in our report , except for its data on the gs - 14 and gs - 15 white collar workforces . in addition to the individual named above , richard w. caradine , mary y. martin , gregory h. wilmoth , steven j. berke , ellen t. grady , william trancucci , michael r. volpe , sylvia l. shanks , thomas g. dowdal , katharine m. raheb , and jena y. sinkfield made key contributions to this report .