increased capability . at that time , mda began work on the 72-inch diameter launch vehicle ( lv ) - 2 target and the 52-inch diameter targets . when this approach proved more costly and less timely than expected , mda suspended the 52-inch effort , focusing on the lv - 2 . responding to congressional concern about these problems and our 2008 recommendations , mda revised its acquisition approach in 2009 , seeking to increase competition by returning to a multiple contract strategy with four separate target classes and a potential of four prime contractors . mda completed the intermediate - range target contract award , which reduced target costs . however , as proposals for the new medium - range ballistic missile ( mrbm ) contract were submitted , the program determined that costs associated with this approach were higher than anticipated . solicitations for the medium - range and the intercontinental classes of targets were then canceled , and mda began the process of revising its acquisition strategy for the third time . in the past , we have reported that availability and reliability of targets caused delays in mda's testing of ballistic missile defense system ( bmds ) elements . however , in fiscal year 2011 , mda delivered 11 targets , all of which were successfully launched and did not negatively affect the test program . the targets launched during the year supported tests of several different bmds elements , including ground - based midcourse defense ( gmd ) , aegis ballistic missile defense , and patriot systems . these deficiencies were satisfactorily addressed when the target missile was successfully extracted from the rear of the c - 17 aircraft in ftx - 17 . to reduce risk , the flight was not planned as an intercept mission but as a target of opportunity for several emerging missile defense technologies , including space tracking surveillance system . according to mda and director , operational test & evaluation test officials , the availability of targets has affected planned future flight tests . mda has scheduled the first two extended medium - range ballistic missiles ( emrbm ) to launch in a crucial operational flight test ( fto - 01 ) by the end of 2012 , which is the first system - level test of the bmds . on a tight schedule to meet this deadline , mda is accepting higher risk that target issues could affect this test by launching the first two of the new targets in this operational test , rather than conducting a risk reduction flight first . risk reduction flight tests are conducted the first time a system is tested in order to confirm that it works before adding other test objectives . the lack of such a test was one factor that delayed a previous gmd flight test ( ftg - 06 ) in 2010 . while the target , the lv - 2 , was successfully flown in that flight test , aspects of its performance were not properly understood and lack of modeling data prior to the test contributed to significant delays in the test program .