omb's circular no . a - 133 provides general guidance on the roles and responsibilities of the federal awarding agencies and primary recipients of government funds regarding audit requirements of grantees and the circular sets forth guidance implementing the single subrecipients . audit act , which requires certain entities receiving federal awards under more than one federal program to undergo a single audit , which is intended to promote the efficient and effective use of audit resources . additionally , the circular sets forth standards for obtaining consistency and uniformity among federal agencies for the audits of states , local governments , and nonprofit organizations expending federal awards totaling $500,000 or more annually . among other responsibilities , the circular gives: federal awarding agencies the responsibility to advise recipients of requirements imposed on them by federal laws , regulations , and the provisions of contracts or grants , and primary recipients the responsibility to identify subrecipient awards ; advise subrecipients of requirements imposed on them by federal laws , regulations , and the provisions of contracts or grant agreements as well as any supplemental requirements ; and monitor the implementation of the grants . similarly , federal agencies monitor and oversee certain aspects of pass - through grants as part of their monitoring procedures . omb is responsible for developing government - wide guidance to help ensure that grants are managed properly and that the funds are spent in accordance with applicable laws and regulations . omb instructions or information issued to federal agencies are referred to as “circulars.” these circulars apply to recipients of federal pass - through awards and they give instructions to federal agencies on implementing policies within their purview , including those that apply to grant programs . in addition , these circulars lay out guidance applicable to grants management in the areas of administration , audits , and cost principles . as part of an entity's single audit , the independent auditor is to test compliance with cmia . the auditor examines compliance in areas such as whether the state minimized the time between receipt of federal funds and expenditure , whether there are internal controls in place to help ensure that timely payments are made , and whether any interest earned by the state was reported and remitted . the auditor is to test compliance by comparing a sample of the state's reimbursement requests to determine if they conform to the procedures in the state's treasury - state agreement . the independent auditors performing single audits may also review the allowances states withhold for administrative costs before passing funds on to subrecipients . omb's circular a - 133 single audit compliance supplement states that for programs where a maximum percentage or amount is allowed for the grantees' administrative costs ( such as the three programs we reviewed ) , auditors are to verify that administrative costs were accurately recorded and that these costs do not exceed the allowed amount . as a result of their work , auditors can identify issues with excess administrative funds withheld ; however , generally , auditors do not test all transactions or programs , as they use a risk - based approach in their testing .