concussion . office of the surgeon , multinational force - iraq and office of the surgeon general , united states army medical command , mental health advisory team ( mhat ) iv operation iraqi freedom 05-07 final report ( nov. 17 , 2006 ) . the 2008 mhat report ( mhat v ) found that 18 percent of male army enlisted servicemembers in oif brigade combat teams screened positive for ptsd , depression , or anxiety . office of the surgeon , multi - national force - iraq , office of the command surgeon , and office of the surgeon general , united states army medical command , mental health advisory team ( mhat ) v operation iraqi freedom 06-08: iraq operation enduring freedom 8: afghanistan ( feb. 14 , 2008 ) . dod states that these groups may not be representative of all army and marine corps servicemembers returning from oef / oif . dod is required by law to have a system to assess the medical condition of servicemembers before and after deployment to locations outside the united states . the required elements of this system include the use of pre - and post - deployment medical examinations . to implement the system , dod uses multiple health assessments to screen servicemembers for a variety of health concerns , including mental health concerns , both before and after their deployments to combat theaters . these assessments include the pre - deployment health assessment , the post - deployment health assessment ( pdha ) , and the post - deployment health reassessment ( pdhra ) . during these assessments , a servicemember completes a form that includes questions used to screen for mental health concerns . a health care provider reviews the completed form and may refer the servicemember for further evaluation if necessary . questions have been raised about dod's mental health screening of servicemembers before and after their deployments to oef / oif . in 2007 a dod mental health task force reported that dod faced several challenges to effective mental health assessments , including eagerness to deploy or stigma , that may prevent servicemembers from disclosing mental health concerns on the pre - deployment health assessment or the pdha respectively , and recommended that dod coordinate the mental health screening questions that are used on the health assessment forms to ensure accuracy and consistency . in may 2006 we reported that dod could not provide reasonable assurance that oef / oif servicemembers who need referrals for mental health following deployments receive them . there has also been interest in ensuring that servicemembers are screened for tbi , particularly mild tbi . mild tbi can be difficult to identify in part because , unlike with more severe forms of tbi , there may be no observable head trauma and because some of its symptoms overlap with other conditions , such as ptsd . in may 2007 an army tbi task force report identified gaps in tbi screening efforts across all levels of army health care , such as few military installations that had been conducting tbi screening before deployment and a lack of policies requiring tbi screening after deployment .