during our review we found that there was limited federal oversight related to pension advances . both cfpb and ftc are authorized to protect consumers and to regulate the types of financial and commercial practices that consumers should be protected against , some of which appear to be relevant to practices that we describe in our june 2014 report . however , at the time of our 2014 review , neither agency had undertaken any direct oversight or public enforcement actions regarding pension advances . according to cfpb officials , they were concerned about the effect of pension advances on consumers , but stated that they had not taken an official position or issued any regulations regarding pension advance transactions or products , or taken any related enforcement actions . according to ftc officials , the agency had not taken any public law - enforcement action as they had not received many complaints regarding this issue . as noted in our 2014 report , conducting a review to identify whether some questionable practices — such as the ones highlighted in our report — are unfair or deceptive or are actually loans that should be subject to disclosure rules under tila , and taking any necessary oversight or enforcement action , could help cfpb and ftc ensure that vulnerable pensioners are not harmed by companies trying to exploit them . another 17 companies exclusively focused on offering pension advances . we also found that at least 30 out of 38 companies that we identified had a relationship or affiliation with each other , including working as a subsidiary or broker , or the companies were the same entity operating with more than one name . however , only 9 out of those 30 companies clearly disclosed these relationships to consumers on the companies' websites . while companies having affiliations is not uncommon , the lack of transparency to consumers regarding with whom they are actually conducting business can make it difficult to know whom to file a complaint against if the pensioner is dissatisfied or make it difficult to research the reputability of the company before continuing to pursue the business relationship . specifically , we compared the terms with: ( 1 ) relevant state usury rates for loans and ( 2 ) lump - sum options offered through defined - benefit pension plans . as discussed below , we found that most of the six pension advance companies' lump - sum offers ( 1 ) had effective interest rates that were significantly higher than equivalent regulated interest rates , and ( 2 ) were significantly smaller than the lump - sum amounts that would have to be offered in a private - sector pension plan that provided an equivalent lump - sum option . we determined that the effective interest rate for 97 out of 99 offers provided to our undercover investigator by six companies ranged from approximately 27 percent to 46 percent . most of these interest rates were significantly higher than the legal limits set by some states on interest rates assessed for consumer credit , known as usury rates or usury ceilings . additional details on our scope and methodology are included in the june 2014 report .