requirements . the marine must complete the marine corps advisor course . alternatively , if the marine does not complete the marine corps advisor course , the marine can be certified by a commanding officer after demonstrating sufficient expertise in advising foreign security forces in an on - the - job training environment spanning a cumulative period of at least 6 months while still serving in the position . according to the marine administrative message that the marine corps has developed to announce approval of the free mos , marines who have already graduated from an advisor course or who have 6 months or more of cumulative on - the - job experience advising foreign security forces may apply to be grandfathered in to receive the free mos . the marine corps security cooperation group will convene a panel in order to review these applicants' packages , which should include a letter from the applicant to the commanding officer of the marine corps security cooperation group , endorsement from battalion - or squadron - level or higher commanding officer , and documentation demonstrating that the marine graduated from an advisor training course , among other things . the marine corps security cooperation group is responsible for managing the foreign security force advisor mos and the marine advisor course . in the event that the marine corps security cooperation group is disbanded , the training and education command commanding officer would be responsible for determining who would provide the training going forward . the army and marine corps have established processes to guide and evaluate career progression . both services have taken a number of actions to give consideration to those serving in sfa - related positions during the promotion process . however , dod cannot evaluate the effect that serving in an sfa - related role could have on career progression because the army and marine corps have not established a mechanism to identify and track servicemembers with sfa - related experience . the army and marine corps convene promotion boards to review personnel for career advancement . these promotion boards consist of 5 to 21 servicemembers whose rank is above that of the promotion candidates . the promotion cycles for officers and enlisted personnel occur throughout the year . the promotion process is confidential , and each board member is briefed on and reviews the same information for each candidate , to include performance evaluations , assignment history , and professional development and education . according to dod officials , board members review the entirety of servicemembers' careers when making decisions about promotions . both the army and the marine corps provide guidance to promotion boards to assist them in their deliberations . specifically , the army provides every promotion board member with a memorandum of instruction signed by the secretary of the army for officers and the army chief of staff for enlisted personnel . similar to the army , the marine corps provides every promotion board member with instructions , also referred to as precepts , that are signed by the secretary of the navy for officers and the commandant of the marine corps for the enlisted personnel .