charged to patient . when a patient goes to be seen in clinic ( on - post or off - post ) , the medical record is physically given to the patient . the procedure is that the medical record will be returned following their clinic visit . expired term of service . servicemember separates from the military and their medical record is sent to st. louis , missouri , and therefore not available for review . permanent change of station . servicemember is still in the military , but has transferred to another base . what steps has dod taken to establish a quality assurance program to ensure that the military services comply with force health protection and surveillance policies ? to accomplish these objectives , we obtained the force health protection and surveillance policies applicable to the oif deployment from the u.s. central command , the office of the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs , and the services' surgeons general . for each service , we identified those installations that had amongst the largest deployments or redeployments of servicemembers during specified time frames . because of concerns about the reliability of overall personnel deployment data , we obtained data from the selected installations on the universe of those servicemembers who deployed or redeployed from the selected installations . to test the implementation of these policies , we reviewed samples or , in some instances , the entire universe of medical records for servicemembers at seven military installations . in total , we reviewed medical records of 1,328 active duty servicemembers — including 750 army servicemembers , 270 marine corps servicemembers , 146 air force servicemembers , and 162 navy servicemembers . in addition , we reviewed medical records for 409 army reserve servicemembers and 125 army national guard servicemembers . to provide assurances that the data were reliable and that our review of the selected medical records was accurate , we requested the installations' medical personnel to reexamine those medical records that were missing required health assessments or immunizations and adjusted our results where documentation was subsequently identified . we also requested installation medical personnel to check all possible sources for missing pre - and post - deployment health assessments and missing immunizations . we also examined , for all medical records within our review , the completeness of the centralized records at the army medical surveillance activity ( amsa ) , which is tasked with centrally collecting deployment health - related information for all of the military services . further , we interviewed officials with the office of the deployment health support directorate within the office of assistant secretary of defense for health affairs , the offices of the services' surgeons general , and the military installations that we visited for medical records review regarding the quality assurance processes established to ensure compliance with dod force health protection and surveillance policies . for more detailed information of our scope and methodology , see appendix i . we performed our work from november 2003 through august 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .