pharmacy transactions . these entities were required to be fully compliant with version d.0 by january 1 , 2012 . medicare part a , medicare's inpatient medical benefit , provides benefits for drugs administered in inpatient settings , such as hospitals . medicare part b , medicare's outpatient medical benefit , provides limited benefits for drugs administered to patients in outpatient settings , such as physician offices . medicare uses contractors to process and pay part a and part b claims . medicare part c — medicare's managed care benefit , also known as medicare advantage — offers beneficiaries plans that provide inpatient and outpatient drug benefits ( part a and part b , respectively ) through a network of managed care organizations . in addition , some medicare advantage organizations offer plans with pharmacy benefits similar to those provided under medicare part d. medicare part d provides a voluntary pharmacy benefit for medicare beneficiaries . beneficiaries may choose medicare part d plans from among those offered by private part d - only sponsors . part d beneficiaries may obtain drugs through retail and mail - order pharmacies . states establish and administer their own medicaid programs within broad federal guidelines . medicaid programs vary from state to state , but all state medicaid programs provide inpatient and outpatient medical benefits , which include benefits for drugs administered in inpatient hospital and outpatient physician office settings . in addition , all state medicaid programs provide a prescription drug benefit under which they pay pharmacies for drugs dispensed to medicaid beneficiaries . states report these payments to cms , which provides federal matching funds to states to cover a portion of these costs.benefits using a fee - for - service or managed care delivery system . in a managed care delivery system , states typically contract with managed care organizations to provide some or all medicaid covered services to beneficiaries . private health plans in the commercial market provide medical benefits , which include benefits for drugs administered in inpatient hospital and outpatient physician office settings , and pharmacy benefits . private health plans offered in the commercial market include individual and group market plans . participants in the individual market purchase health insurance directly from an insurer , through a broker , or through a state health insurance exchange . group market participants generally obtain health insurance through a group health plan , usually offered by an employer . these plans can include fee - for - service , preferred provider organization , and health maintenance organization options . medicare , medicaid , and private health insurer payment practices for compounded drugs dispensed in pharmacy settings allow for the payment of fda - approved products but vary in whether they allow payment for bulk drug substances in these compounds . as a result of version d.0 of ncpdp's standard for pharmacy transactions , officials from the states , insurers , and part d - only sponsors we spoke with told us that claims for compounded drugs dispensed in pharmacy settings contain sufficient information to identify when a compounded drug is dispensed and the ingredients used to make the drug by ndc .