iii ) . they provided more detailed information . they provided more useful information . dol agreed that there is value in learning more about how local areas are using career pathways approaches . the confidence interval for the estimate of 93 percent is 88 to 97 percent . the state labor market information office , state workforce agency , or state or local economic development agency , while about one - third purchased it from private companies . of the local initiatives , areas found discussions or focus groups with employers about their hiring plans or skill needs most useful for identifying demand occupations . most of the areas that undertook local initiatives used wia funding to support them ( see fig . some local areas also used other funding sources — such as the employment service ( wagner - peyser ) program , the state workforce agency , economic development agencies , and private funding — to support these initiatives . this report does not contain all the results from the survey . the survey and a more complete tabulation of the results can be viewed at gao - 14-20sp . we also interviewed dol officials as well as representatives from national workforce associations and organizations with expertise in workforce issues . see appendix i for more information on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from july 2012 to december 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the wia adult and dislocated worker programs provide employment services to a wide range of participants . after completing the pretests , we administered the survey . on march 7 , 2013 , we sent an e - mail announcement of the questionnaire to executive directors and other knowledgeable representatives of the wibs in our sample , notifying them that our online questionnaire would be activated within a week . on march 13 , 2013 , we sent a second e - mail message to these wib representatives in which we informed them that the questionnaire was available online and provided them with unique passwords and usernames . we also followed up by telephone and e - mail with these wib representatives as needed to clarify their survey responses . we collected responses through april 15 , 2013 . we received completed questionnaires from 148 wibs , for a 74 percent unweighted gao - 14-20sp response rate . detailed survey results are available at: . we used standard descriptive statistics to analyze responses to the questionnaire . all estimates based on the survey results are subject to sampling error . because we followed a probability procedure based on random selections , our sample is only one of a large number of samples that we might have drawn . since each sample could have provided different estimates , we express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample's results as a 95 percent confidence interval .