( see fig . this reduction in tasking squadrons for more than one 90-day period allows the air force to spread the deployments more evenly across all squadrons . by doing this , dual - tasking would help make it possible for the air force to better meet its goal of one 90-day tasking every 15 months . with fewer squadrons being tasked more than once to cover requirements , dual - tasking would also result in fewer total squadrons being tasked to meet requirements . the air force tasked 95 squadrons to meet requirements from december 2000 through february 2002 . as illustrated in figure 3 , our analysis showed that dual - tasking would result in the air force's being able to meet these same requirements with just 72 ( or 24 percent fewer ) squadrons . finally , our analysis showed that dual - tasking would result in more of a squadron's aircraft being used to meet requirements . currently , the air force tasks an average of 45 percent of a squadron's aircraft along with the necessary pilots and maintenance personnel to cover a single requirement . this practice splits the squadron , leaving the residual aircraft and pilots at their home station . since squadrons are not equipped to conduct two independent operations in different locations , the residual aircraft can augment only their own squadron in its deployed location or continue training at their home station . our analysis showed that during the most recent 15-month cycle , the air force tasked 613 of 1,647 aircraft , leaving 1,034 aircraft at their home station . in contrast , under dual - tasking , theater commanders would receive about the same number of aircraft — 618 of 1,350 aircraft — leaving 732 aircraft at their home station . this is possible because dual - tasking meets requirements with fewer squadrons , using up to 78 percent of the aircraft in a squadron . this higher usage of squadron aircraft would reduce the number of aircraft remaining at their home station by almost 30 percent . air force officials said that dual - tasking 75 percent of a squadron's aircraft would significantly reduce or eliminate the need to conduct home station training while the squadron is deployed , since all the pilots would also be tasked . one air force official indicated that operating in this manner would further allow the squadron to better continue training while deployed because the squadron's senior instructor pilots and more junior pilots would be in the same location . to accomplish our second objective of determining what challenges must be addressed to maximize dual - tasking benefits , we conducted analyses in three areas: pilot training , maintenance personnel , and pilot deployments . to project the increased training that may be required for pilots in these two wings to prepare for dual - tasking , we analyzed their actual fiscal year 2001 training sorties . one wing was a f - 16 cg wing ( the 388th fighter wing at hill air force base , ogden , utah ) , which specializes in delivering precision - guided munitions .