ii . analyzed plan conversions show most , but not all: converted accrued benefits into an opening account balance and offered some form of transition provisions . had age and service eligibility restrictions on transition provisions . iii . , and c. uccello . “cash balance plans and the distribution of pension wealth.” industrial relations , 42 ( 4 ) ( 2003 ) : 745-773 . mellon financial corporation . 2004 survey of cash balance plans . secaucus , n.j.: 2004 . niehaus , greg , and tong yu . “cash - balance plan conversions: evidence on excise taxes and implicit contracts.” the journal of risk and insurance , 72 ( 2 ) . pricewaterhousecoopers . regardless of age , workers who were converted from an fap plan to a typical cb plan generally had reductions from expected fap benefits . a majority of younger workers received larger benefits under a conversion to an equal cost cb plan . analysis of lifetime benefits under a conversion to an equal cost cb plan does not change basic findings . vested workers receive larger benefits under a cb conversion of either type compared to benefits received under termination of an fap . data and other methodological issues ( eg , sampling methods ) limit generalization of results . limit generalization of results . conversion impact depends on a variety of factors including plan generosity , transition provisions , and firm specific employee demographics . also , because of the different accrual patterns in a cb plan compared to a fap plan , for a variety of workers , the impact of a conversion varies . why sponsors convert to cb plans . why sponsors convert to cb plans . how participants are likely to fare under a cb plan how participants are likely to fare under a cb plan relative to the traditional db plan that is being replaced . relative to the traditional db plan that is being replaced . in situations where we could not find information on the form or its attachments , we recorded this as “information not found.” finally , although the form 5500 provides information on the number of active participants in the entire plan , it was often impossible to determine how many of those participants were converted to the cb plan in instances where only certain employee groups were converted . cb plan conversions have distributional effects on pension younger , more mobile workers who vest usually benefit . the sample design for this study was a stratified random sample of cb plans , with the 45 largest plans comprising the first stratum , and an additional 160 plans selected from the remaining plans , producing a total sample of 205 plans . older workers with long job tenure likely to experience a loss , particularly if they are near age and service requirements for early retirement . there were 2 primary methods for setting the opening account 1 . present value ( pv ) of old accrual: account balance is based on accrued benefit at conversion ; or 2 . this sample disposition information is summarized in table 1 .