non - inferiority trials . ( see fig . since issuing regulations that address the elements of adequate and well - controlled trials , fda has also periodically issued guidance documents to provide updates on the agency's current thinking on a range of topics . fda's review therefore minimized the potential for biocreep . these guidance documents encompass broad issues such as statistical principles for use in clinical trials and how to select an appropriate control , whereas others are more focused and serve to consolidate relevant recommendations on the development of drugs treating a particular indication . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or crossem@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . some of the concerns fda identified with sponsors' non - inferiority trials were inappropriate use of non - inferiority trials for the indication being treated , inappropriate selection of an active control , including cases where the drug was not fda - approved or the sponsor did not provide an adequate justification , and improper calculation or justification of the non - inferiority margin . fda informed sponsors of its concerns with all of these applications' non - inferiority trials prior to the sponsors' submission of the ndas . specifically , fda notified the sponsors between 1 month and 94 months before submission , with an average of about 30 months prior to submission . with the exception of one application , fda notified all sponsors at least 6 months prior to submission . for example , fda advised one sponsor before the sponsor began its non - inferiority trials — 24 months prior to submitting its nda — that the agency did not consider it appropriate to use non - inferiority trials to support the approval of the drug for the indication being sought — treatment of schizophrenia . fda reiterated this position on another occasion prior to the nda submission . fda did not consider the results of this trial to provide primary evidence to support its approval decision . several different types of trials may be used to gather this evidence . the confidence interval around the observed difference in effectiveness is used to determine if the new drug is non - inferior to the active control . fda , an agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , is responsible for overseeing the safety and effectiveness of drugs marketed within the united states . these responsibilities begin before a product is brought to the market , and include reviewing drug sponsors' proposals for conducting clinical trials , providing advice and publishing guidance regarding these trials , as well as reviewing applications for new drugs . a new drug can be non - inferior to an active control even if the estimated difference in effectiveness and its confidence interval lies entirely below zero , meaning that the active control drug is more effective than the new drug , but by an irrelevant amount .