gao - 17-289t . washington , d.c.: december 7 , 2016 . ( recommendation 5 ) . we provided a draft of this report to usda and the departments of commerce , health and human services , and homeland security for their review and comment . in written comments , health and human services's fda agreed with one of the recommendations and partially agreed with the other . fda also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . in written comments , usda's fsis partially agreed with two of the recommendations and stated that its current policy already addresses the third recommendation . copies of health and human services's and usda's comments are presented in appendixes iii and iv , respectively . in an email , the department of homeland security's gao - office of inspector general liaison office stated that , because there were no recommendations directed to the department , it would forego a formal management response letter but provided one technical comment , which we incorporated . likewise in an e - mail , the department of commerce's national oceanic and atmospheric administration audits office stated that the agency did not have any technical comments . fishery products ( i.e. , seafood ) , including wild catch , aquaculture , and processed fish products , are one of the most highly traded commodities in the world today , and more than half of this commodity originates in developing countries . the eu is the largest market for imported seafood , followed by the united states and japan . roughly 20 years ago , about 60 percent of the seafood consumed in the united states was imported . as of april 2016 , over 90 percent of the seafood consumed in the united states was imported , about half of which was produced from aquaculture operations , also known as fish farms . in 2015 , china was the overall leading exporter of seafood to the united states , india was the leading exporter of shrimp , and vietnam was the leading exporter of catfish . figure 1 shows the proportion of u.s. imports from the five countries exporting the most seafood to the united states in 2015 . the “others” category represents 137 countries that also exported seafood to the united states in 2015 . figure 2 shows the countries that in 2015 were the major exporters of shrimp , salmon , tilapia , and catfish to the united states . as with seafood more generally , the volume of imported catfish has been increasing in recent years . in 2005 , the united states imported over 30 million pounds of catfish . in 2010 , the united states imported about 137 million pounds ; the major catfish exporters were vietnam , with 79 percent , and china , with 13 percent . by 2015 , total catfish imports were almost 250 million pounds , with vietnam alone accounting for over 95 percent of all such imports . domestically , catfish production is concentrated in alabama , arkansas , louisiana , and mississippi . in general , according to usda , domestic catfish production has trended downward in recent years , but data in this regard are incomplete .