aoc does not have plans to fill the position of ombudsperson . according to aoc officials , the ombudsperson was to serve as an independent provider of advice and counsel to nonunion employees on employment policies , practices , and other employment - related matters . the ombudsperson's duties and responsibilities focused on resolving employee issues that may have not been resolved by other offices , according to aoc officials . aoc has made progress in addressing employee communications issues by creating the basic framework in its communications plan and process manuals by which aoc will regularly obtain employee input , systematically analyze those data , and provide feedback to employees on improvement actions that results from those efforts . for instance , aoc has committed itself to initiating employee focus groups not later than august 1 , 2004 . aoc also needs to issue and implement its draft employee feedback manual . aoc can maintain momentum in this area by fully implementing the policies and procedures that it drafted or issued as part of its employee communication efforts . as we noted in our october 2003 report on the government printing office's transformation , developing a comprehensive communications strategy that reaches out to employees and seeks to engage them in a two - way exchange helps to build trust and cultivate stronger working relationships . most important , aoc's top leadership must make visible and timely adjustments as appropriate in policy or procedures in response to employee concerns . aoc's decision to not fill the vacant ombudsperson position raises questions as to whether the services previously provided by the ombudsperson are being met by other offices or are no longer needed . given the history of employee relations issues at aoc , a critical component of such a management decision would be to conduct a thorough analysis of the agency's and employees' needs , as well as an assessment of the capacity of existing offices , both internal and external to aoc , to fulfill those needs . without a thorough analysis aoc cannot be assured that the need for an ombudsperson no longer exists , or that aoc units are prepared to fulfill the responsibilities an ombudsperson would have performed . to improve communications with employees , we recommend that the architect of the capitol direct the chief operating officer to fully and effectively implement the basic framework as defined in its communications plan and process manuals , and finalize its draft employee feedback manual to assure that the current progress already made is maintained and conduct an analysis of both aoc management and employee needs with respect to resolving employee concerns and issues , as well as assessing the capacity of existing offices to fulfill those needs . preparing auditable financial statements and establishing related internal controls are fundamental components of a foundation of control and accountability . in our january 2003 and january 2004 reports , we discussed the value of a system of checks and balances over assets and financial reporting . these steps are a key foundation for implementing our january 2003 recommendation that aoc continue to improve its approach to financial management by institutionalizing practices that will support budgeting , financial , and program management .