this has increased the cost of telephone service for both residents and the tribal government . lack of tribal technical capacity: the tribal official stated that the tribe does not have a sufficient number of technically knowledgeable tribal members to develop and maintain needed telecommunications systems . the yakama nation is addressing these barriers by developing its own telecommunications system that will provide wireless telephone service and high - speed internet access to the tribal government and the community at large . the technically trained tribe member is now managing the system . figure 7 shows fiber being deployed for this network . the eastern band of cherokee and their partner have formed a company that will act as both a wholesaler and a retailer of telecommunications services . a company official told us that because of the cost of putting in the fiber and the low density of the service area , a private , for - profit company would never have made this level of investment . officials of the tribe and the company told us that the tribe will use its ownership in these networks and future planned deployment of cable and wireless infrastructure to ensure that all residents of tribal lands can receive high - speed internet , voip ( voice over internet protocol ) , and other information and content applications at costs and quality levels comparable to or better than metropolitan areas . several tribes we interviewed have focused their efforts on wireless technologies to help address the barriers of tribal lands' rural , rugged location and tribes' limited financial resources , with funding for these efforts coming from both public and private sources . in addition , to increase interest among tribal members in internet access and computer usage , the tribal government plans to provide tribal members with training and internet access at the tribe's community technology center for as long as its budget will allow . those attending training will be assisted by the recently hired technical staff in repairing and refurbishing computers that belong to the tribe and are no longer needed . they will be allowed to keep the computers for home use once the work is complete . services are being offered for free for 2 years to the benewah medical center , local libraries , fire and police departments on tribal land , as well as tribal and local public schools . the system will also make telemedicine services available so that those who are uninsured or underinsured can obtain the expertise of physicians not located on tribal lands . in addition , tribal members and non - tribal members will have high - speed internet access at the community center at no cost . however , there will be a fee for high - speed internet access to homes for tribal and non - tribal members living within reservation boundaries . tribal officials told us that , after the first 2 years of operation , they expect to earn sufficient revenue from subscribers within tribal boundaries to fund needed maintenance and improvements , as well as offset the costs of operating the community technology center .