aircraft exceeds availability . in 1999 , our most recent review of the use of military aircraft for special air missions , we found weaknesses in guidance and in internal controls , including billing and reimbursements for air travel by non - dod government officials . specifically , we recommended that dod improve its billing and reimbursement process to ensure that dod organizations comply with departmental accounting and financial management requirements to record transactions in a manner that permits verification of the proper handling of the funds . dod subsequently improved its billing and reimbursement process by establishing agreements with other agencies to electronically transfer reimbursements . you requested that we examine government officials' use of military aircraft and the regulations and policies that govern such travel . this report examines the extent to which ( 1 ) senior federal government officials have used military aircraft and the costs associated with this travel , and ( 2 ) agencies have followed guidance governing the use of military aircraft by senior federal government officials . to determine the extent to which senior federal government officials have used military aircraft and the costs associated with this travel , we tabulated the number of special air missionswing and calculated the costs associated with these missions — including aircraft operating costs and the use of secure communications — for fiscal years 2008 through 2012 , which was the most recent 5-year period that data was available . we calculated the cost of special air missions flown during fiscal years 2008 through 2012 using the flight duration of the missions and the air force's actual cost per flying hour associated with the type of aircraft used . the cost per flying hour is calculated by the air force at the end of each fiscal year by dividing the actual annual costs for fuel , maintenance , and the salaries of military personnel who plan and execute the missions by the number of hours flown for each aircraft . to determine the extent to which agencies have followed guidance governing the use of military aircraft by senior federal government officials , we examined relevant guidance issued by dod , omb , and the white house , as well as relevant laws . we compared this guidance and flown by the 89th airlift the standards for internal control in the federal governmentrequest , approval , scheduling , and reimbursement processes followed by dod and the white house military office to determine whether the processes were in accordance with the guidance and federal internal control standards . this review does not include travel by the president , vice president , first lady , and second lady . to determine if dod received payments for reimbursable missions , we reviewed billing and payment data retained by the air force and the defense finance and accounting service for the past four fiscal years 2009 through 2012 . we analyzed the data for any anomalies , such as inaccurate or missing information , and interviewed officials from the air force and the white house military office to discuss how data was accumulated and verified .