reviews of spending . to monitor actual spending , usaid officials , including agreement officers' representatives , told us that they rely primarily on each partner's quarterly financial report , known as the sf - 425 . implementing partners are required to report high - level expenditures for 202 ( e ) and itsh quarterly in the sf - 425 , according to usaid officials . the officials noted that they follow up with a partner if spending reported in the sf - 425 is inconsistent with the annual approved amount . reviews of audit reports . according to usaid officials , usaid's office of food for peace generally reviews the results of partners' annual single audits as well as findings of the usaid office of inspector general's ( oig ) periodic audits . ( fig . 2 shows images from a video depicting examples of usaid's uses of 202 ( e ) and itsh funding for title ii projects. ) in fiscal years 2012 through 2015 , usaid obligated about $5.567 billion in title ii funding for its development and emergency projects . as figure 3 shows , usaid obligated about 44 percent of total title ii funding to 202 ( e ) and itsh during that period to cover the costs of implementing and supporting these projects . these obligations comprised about $889 million of 202 ( e ) funding ( 16 percent of total title ii funding ) and about $1.575 billion of itsh funding ( 28 percent of title ii funding ) . usaid data for fiscal years 2012 through 2015 show that the agency provided about 4.5 million metric tons of food commodities . according to usaid , it provides most of its assistance for cash transfers , food vouchers , and local and regional purchases of food through efsp to assist beneficiaries facing immediate food insecurity . according to usaid , it provided about $1.01 billion in fiscal year 2015 on efsp projects implementing cash transfer , food voucher , local and regional procurement , and other activities . in 2014 , usaid issued an information bulletin to its implementing partners outlining the 2014 farm bill's changes to 202 ( e ) and usaid's policy regarding eligible and ineligible uses of 202 ( e ) and itsh funding . the bulletin states that 202 ( e ) funding may be used for activities to establish and enhance title ii projects , including cash transfers , food vouchers , and local and regional procurement of food — modalities previously not authorized for title ii projects — as well as for traditional implementation costs such as the partner's staff salaries , project overhead , project materials , and equipment , among others . usaid also instructs partners that itsh funding is available only for in - country costs directly associated with the storage , movement , and distribution of u.s. in - kind commodities . in addition to outlining the eligible and ineligible uses for 202 ( e ) and itsh funding , and consistent with u.s. government - wide guidance issued by the office of management and budget ( omb ) concerning federal awards outlined in 2 c.f.r . § 200 , the bulletin instructs partners that these funds must be reasonable and allocable .