eeoc and ftc . background checks: what employers need to know , 2012. accessible for private companies to search . the report added that states and state agencies that do make their criminal history records accessible to the public may only periodically update these records , which may affect the information the private background companies access . senior officials from the washington state patrol who maintain the state's criminal record repository said that the state provides a subscription service to private vendors for access to public records , but that the state updates the records only every few months . also , private companies generally conduct name - based checks ( versus fingerprint - based checks ) , which can decrease the accuracy of the information that the check produces . to what extent have states made progress in improving the completeness of criminal history records and what challenges remain that federal agencies can help mitigate ? to what extent do private companies conduct record checks , what benefits do they provide , how are they regulated , and what challenges do they face ? regarding access to fbi record checks and state challenges , we assessed whether states had established laws or were using authorities under federal laws to conduct fbi checks for three employment sectors — those related to the national child protection act of 1993 , which covers , among other things , individuals with responsibility for vulnerable populations ; the edward m. kennedy serve america act ( serve america act ) , which covers organizations that can serve vulnerable populations and receive funding under national service laws ( eg , americorps ) ; and the private security officer employment authorization act of 2004 , which covers organizations that employ private security officers . we selected these laws to represent a range of factors , including variation in whether the law requires or authorizes ( permits ) an fbi record check . in addition , we conducted a web - based survey of officials at agencies within all 50 states and the district of columbia that maintain criminal history records ( state repositories ) to determine the extent to which states are conducting fbi checks for the employment sectors covered under the three federal laws and what challenges , if any , states face in doing so . we received a response rate of 94 percent — 47 states and the district of columbia — which we collectively refer to as states throughout this report . we also interviewed management officials from state repositories and courts that maintain criminal history information in 4 states — california , florida , idaho , and washington — to determine the extent to which they conduct fbi checks , any challenges , and actions taken to address those challenges . we selected the 4 states based on geographic location and other factors . in addition , we analyzed federal regulations and procedures for conducting criminal record checks and interviewed fbi officials who manage the checks to determine any challenges in providing access . we also interviewed senior officials from the compact council — the primary state and federal body for setting policy around the interstate sharing of criminal history records for non - criminal - justice purposes .