this is very encouraging . omb will need to be engaged seriously on a sustained basis to make progress on a range of challenges that are costing taxpayers billions of dollars each year . continued oversight by the congress will also be key , and in the case of some areas , legislative actions will be needed . in the pma , the president has identified five governmentwide initiatives that are interrelated and support each other — improved financial performance , strategic management of human capital , budget and performance integration , electronic government , and competitive sourcing . the pma also includes program initiatives on eliminating improper payments and real property asset management . decisive action and sustained attention will be necessary to make the hard choices needed to reexamine and transform the federal government , maximize its performance , and ensure accountability . this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . we have issued a large body of reports , guides , and tools on issues directly relevant to pma , and plan to continue to actively support congressional and agency actions to address today's challenges and prepare for the future . as i have discussed in my statement today , although efforts to transform agencies by improving their management and performance are under way , more remains to be done to ensure that the government has the capacity to deliver on its promises meet current and emerging needs , and to remain relevant in the 21st century . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . today , as agreed with the subcommittee , my statement will focus on the progress made in these five governmentwide and the two program initiatives in pma and the next steps our work shows will be key to effectively enhance the management and performance of the federal government . i will also highlight the importance of congressional oversight in continuing to provide the attention needed to improve management and performance across the federal government and ensure accountability . this testimony draws upon our wide - ranging work on federal management and transformation issues , including analysis of pma initiatives and the president's 2006 budget of the u.s government . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the pma initiative to improve financial performance is aimed at ensuring that federal financial systems produce accurate and timely information to support operating , budget , and policy decisions . it focuses on key issues such as data reliability , clean financial statement audit opinions , and effective internal control and financial management systems . our work in these areas over a number of years demonstrates the importance of the improvement efforts that are underway . the congress enacted a number of statutory reforms during the 1990s in the area of financial management .