other challenges are emerging . these include creating appropriate cooperation and collaboration mechanisms to assure effective program management , and reinforcing training and management controls to help assure compliance with dhs policies and procedures and the proper treatment of citizens and aliens . bice will need to assure that appropriate cooperation and collaboration occurs between it and other dhs bureaus . for example , both the border patrol , now located in the bureau of customs and border protection ( bcbp ) , and bice's immigration investigations program conducted alien smuggling investigations prior to the merger into dhs . these units operated through different chains of command with different reporting structures . as a result , ins's antismuggling program lacked coordination , resulting in multiple antismuggling units overlapping in their jurisdictions , making inconsistent decisions about which cases to open , and functioning autonomously and without a single chain of command . it's unclear at this time how the anti - smuggling program will operate under dhs . should both bcbp's border patrol and bice's investigations program continue to conduct alien smuggling investigations , under secretary hutchinson will need to assure that coordination and collaboration exists to overcome previous program deficiencies . the bureau of citizenship and immigration services ( bcis ) is responsible for administering services such as immigrant and nonimmigrant sponsorship , work authorization , naturalization of qualified applicants for u.s. citizenship , and asylum . processing benefit applications is an important dhs function that should be done in a timely and consistent manner . those who are eligible should receive benefits in a reasonable period of time . however , some try to obtain these benefits through fraud , and investigating fraud is the responsibility of bice's immigration investigations program . ins' approach to addressing benefit fraud was fragmented and unfocused . ins' interior enforcement strategy did not address how the different ins components that conducted benefit fraud investigations were to coordinate their investigations . also , ins had not established guidance to ensure the highest - priority cases are investigated . secretary ridge will need to ensure the two bureaus work closely to assure timely adjudication for eligible applicants while identifying and investigating potential immigration benefit fraud cases . bice's intelligence program is responsible for collecting , analyzing , and disseminating immigration - related intelligence . immigration - related intelligence is needed by other dhs components such as border patrol agents and inspectors within bcbp and personnel within bcis adjudicating immigration benefits . bice will need to develop an intelligence program structure to ensure intelligence information is disseminated to the appropriate components within dhs's other bureaus . since the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , and with the formation of dhs , the linkages between immigration enforcement and national security have been brought to the fore . immigration personnel have been tapped to perform many duties that previously were not part of their normal routine .