delivery . current truck delivery technologies cannot compete with gasoline technologies because of the cost of compressing or liquefying hydrogen . although delivery by pipeline is more economical , hydrogen causes pipelines to become brittle , raising safety concerns . current r&d efforts focus on , among other things , reducing the cost of delivering hydrogen by truck and pipeline , and developing new composite materials for safer delivery by pipeline , targeting a point - to - point delivery cost of less than $1 per gallon of gasoline equivalent . fuel cell cost and durability . the type of hydrogen fuel cell considered the most promising for vehicles currently has cost and durability limitations . specifically , current fuel cell systems ( 1 ) cost about $8,000 to produce at high volume , compared to $2,000 to $3,000 to produce a conventional internal combustion engine and ( 2 ) operate for less than half the life span of a conventional internal combustion engine . current hydrogen fuel cell r&d efforts focus on reducing the cost and increasing the durability of fuel cells . for example , doe set a target date of 2015 to develop a fuel cell with a life span of about 5,000 hours — or about 150,000 miles — making it competitive with internal combustion engines . industry representatives have noted that they are spending far more for hydrogen r&d than the federal government's hydrogen fuel initiative . specifically , while actual r&d figures are proprietary , chrysler llc , ford motor company , and general motors corporation each has reported spending at least as much as the federal government on r&d for hydrogen fuel cell vehicles , and each plans to spend $6 to $10 billion from 2006 through 2015 . furthermore , doe is analyzing infrastructure requirements for deploying hydrogen fuel cell technologies , including hydrogen production facilities and pipelines to deliver hydrogen to major metropolitan markets . to facilitate this effort , doe is working with dot , industry groups , and international organizations to develop national and international safety codes and standards , such as fire codes for stationary fuel cells and standards for hydrogen fueling stations . doe is also validating hydrogen technologies in real - world environments by , for example , collecting information on the performance of 77 hydrogen fuel cell vehicles used as a demonstration in several cities for commuting and other daily driving needs . to stimulate public awareness and acceptance of hydrogen technologies , doe is disseminating safety - related information for emergency personnel as well as nontechnical information for the general public on hydrogen production , storage , and delivery ; fuel cells ; and near - term markets . you asked that we assess doe's hydrogen fuel initiative as doe enters the last year of its initial 5-year , $1.2 billion program . specifically , you asked that we examine the extent to which doe's hydrogen r&d program has ( 1 ) made progress in meeting the initiative's r&d targets , ( 2 ) worked with industry to set and meet r&d targets , and ( 3 ) worked with other federal agencies to develop and demonstrate hydrogen technologies .