airport capacity . a national policy regarding airport capacity in key metropolitan areas will need to be determined . even with current planned airport expansion , faa expects capacity shortfalls in many of the nation's busiest airports . nextgen alone is not likely to sufficiently expand the safety and capacity of the national airspace system . decisions regarding using existing capacity more efficiently include certifying and approving standards for the use of closely spaced parallel runways — which will be a major driver of the amount of land needed to expand airport capacity and will determine capacity in some metropolitan areas — and developing policies that address situations when demand exceeds capacity at airports or in specific airspace ( eg , pricing , administrative rules , service priorities , and so forth ) . furthermore , planning infrastructure projects to increase capacity , such as building additional runways , can take as long as a decade or more , and will require substantial planning and safety and cost analyses . jpdo and mitre are currently conducting modeling work to examine benefits , costs , and risks associated with alternative assumptions regarding various future scenarios . this work will provide important information to stakeholders and decision makers regarding the validation of the benefits of nextgen capabilities , as well as the extent to which further capacity in the system may be required , and is still in the preliminary stages . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information on this testimony , please contact gerald l. dillingham , ph.d. , at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or dillinghamg@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include andrew von ah ( assistant director ) , kieran mccarthy , richard scott , maria mercado , kevin egan , dominic nadarski , delwen jones , amy abramowitz , and bert japikse . next generation air transportation system: faa faces challenges in responding to task force recommendations . gao - 10-188t . washington , d.c.: october 28 , 2009 . responses to questions for the record: march 18 , 2009 , hearing on atc modernization: near - term achievable goals . gao - 09-718r . washington , d.c.: may 20 , 2009 . next generation air transportation system: status of transformation and issues associated with midterm implementation of capabilities . gao - 09-479t . washington d.c.: march 18 , 2009 . responses to questions for the record: february 11 , 2009 , hearing on the faa reauthorization act of 2009 . gao - 09-467r . washington , d.c.: march 10 , 2009 . next generation air transportation system: status of systems acquisition and the transition to the next generation air transportation system . gao - 08-1078 . washington , d.c.: september 11 , 2008 . next generation air transportation system: status of key issues associated with the transition to nextgen . gao - 08-1154t . washington , d.c.: september 11 , 2008 . joint planning and development office: progress and key issues in planning the transition to the next generation air transportation system . gao - 07-693t . washington , d.c.: march 2007 .