loans ? what factors influence sap ? what would be the effects of making statutory and regulatory changes to the guaranteed minimum 9.5 percent yield ? of education ( education ) . these data include information on 9.5 percent loan volume and sap paid to lenders . on the basis of our analysis , we have determined that data from 1986 onward are sufficiently reliable for purposes of our review . – gathered data from top 10 lenders that held 9.5 percent loans in fy 2003 . these lenders held 70 percent of reported 9.5 percent loan volume in fy 2003 . interviewed officials at education about laws , regulations and policies related to the minimum 9.5 percent yield and internal revenue service ( irs ) about legal aspects of tax - exempt bonds . interviewed a major ratings agency that examines and rates the quality of bonds and a law firm that provides legal advice to lenders that issue tax - exempt bonds for student loans . to estimate what the sap for 9.5 percent loans would have been from fy 1995 to 2003 had these loans not been guaranteed a minimum 9.5 percent yield , we used education's data on sap made by fiscal year , loan type , and special allowance code ( which contains information on when the loan was issued ) , along with several assumptions . had the loans not been guaranteed a minimum 9.5 percent yield , we assumed that they would have received the yield for the same loan type financed with taxable bonds with the same disbursement date and repayment status . in fy 2003 , 37 lenders received sap for 9.5 percent loans and these payments have increased by $347 million , from $209 million in fy 2001 to $556 million in fy 2003 . sap have exceeded $600 million through the third quarter of fy 2004 . a decline in the interest rates paid by borrowers and a rise in the dollar amount of 9.5 percent loans have influenced the increased sap . changing the yield for 9.5 percent loans made or purchased in the future should decrease sap and is unlikely to cause outstanding bonds to default , but lenders may not be able to offer the same borrower benefits , such as loan cancellation and interest rate reductions , in the future because earnings from their tax - exempt bonds may decrease . significant drop in borrower rate relative to 9.5 percent yield . the volume of 9.5 percent loans has not decreased as expected , which has also influenced the sap increase . eliminates the minimum could lower sap for loans made or purchased in the future . changing the yield for 9.5 percent loans made or purchased in the future is unlikely to cause outstanding bonds to default , but lenders may not be able to offer the same borrower benefits , such as loan cancellation and interest rate reductions , in the future . to market interest rates , those financed with pre - 10 / 1 / 93 tax - exempt bonds have a guaranteed minimum rate of return .