ii . the following are gao's comments on the hud office of inspector general's ( oig ) letter dated june 8 , 2001 . we agree that , on june 4 , 2001 , the hud oig fully implemented its policies and procedures pertaining to employee misconduct , and we have deleted the proposed recommendation and revised the report to reflect this action . however , the oig has not yet completed action on two other recommendations . while on june 5 , 2001 , the oig issued new procedures to track funding obligated and expended by individual task forces , further action is needed to ensure that the oig fully and effectively implements this system . action is also still needed to promulgate guidance to be used by oig staff in reporting arrests and convictions and to establish procedures to properly maintain documentation supporting investigative data reported to the congress . the hud oig stated that although it agreed with the recommendations it did not agree with many of the facts and conclusions supporting those recommendations . however , the oig did not provide evidence or additional information to support its position . for example , although the oig disagreed that it cannot accurately determine the number of arrests and convictions that have resulted from operation safe home activities , it also did not dispute any of the facts we presented to support our finding that operation safe home arrest and conviction data were unreliable . a more detailed analysis of the statements in the oig's letter is presented in the comments that follow . while we made no changes to the facts and conclusions in our draft report , we made modifications where appropriate to clarify the issues presented in the report . we agree that the hud oig does not maintain its own accounting system , and have made modifications to the report where appropriate to reflect that the oig uses hud's accounting system . while we recognize there are limitations in hud's accounting and financial management systems and have reported on these limitations in the past , we do not believe that these limitations inherently prevent the oig from identifying funding by individual task forces or preclude it from centrally maintaining more detailed information spending data . for example , the oig is currently working with hud to use hud's accounting system to enable it to track the use of funds by individual task forces and provide greater detail on how funds are spent . we disagree that our finding that the oig has not effectively managed operation safe home funding is “overly broad.” we based this conclusion on several factors , including the oig's inability to readily identify how much funding was allotted to and obligated and expended by individual task forces and the limited information the oig had centrally on how task force funds were spent . as a result , it did not have a reliable mechanism for estimating its funding needs , allocating program resources , and determining how funds were spent — and thus effectively manage its operation safe home funding .