circuit . neither of these recommendations has been implemented . with regard to our 2003 recommendation for updating the district court case weights , the fjc agreed that the method used to develop the new case weights would not permit the calculation of standard errors , but that other methods could be used to assess the integrity of the resulting case weight system . in response , we noted that the delphi technique to be used for developing out - of - court time estimates was most appropriate when more precise analytical techniques were not feasible and the issue could benefit from subjective judgments on a collective basis . more precise techniques were available for developing the new case weights and were to be used for developing new bankruptcy court case weights . the methodology the judicial conference decided to begin in june 2002 for the revision of the bankruptcy case weights offered an approach that could be usefully adopted for the revision of the district court case weights . the bankruptcy court methodology used a two - phased approach . first , new case weights would be developed based on the time data recorded by bankruptcy judges for a period of weeks — a methodology very similar to that used to develop the bankruptcy case weights that existed in 2003 at the time of our report . the accuracy of the new case weights could be assessed using standard errors . the second part represents experimental research to determine if it is possible to make future revisions of the weights without conducting a time study . the data from the time study could be used to validate the feasibility of this approach . if the research determined that this were possible , the case weights could be updated more frequently with less cost than required by a time study . we believe this approach would provide ( 1 ) more accurate weighted case filings than the design developed and used for the development of the 2004 district court case weights , and ( 2 ) a sounder method of developing and testing the accuracy of case weights that were developed without a time study . with regard to our recommendation improving the case - related workload measure for the courts of appeals , the chair of the committee on judicial resources commented that the workload of the courts of appeals entails important factors that have defied measurement , including significant differences in case processing techniques . we recognize that there are significant methodological challenges in developing a more precise workload measure for the courts of appeals . however , using the data available , neither we nor the judicial conference can assess the accuracy of adjusted case filings as a measure of the case - related workload of courts of appeals judges . that concludes my statement , mr. chairman , and i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have . for further information about this statement , please contact william o. jenkins jr. , director , homeland security and justice issues , on ( 202 ) 512- 8777 or jenkinswo@gao.gov .