gao - 14-659r . washington , d.c.: june 24 , 2014 . the photographs below ( figs . 3 and 4 ) show the offloading of the usns williams at the newly constructed pier at hammernesodden and provide an example of the type of ground equipment used to support a marine air ground task force that can be found at mcpp - n caves . as part of the 2005 memorandum of understanding between the united states and norway , the united states will provide military equipment to be stored in the norwegian - built caves , and norway will provide the infrastructure to support the program and will maintain the equipment provided by the united states . both countries agree to share the program's operations and maintenance expenses . under the cost - sharing portion of the agreement , each country agrees to match the other's financial contributions up to an agreed upon threshold , which in fiscal year 2014 was $10.5 million each . the cost - sharing agreement does set a maximum contribution by norway , limiting its contribution either to half of the total costs incurred or to the ceiling set in u.s. dollars to be negotiated , whichever is less . table 1 below illustrates the marine corps and navy's total annual contributions covering the actual direct and indirect programmatic costs for mcpp - n from fiscal years 2010 to 2014 . according to officials from the office of the deputy commandant of the marine corps for installations and logistics , the direct costs for mcpp - n include all operations and maintenance expenses incurred by the marine corps for both ground equipment and aviation support equipment . in addition , indirect costs cover administrative expenses incurred by blount island command and other marine corps organizations as part of the execution of the program . five organizations are responsible for the support and operation of mcpp - n. four marine corps organizations are responsible for the planning , funding , and management of mcpp - n . the fifth organization , the norwegian defence logistics organization , is responsible for providing program infrastructure and maintaining mcpp - n equipment prepositioned in norway . table 2 below summarizes the primary roles and responsibilities of each organization . the marine corps is changing its mix of equipment to address the u.s. european and u.s. africa commands' strategic and theater - specific operational requirements . both combatant commands have identified in their contingency plans the need for prepositioned equipment within their respective geographic areas to support their operational requirements and capabilities . the u.s. european command's theater posture plan identifies trondheim , norway , as a stand - alone prepositioning site for mcpp - n capable of providing equipment to a wide variety of operations . in addition , officials from the u.s. european command stated that they have developed and are continuing to develop contingency plans that specifically call upon the marine corps to maintain prepositioned equipment in europe to support strategic and theater - specific operational requirements .