but i will not allow this to occur . this is not in the congress's nor gao's interest . one consequence of our demand vs. supply situation is the growing list of congressional requests that we are not able to promptly staff . while we continue to work with congressional committees to identify their areas of highest priority , we remain unable to staff important requests . this limits our ability to provide timely advice to congressional committees dealing with certain issues that they have slated for oversight , including safety concerns such as incorporating behavior - based security programs into tsa's aviation passenger screening process , updating our 2006 study of fda's post - market drug safety system , and reviewing state investigations of nursing home complaints . operational improvements such as the effectiveness of border security checkpoints to identify illegal aliens , technical and programmatic challenges in dod's space radar programs , oversight of federally - funded highway and transit projects and the impact of the 2005 bankruptcy abuse prevention and consumer protection act . opportunities to increase revenues or stop wasteful spending including reducing potential overstatements of charitable deductions and curbing potential overpayments and contractor abuses in food assistance programs . our fiscal year 2009 budget request seeks to better position us to maintain our high level of support for the congress and better meet increasing requests for help . this request would help replenish our staffing levels at a time when almost 20 percent of all gao staff will be eligible for retirement . accordingly , our fiscal year 2009 budget request seeks funds to ensure that we have the increased staff capacity to effectively support the congress's agenda , cover pay and uncontrollable inflationary cost increases , and undertake critical investments , such as technology improvement . gao is requesting budget authority of $545.5 million to support a staff level of 3,251 ftes needed to serve the congress . this is a fiscally prudent request of 7.5 percent over our fiscal year 2008 funding level , as illustrated in table 2 . our request includes about $538.1 million in direct appropriations and authority to use about $7.4 million in offsetting collections . this request also reflects a reduction of about $6 million in nonrecurring fiscal year 2008 costs . our request includes funds needed to increase our staffing level by less than 5 percent to help us provide more timely responses to congressional requests for studies ; enhance employee recruitment , retention , and development programs , which increase our competitiveness for a talented workforce ; recognize dedicated contributions of our hardworking staff through awards and recognition programs ; address critical human capital components , such as knowledge capacity building , succession planning , and staff skills and competencies ; pursue critical structural and infrastructure maintenance and restore program funding levels to regain our lost purchasing power ; and undertake critical initiatives to increase our productivity . key elements of our proposed budget increase are outlined as follows: pay and inflationary cost increases we are requesting funds to cover anticipated pay and inflationary cost increases resulting primarily from annual across - the - board and performance - based increases and annualization of prior fiscal year costs .