pub . 110-53 , § 1203 ( a ) , 121 stat . 266 , 383-85 ( 2007 ) ( codified at 49 u.s.c . § 114 ( u ) ( 7 ) ) . to what extent are stakeholders satisfied with the mechanisms used to disseminate these products ? to what extent has tsa defined its roles and responsibilities for sharing security - related information with stakeholders ? transportation or emergency management . we sent the survey to the entire known population of organizations ; no sampling was conducted . while the survey responses cannot be used to generalize the opinions and satisfaction of all transportation stakeholders as a whole , the responses provide data for our defined population . the survey document and counts of responses received for each question are reproduced in an electronic supplement we are issuing concurrent with this report — gao - 12-67sp stakeholders , survey respondents were given multiple opportunities to provide additional open - ended comments throughout our survey . additional information was obtained from interviews with industry associations , tsa and dhs officials , and 18 individual stakeholders who were selected based on their geographic location and mode of transportation . while the opinions expressed in the interviews are nongeneralizable to all stakeholders or modes of transportation , they provided important perspective to our analysis . we also reviewed documents and plans that describe recommended practices for effective information sharing . to obtain additional narrative and supporting context from to assess the extent to which tsa has defined its roles and responsibilities for sharing security - related information with stakeholders , we interviewed officials from tsa's office of intelligence ( tsa - oi ) and officials from the commercial airline , commercial airport , air cargo , freight rail , and highway and motor carrier units within the office of transportation sector network management ( tsnm ) on the functions they perform in information sharing.described by these officials , industry associations , and individual stakeholders to those described in the tsisp and other dhs and federal we compared the practices plans that describe effective practices for information sharing . appendix i provides more details about our objectives , scope , and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from may 2010 through november 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . generally accepted government auditing standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the aviation and transportation security act , enacted in november 2001 , assigned tsa responsibility for security in all modes of transportation , which include aviation , maritime , mass transit , highway and motor carrier , freight rail , and pipeline . the act included requirements for deploying a federal screening workforce at airports and screening all passengers and property transported from or within the united states on commercial aircraft .