see table 3 below . in fiscal year 2011 , dhs modified how port vulnerability — the relative exposure to an attack — is calculated in the psgp risk model , but additional changes could improve how vulnerability is measured in the model . prior to fiscal year 2011 , the psgp risk model held vulnerability constant , rather than accounting for differences across ports . we have reported on the value of measuring vulnerability in risk analysis models in in june 2008 , we reported that dhs chose to hold two prior reports.vulnerability constant and consider all states and urban areas equally vulnerable in the hsgp risk analysis model , which reduced the value of the model in estimating risk.in june 2009 , we reported that dhs also chose to consider all transit agencies equally vulnerable in its transit security grant program ( tsgp ) risk analysis model . regarding both models — which are similar in structure to the psgp risk model — we recommended that dhs formulate a method to measure vulnerability in a manner that captures variations across jurisdictions , and apply this vulnerability measure in future iterations of the grant allocation model . to respond to these recommendations and other external feedback regarding the grant programs , and to produce a more complete risk picture , dhs modified the vulnerability index in the fiscal year 2011 psgp model such that vulnerability is no longer held constant . instead , the new vulnerability index recognizes that different ports can have different vulnerability levels . in the fiscal year 2011 psgp model , port vulnerability is assessed using four data components thought to influence a port's vulnerability to attack , as shown below in table 4 . the fiscal year 2011 psgp risk model is provided in full in appendix ii . although fema has taken the first step towards improving how port vulnerability is measured in the psgp risk model , further improvements are needed to ensure that the vulnerability score for a specific port is responsive to changes in security that may occur in that port — such as the implementation of new security measures . the fiscal year 2011 vulnerability index does not provide a mechanism to account for how new security measures — such as the installation of cameras or the provision of additional training to security officials — affect a port's vulnerability , even if those security measures were funded using psgp grant dollars . this limitation is due to the fact that the data elements within the vulnerability index are counts of activities , which recognize the number of activities that may occur — such as how many ferry passengers board a ferry — but do not account for the protective actions taken to secure them . for example , if a port installed security cameras throughout a ferry system to monitor vessel or ferry passenger activity , one would expect to reduce the ferry system's vulnerability to attack .