several examples follow . the need for such time - consuming procedures primarily results from inadequate financial management systems . our unqualified opinions on irs's fiscal years 2001 and 2000 financial statements were made possible by the extraordinary efforts of irs senior management and staff to develop processes to compensate for serious internal control and systems deficiencies . irs was again compelled to rely extensively on costly , time - consuming processes ; statistical projections ; external contractors ; substantial adjustments ; and monumental human efforts that extended nearly four months after the september 30 , 2001 , fiscal year - end to derive reliable year - end balances for its financial statements . for example , irs does not have a detailed record , or subsidiary ledger , for taxes receivable to allow it to track and manage amounts due from taxpayers . to enable it to report a reliable taxes receivable balance in the absence of a subsidiary ledger , irs has , for the last five years , relied on a complex statistical sampling approach that requires substantial human and financial resources to conduct , takes months to complete , and yields tens of billions of dollars of adjustments . similarly , irs does not have an integrated property management system that appropriately records property and equipment additions and disposals as they occur and links costs on the accounting records to the property records . during fiscal year 2001 , irs expensed property additions during the year and then capitalized them at year - end based on analysis of expense records conducted by a contractor . dot's major agencies use the departmental accounting and financial information system ( dafis ) , which cannot produce financial statements based on the information included within the system . as a result , dot made about 850 adjustments , totaling about $41 billion , outside dafis to prepare the financial statements . these adjustments were recorded in a financial statement module , a tool used to process the adjustments . however , all dot agencies did not use the financial statement module to prepare the financial statements , and the adjustments were not recorded in dafis . the dot inspector general reported that dot plans to have a new accounting system fully operational and compliant with accounting standards by january 2003 . again , in fiscal year 2001 , hhs attained an unqualified opinion on its financial statements . however , system and internal control weaknesses , such as lack of an integrated financial management system , continued to make it difficult for certain hhs components to prepare timely and reliable financial statements . for example , the national institutes of health used a manual year - end process to create and post correct standard general ledger accounts , generating about 19,000 nonstandard accounting entries with an absolute value of approximately $348 billion . also , the centers for medicare and medicaid services , continued to contract with independent public accounting firms , as it has since fy 1999 , to validate contractor receivables .