some states will waive other requirements as well . thirty - eight states indicated that they will waive specific requirements included in a client's individual responsibility plan , which is intended to lead to work and financial independence . for example , an illinois official told us that the individual plan of many clients requires them to meet with their caseworker in order to continue receiving benefits . if a client misses a meeting and can demonstrate that the failure to make the appointment was due to domestic violence , the requirement can be temporarily waived and cash benefits will not be interrupted . what are states doing to address domestic violence among tanf recipients once victims have been identified ? to what extent are state tanf programs spending tanf funds on marriage and responsible fatherhood programs , and how , if at all , are these programs addressing domestic violence ? most workshops are voluntary and participants learn about the program through the internet , referrals , word of mouth , local advertising , and churches . to answer these questions , we conducted a survey of the tanf programs of the 50 states and the district of columbia . in this survey , we asked detailed questions about state policies regarding screening tanf clients for domestic violence , how states addressed domestic violence situations once clients have disclosed them , and the extent to which states have used tanf funds for marriage and responsible fatherhood programs . to supplement the data obtained through the survey , we conducted in - depth visits to five states — colorado , georgia , new york , oklahoma , and washington . we selected these states because their practices for screening tanf clients for domestic violence have been in place for various amounts of time ; only one of these states , oklahoma , has not adopted the family violence option . we selected one state — oklahoma — in part because of its tanf - funded marriage program , and another state — georgia — because of its tanf - funded responsible fatherhood program . during each of these visits , we conducted detailed discussions with state officials about state policies , obtained documentation of state policies , and visited two local service delivery offices in each state to discuss and observe how the policies were implemented . georgia's fatherhood program is a partnership with several state agencies and other organizations . the program's mission is to assist non - custodial parents in training and educational opportunities leading to employment paying above minimum wage and encouraging increased involvement in the lives of their children . the program contracts with the georgia department of technical and adult education to provide job skills and placements for unemployed or underemployed non - custodial parents . georgia's other responsible fatherhood program , the child access and visitation program , is designed to assist non - custodial parents with improving visitation with their children and addressing the children's relationship with the custodial parent . this program is run through a contract with an outside service provider and funded through a grant from hhs' administration for children and families .