pub . advisory service , within the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , who are responsible for developing the plan . to determine the extent to which dod's plan is consistent with key strategic workforce planning principles , we compared dod's fiscal year 2013-2018 strategic workforce plan with key principles of effective strategic workforce planning . specifically , we selected two key principles — aligning workforce planning with strategic planning and budget formulation and involving stakeholders , among others , in developing , communicating , and implementing the strategic workforce plan — that do not overlap with the statutory requirements . additionally , we selected two other key principles — determining the critical skills and competencies needed to achieve current and future programmatic results and developing strategies that are tailored to address gaps — because they are integral to developing a comprehensive strategic workforce plan and because we have consistently found that dod has not yet completed actions to address issues related to them . we interviewed officials from the strategic human capital planning office to obtain information on dod's approach to strategic workforce planning . we also interviewed officials in 3 of dod's 22 functional communities to obtain additional perspective on their approaches . the three communities included ( 1 ) the civilian senior leader functional community , ( 2 ) the financial management functional community , and ( 3 ) the intelligence functional community . we selected these communities because dod is required specifically to include information about its civilian senior leader and its financial management workforces in its strategic workforce plan , and because our 2012 review of dod's 2010 strategic workforce plan found that the department's intelligence functional community did not provide the mandated workforce assessments or plan of action for shaping and improving that workforce . we also selected the three communities to better understand how each of their plans was developed based on the stated criteria . however , our selection of these 3 functional communities does not constitute a representative sample of dod's 22 functional communities . thus , while the results cannot be projected to all functional communities , they did provide us with important insights . we also evaluated dod's processes for conducting the strategic workforce planning efforts for these three functional communities as part of the larger dod strategic workforce plan , including relevant instructions or guidance from the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness . we then evaluated the data presented in the plan to assess the extent to which dod's latest plan is consistent with key strategic workforce - planning principles ; however , we did not assess the underlying accuracy of dod's data . we conducted this performance audit from september 2013 to july 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . a full discussion of our scope and methodology is presented in appendix i .