( see fig . the effect of these incentives also varies substantially with personal circumstances . in general , the availability of social security benefits at age 62 offers an incentive to retire before full retirement age , though changes in program rules are progressively weakening that incentive . the recent elimination of the social security earnings test for those at full retirement age and beyond , which had formerly reduced benefits for those beneficiaries who had earnings above a certain threshold , also may discourage drawing benefits early . the fact that most individuals are eligible for medicare at age 65 generally deters them from leaving the labor force before then , especially if they are not covered by retiree health insurance . federal pension tax policies give employers discretion to set pension plan rules that provide incentives for many workers to retire somewhat earlier than the norms established by social security , often age 55 , or in some cases earlier . ( 3 ) is there evidence that tax - favored private retiree health insurance and pension benefits have influenced when people retire ? we have prepared this report under the comptroller general's authority to conduct evaluations on his own initiative as part of a continued effort to provide congress with relevant information on the aging of the american workforce . to identify which federal policies may influence the age at which workers retire , we reviewed the relevant literature and interviewed agency experts . to answer our second and third objectives , we used two main data sources: ( 1 ) social security administration ( ssa ) data and ( 2 ) longitudinal data from the health and retirement study ( hrs ) conducted by the university of michigan , which looks at the circumstances under which recent retirees or people who are approaching retirement are making their decisions to retire . we used the ssa data to determine when workers who reached ages 66 through 71 in 2006 started drawing social security retired worker benefits . we conducted various statistical analyses of the hrs survey data to determine which factors were associated with decisions to retire at early ages ( before age 62 ) and decisions to retire at later ages ( at or after age 65 ) . we focused on workers who were born from 1931 to 1941 ( reaching age 62 at some point between 1993 and 2003 ) and who were in the labor force when the hrs survey began in 1992 . to select appropriate variables to consider in our analyses , we reviewed relevant literature and interviewed experts in the field . we conducted reliability assessments of these data and found them to be sufficiently reliable for our study . as is the case with most statistical analyses , our work is limited by factors such as the unavailability of information and the inability to account for influences that cannot be quantified or observed . in addition , our analysis of the hrs survey , which includes only one cohort of workers , may not apply to older or younger groups of workers .