program design . experts in certain case study countries reported that employers must design their programs carefully to ensure that they meet sometimes complex statutory requirements and to ensure that workers are eligible for and benefit from phased retirement . however , some also mentioned that designing a program that incentivizes continued work and avoids penalties for workers can be a challenge . sources of income . workers participating in phased retirement typically forego some amount of wages as a result of reduced working hours or reduced responsibilities , similar to the wage reduction in full retirement . in the programs we reviewed in our four countries , workers are able to offset foregone wages , at least partially , from multiple sources . according to program administrators and employers we interviewed , these sources include the national pension ; employer - sponsored retirement accounts ; an employer - provided benefit designated for this purpose ; personal savings ; or some combination of these sources . for example , german experts told us that , in germany , workers participating in the national atz program can reduce their work hours by 50 percent . experts told us that employers are required to pay a minimum of 70 percent of full - time wages for phasing employees and pay contributions toward the employee's pension as though the employee were working 90 percent . among the employers we interviewed that continue to offer the national atz program , the 20 percent topped - off amount was reported as generally financed by the employer . in the u.k. , employees participating in a private - sector employer's phased retirement programs make up for the foregone wages by withdrawing funds from their own employer - sponsored retirement plan . in canada , one employer offers a lump - sum allowance to employees between 60 and 64 years of age who wished to reduce their hours as part of phased retirement . participating employees are paid a salary proportional to their reduced hours and can use the lump - sum benefit to supplement their income , but may not exceed their full - time salary . this lump - sum is funded solely by the employer . role of collective bargaining . based on our research and interviews with experts , we found that most of the phased retirement programs we reviewed in the four case study countries were established as part of collective bargaining agreements between employers and union - represented workers . this was often the case for sectoral programs in either the public or private sectors and for those covering specific occupations . the programs often covered a large number of workers . for example , in sweden , representatives of an organization for public employers with approximately 1.2 million employees ( 23 percent of the swedish workforce ) told us that 90 percent of the workers in sweden were covered by collective agreements , and that they have negotiated collective agreements that included phased retirement for many of their members . in canada , one expert reported that phased retirement was most common in fields that are highly unionized , because canadian unions wanted to increase flexibility for members to gradually decrease work , but also receive a pension payment .