pub . 111-203 , § 165 ( i ) ( 1 ) ( a ) , 124 stat . 1376 , 1430 ( 2010 ) ( codified at 12 u.s.c . the comprehensive capital analysis and review is an annual assessment by the federal reserve of the internal capital planning process and capital adequacy of large , complex u.s. bank holding companies . ensure that we , in all material respects , used the data in a similar manner and for similar purposes . for a more detailed discussion of the scope and methodology , please see appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from march 2013 to october 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings based on our audit objectives . the decision to provide substantial amounts of funding to the auto industry — more than 12 percent of all authorized tarp funds — and to accept equity in the companies in return for some of the assistance reflects treasury's view of the automotive industry's importance to the u.s. economy . according to treasury officials , treasury provided assistance not simply because of the industry's importance , but because of the severity of the crisis and the desire to prevent significant disruption to the economy that would have resulted from uncontrolled liquidations of chrysler and gm . to help stabilize the industry and avoid economic disruptions , treasury disbursed $79.7 billion through aifp from december 2008 through june 2009 . the majority of the assistance was used to support two automakers , chrysler and gm , during restructuring , along with their automotive finance companies , chrysler financial and gmac . in july 2009 , treasury outlined guiding principles for the investments made to the auto industry , including: exiting its investments as soon as practicable in a timely and orderly manner that minimizes financial market and economic impact ; protecting taxpayer investment and maximizing overall investment returns within competing constraints ; improving the strength and viability of gm and chrysler so that they can contribute to economic growth and jobs without government involvement ; and managing its ownership stake in a hands - off , commercial manner , including voting its shares only on core governance issues , such as the selection of a company's board of directors and major corporation events or transactions . gm is one of the world's largest automotive companies and does business in more than 120 countries worldwide . as of december 31 , 2012 , it employed 213,000 workers worldwide and marketed vehicles through a network of independent retailers totaling 20,754 dealers . in north america , gm manufactures and markets the following brands: buick , cadillac , chevrolet , and gmc . treasury provided a $13.4 billion loan in december 2008 to the old gm to fund working capital.the purchase of additional ownership interests in a rights offering by gmac .