we visited two schools in each district we visited . unless otherwise noted , differences made between groups in these tables are not statistically significant at p - value less than 0.05 . in addition to the contact above , elizabeth morrison ( assistant director ) , theresa lo ( analyst - in - charge ) , hedieh rahmanou fusfield , and michael pahr made significant contributions to this report . steven putansu , dae park , and shana wallace assisted with the data analysis and methodology . alexander galuten provided legal support . james bennett assisted with graphics . susannah compton and jessica orr assisted in report development . student participation on sports teams varies by disability . see appendix i for additional information on our methodology . we conducted this performance audit from june 2009 through june 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . new jersey passed a much less detailed law in august 2009 that directs the new jersey state interscholastic athletic association to establish interscholastic adapted athletics for students with visual impairments or physical disabilities who are participating in an adapted athletic program developed by a school district . the new jersey state interscholastic athletic association must require coaches of adapted athletics to receive training specific to that program but the law does not outline other requirements . officials from several districts and state athletic associations said they generally lacked information that would help them provide extracurricular athletic opportunities for students with disabilities . for instance , a number of district officials said coaches do not receive training specifically on how to work with students with disabilities . some parents we spoke with said that coaches who do not have such training can be overly focused on winning and fail to fully include students with disabilities on their teams . other parents noted that coaches are rarely at iep meetings , and one parent in minnesota told us that a coach improperly removed her child from a team for being academically ineligible without considering the student's iep . additionally , some states and districts lacked information on how to implement new adapted athletic programs for students with disabilities . for example , while the florida high school athletic association planned to initiate a wheelchair track event in the coming year , state and district officials we spoke with said they had questions about how eligibility would be determined and how to provide the equipment needed for these students to participate . other state athletic associations we interviewed were hesitant to consider offering adapted athletic programs because they did not know how competitive events would be held or how teams would be formed . further , some districts lacked information and clarity regarding their responsibilities to provide opportunities under section 504 for students with disabilities who want to participate in extracurricular athletics equal to those provided to other students .