contaminants . information is needed on how to manage the contaminants that are found in the algal cultivation water and how any resulting wastewater should be handled . uncertainty also exists regarding the water supply impacts of converting feedstocks into biofuels . biorefineries require water for processing the fuel and need to draw from existing water resources . water consumed in the corn - ethanol conversion process has declined over time with improved equipment and energy efficient design , according to a 2009 argonne national laboratory study , and is currently estimated at 3 gallons of water required for each gallon of ethanol produced . however , the primary source of freshwater for most existing corn ethanol plants is from local groundwater aquifers and some of these aquifers are not readily replenished . for the conversion of cellulosic feedstocks , the amount of water consumed is less defined and will depend on the process and on technological advancements that improve the efficiency with which water is used . current estimates range from 1.9 to 5.9 gallons of water , depending on the technology used . some experts we spoke with said that greater research is needed on how to manage the full water needs of biorefineries and reduce these needs further . similar to current and next generation feedstock cultivation , additional research is also needed to better understand the impact of biorefinery withdrawals on aquifers and to consider potential resource strains when siting these facilities . our work to date also indicates that additional research is needed on the storage and distribution of biofuels . ethanol is highly corrosive and poses a risk of damage to pipelines , and underground and above - ground storage tanks , which could in turn lead to releases to the environment that may contaminate groundwater , among other issues . these leaks can be the result of biofuel blends being stored in incompatible tank systems — those that have not been certified to handle fuel blends containing more than 10 percent ethanol . while epa currently has some research under way , additional study is needed into the compatibility of higher fuel blends , such as those containing 15 percent ethanol , with the existing fueling infrastructure . to overcome potential compatibility issues , future research is needed on other conversion technologies that can be used to produce renewable and advanced fuels that are capable of being used in the existing infrastructure . in our work to date , we have found ( 1 ) the use of advanced cooling technologies can reduce freshwater use at thermoelectric power plants , but federal data may not fully capture this industry change ; ( 2 ) the use of alternative water sources can also reduce freshwater use , but federal data may not systematically capture this change ; and ( 3 ) federal research under way is focused on examining efforts to reduce the use of freshwater in thermoelectric power plants . advanced cooling technologies offer the promise to reduce freshwater use by thermoelectric power plants . unlike traditional cooling technologies that use water to cool the steam in power plants , advanced cooling technologies carry out all or part of the cooling process using air .