1 to implement the executive order . the executive order and the isoo directive stipulate a number of specific responsibilities expected of federal agencies , including dod . examples of responsibilities are promulgating internal regulations ; establishing and maintaining security education and self - inspection programs ; conducting periodic declassification reviews ; and committing sufficient resources to facilitate effective information security operations . the executive order and the isoo directive also require classifiers to apply standard markings to classified information . for example , originally classified records must include the overall classification as well as portion or paragraph marking , a “classified by” line to identify the original classifier , a reason for classification , and a “declassify on” date line . executive order 12958 , as amended , states that information shall be declassified when it no longer meets the standards for classification . classification decisions can be either original or derivative . original classification is the initial determination that information requires protection against unauthorized disclosure in the interest of national security . an original classification decision typically results in the creation of a security classification guide , which is used by derivative classifiers and identifies what information should be protected , at what level , and for how long . derivative classification is the incorporation , paraphrasing , or generation of information in new form that is already classified , and marking it accordingly . in 2004 , 1,059 senior - level officials in dod were designated original classification authorities , and as such , they were the only individuals permitted to classify information in the first instance . according to the isoo director , adequate training , self - inspections , and documentation are essential elements of a robust information security program and their absence can impede effective information sharing and possibly endanger national security . as required by executive order 12958 , ousd ( i ) issued a regulation in january 1997 , information security program , outlining dod's information security program . this regulation does not specifically identify oversight responsibilities for ousd ( i ) , but instead decentralizes the management of the information security program to the heads of dod components . consequently , according to the dod regulation , each dod component is responsible for establishing and maintaining security training , conducting self - inspections , and issuing documentation to implement ousd ( i ) guidance and security classification guides . ousd ( i ) exercises little oversight over how the components manage their programs . as a result , ousd ( i ) does not directly monitor components' compliance with federal and dod training , self - inspection , and documentation requirements stipulated in executive order 12958 , as amended ; the isoo directive ; and the dod regulation . for example , ousd ( i ) does not require components to report on any aspects of the security management program . also , ousd ( i ) does not conduct or oversee self - inspections , nor does it confirm whether self - inspections have been performed or review self - inspection findings .