however , this is not the case . ( see app . if delays continue , a stacking of trades such as we described at the subcommittee's november hearing could hold up finish work , such as drywall or ceiling installation , electrical and plumbing work , plastering , or floor stone installation . such a situation could also increase the risk of accidents and injuries . the cvc team has also identified “trade stacking” as a high risk . the sequence 2 contractor acknowledges the risk , but said that it has structured its schedule to avoid the risk and plans to monitor progress closely to avoid problems . we acknowledge that these steps can be helpful ; however , the more the wall stone schedule slips , the greater is the likelihood of “trade stacking,” since more and more work will have to be done in less time to meet the schedule . aoc's construction management contractor agrees that this is a serious potential problem . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the pace of installation is also an issue . the sequence 2 contractor has recently increased the number of stone masons working on the project and has begun meeting the installation targets in its work plan . however , if the wall stone installation targets are not achieved , whether because the masons are less productive than planned or work spaces are not ready for stonework to begin , completion delays are likely . the sequence 2 contractor has already encountered work spaces in the service level , the orientation lobby , and the east front that were not available for stonework because concrete was out of tolerance or masonry walls were not ready for wall stone to be hung . finally , the sequence 2 contractor still needs to install about 120,000 square feet of floor stone in the cvc and could have problems meeting the scheduled completion dates if not enough masons are available , the amount of floor space available is insufficient because other finish work is not done , or other trades are working in the areas where floor stone is to be laid . as of february 10 , aoc had not received a floor stone installation plan requested from the sequence 2 contractor , but the sequence 2 contractor said that it intends to finish the plan soon . stacking of trades could delay completion . continued delays , particularly in wall stone installation , could adversely affect the sequence 2 contractor's ability to accomplish all of the required finish work on schedule . the sequence 2 contractor has been making progress relative to its current plan for installing wall stone in the auditorium and the orientation lobby , but according to the current project schedule , wall stone installation is delayed in other areas , such as the east front , the great hall , and the orientation theaters' exterior walls .