mr . chairmen and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the committee and subcommittee have at this time . for future contacts regarding this testimony , please contact steven j. sebastian at ( 202 ) 512-3406 or sebastians@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . these figures are shown in table 1 . of the $58 billion in unpaid payroll taxes as of september 30 , 2007 , irs categorized about $4 billion ( 7 percent ) as going through irs's initial notification process . because irs has made the collection of payroll taxes one of its highest priorities , once a case completes the notification process , it is generally sent to irs's field collections staff for face - to - face collection action . however , irs does not have sufficient resources to immediately begin collection actions against all of its high - priority cases . as a result , irs holds a large number of cases in a queue awaiting assignment to a revenue officer in the field . about $7 billion ( 12 percent ) of the unpaid payroll tax amount was being worked on by irs revenue officers for collection , and about $9 billion ( 16 percent ) was in a queue awaiting assignment for collection action . most of the unpaid payroll tax inventory — $30 billion ( 52 percent ) — was classified as currently uncollectible by irs . irs classifies tax debt cases as currently not collectible for several reasons , including ( 1 ) the business owing the taxes is defunct , ( 2 ) the business is insolvent after bankruptcy , or ( 3 ) the business is experiencing financial hardship . of those unpaid payroll tax cases irs has classified as currently not collectible , almost 70 percent were as a result of a business being defunct . much of the unpaid payroll tax debt has been outstanding for several years . as reflected in figure 2 , our analysis of irs records shows that over 60 percent of the unpaid payroll taxes was owed for tax periods from 2002 and prior years . prompt collection action is vital because , as our previous work has shown , as unpaid taxes age , the likelihood of collecting all or a portion of the amount owed decreases . further , the continued accrual of interest and penalties on the outstanding federal taxes can , over time , eclipse the original tax obligation . additionally , as discussed previously , irs is statutorily limited in the length of time it has to collect unpaid taxes — generally 10 years from the date the tax debt is assessed .