contractor charges . nrc sometimes hires a commercial contractor or other federal agency , such as the department of energy ( referred to collectively as contractors ) , to perform services that are directly attributable to a licensee , such as reviewing license applications . nrc's oig also found that agency guidance related to the invoice review process was outdated and did not provide staff with sufficient criteria for verifying information contained in contractor invoices . without such criteria , nrc could not ensure that it was evaluating contractor charges consistently and appropriately before billing those charges to licensees . in 2015 , nrc provided training to staff who manage contracts , which , according to nrc officials , resulted in an immediate decrease in associated billing errors . nrc also revised its guidance to clarify responsibilities , procedures , and instructions for reviewing and approving contractor invoices . nrc's oig and internal reviews identified conditions that made the quarterly validation step in the billing process challenging for staff to perform and that led to inconsistent validation procedures among program and regional offices . nrc has taken or plans to take the following two actions to address these problems: improving validation reports . according to nrc documents , the quarterly validation reports contained billing data for all program and regional offices — sometimes amounting to more than 4,000 pages of data — and the reports did not have the sorting functionality or querying capability that would allow nrc staff to extract relevant information . staff in program and regional offices instead relied on manually generated reports to compile information they needed . additionally , according to the oig , the quarterly validation reports did not include sufficient detail on contractor charges for nrc's staff to properly review them . to address these problems , in 2014 nrc started providing the quarterly validation report in electronic spreadsheet format , which gave staff the sorting and filtering capabilities needed to extract data relevant to their respective reviews and eliminated the need for manually generated reports , according to nrc staff . further , nrc began providing validation information for contractor charges in a separate report . the new validation report for contractor charges has more detailed information and specific instructions for nrc staff for verifying the accuracy of the charges . standardizing the quarterly validation process . licensee reviews and pays invoice: licensees review the invoice and may pay the invoice , request that nrc review the fees assessed , or dispute the fees . these billing disputes generally start informally with the licensee contacting nrc . according to nrc staff , most disputes are handled informally and generally entail explanations of the agency's billing or licensing policies . if nrc staff are unable to resolve a licensee's concern informally , the licensee can write a letter to the chief financial officer , which begins a formal dispute process . according to nrc staff , to address a licensee's concerns with the charges , the office of the chief financial officer reviews the charges on the invoice and may involve the relevant regional or program offices to determine whether the charges are valid for the work performed .