( see app . ii for details about the three bid protests. ) some district officials where the solicitations that were protested originated said that they are concerned that such legal challenges could resurface in the future — jeopardizing other contracts that use the new clause and delaying the award of these contracts . moreover , officials in one district that has not used the new continuing contracts clause since it became available told us that the fact that the new clause has never been published for comment constituted their major reason for not using it . although congress and gao have raised a number of concerns in recent years about the corps' use of continuing contracts , of particular note has been the agency's lack of accurate information on the number and value of contracts that it has awarded . in 2006 , we specifically recommended that the corps establish a system to track its use of continuing contracts , and while the agency agreed with this recommendation , it has failed to implement it . as a result , the process and guidance it relies on to provide quarterly information to congress are ineffective and continue to generate information that is neither complete nor accurate . moreover , the corps developed and implemented its new continuing contracts clause over 3 years ago , but its use of the clause does not comply with the publication requirements of the ofpp act . the corps' position that its use of the new continuing contracts clause while “pursuing publication” of the clause in the federal register satisfies the requirements of the act is unpersuasive . while we understand that the corps has been seeking approval to publish the clause since 2006 , and that it is unable to publish the clause without approval from the army and dod , the statute's publication requirement and its waiver provision clearly permit temporary use of such a clause only if it is actually published in the federal register for public comment . the corps' use of the clause prior to publication does not comply with the statute's requirements and may leave the corps susceptible to further legal challenges . to ensure that the corps provides accurate and reliable reports to congress on its use of continuing contracts and complies with federal procurement law , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the chief of engineers and commanding general of the u.s. army corps of engineers to take the following three actions: establish adequate internal controls to ensure accurate and complete information is collected and reported to congress on the use of continuing contracts . suspend the corps' use of the new continuing contracts clause until it has been published in the federal register , in accordance with 41 u.s.c . provide regular updates to congress on the progress of these actions . we provided a draft of this report to the department of defense for official review and comment . the department concurred with two of our recommendations and did not concur with one . specifically , the department concurred with our recommendations that the corps establish adequate internal controls to ensure accurate and complete information is collected and reported to congress on the use of continuing contracts ; and provide regular updates to congress .