may be warranted . these incidents are categorized by type . figure 2 shows the categories into which incidents reported in fiscal year 2013 fell . moreover , a significant number of security incidents reported by agencies have involved pii . figure 3 shows that the number of incidents involving pii for fiscal years 2009 through 2013 increased over 140 percent . data breaches at federal agencies have received considerable publicity and raised concerns about the protection of pii at those agencies . most notably , in may 2006 , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) reported that computer equipment containing pii on about 26.5 million veterans and active duty members of the military was stolen from the home of a va employee . more recent examples of incidents that compromised individuals' personal information further highlight the impact that such incidents can have: in july 2013 , hackers stole a variety of pii on more than 104,000 individuals from a department of energy system . types of data stolen included social security numbers , birth dates and locations , bank account numbers and security questions and answers . according to the department's inspector general , the combined costs of assisting affected individuals and lost productivity — due to federal employees being granted administrative leave to correct issues stemming from the breach — could be more than $3.7 million . in may 2012 , the federal retirement thrift investment board ( frtib ) reported a sophisticated cyber attack on the computer of a contractor that provided services to the thrift savings plan . as a result of the attack , pii associated with approximately 123,000 plan participants was accessed . us - cert officials also noted that the vast majority of pii - related data breaches are not cybersecurity related — that is , they do not involve attacks on or threats to government systems or networks . according to frtib , the information included 43,587 individuals' names , addresses , and social security numbers , and 79,614 individuals' social security numbers and other pii - related information . finally , we reported that seven of the eight agencies in our review had not requested technical assistance from us - cert when pii data breaches occurred . dhs officials said that us - cert is not equipped to assist agencies in remediating paper - based incidents , and agencies agreed that issues they encounter in dealing with pii breaches are generally best addressed by agency general counsel staff or privacy officers . dhs's privacy office has developed guidance that addresses agencies' obligations to protect pii and procedures to follow when a suspected pii incident occurs , but this is geared more toward developing agency response capabilities in general rather than supporting decision - making related to specific incidents . in our report , we recommended that omb revise its guidance on federal agencies' response to pii - related data breaches to include ( 1 ) guidance on notifying affected individuals based on a determination of the level of risk ; ( 2 ) criteria for determining whether to offer assistance , such as credit monitoring , to affected individuals ; and ( 3 ) revised requirements for reporting pii - related breaches to us - cert .