( app . iii provides examples of selected impairments from va's disability rating schedule. ) as figure 1 shows , the service - connected impairments of iu beneficiaries include a wide range of medical conditions . multiple disabilities will result in a combined degree of disability , which is expressed as a percentage and represents the overall effect on a veteran of all his or her service - connected disabilities . ( app . iv explains va's process for compiling combined ratings. ) va's iu determinations are subject to appeal to the board of veterans' appeals and subsequently the u.s. court of appeals for veterans claims . va rating specialists initiate iu evaluations when a veteran submits an application for iu benefits or his or her application for compensation benefits contains evidence of unemployability . in all cases , before granting benefits , rating specialists must evaluate the impact that the veteran's service - connected disability has had on his or her ability to perform substantially gainful employment , which for decision - making purposes is generally interpreted as employment that is more than “marginal employment.” va generally defines marginal employment as employment for which the worker's annual earned income is at or below the poverty threshold for one person established by the u.s. census bureau — $10,160 for 2005 . however , marginal employment may also be held to exist , on a case by case basis , when a veteran maintaining employment at a sheltered workshop or family business receives annual earnings above the poverty threshold . va rating specialists are to rely on various sources of information for the evidence needed to support such a determination , including an employment and earnings history furnished by the claimant , basic employment information from the claimant's employers ( if any ) , and a medical exam report from vha . at the time of our study , va did not report or maintain separate data on iu expenditures . we estimated va's annual added expenditures due to iu benefits for 1996 to 2005 from monthly internal va reports showing expenditures on the disability compensation program . using data in the september report for each year , we computed average monthly payments due to iu benefits for 1996 to 2005 , annualized this amount , and factored in the number of beneficiaries to estimate total expenditures on iu benefits for each year . figure 6 shows the growth in iu expenditures from 1996 to 2005 . to illustrate the value of iu benefits , we calculated the present value of the added benefits due to iu that would be available over a lifetime to veterans who begin to receive iu benefits at different ages and with schedular disability ratings of 60- , 70- , 80- , and 90-percent . we chose the ages of 20 , 25 , 35 , 45 , 55 , 65 , and 75 to illustrate the added value of iu benefits over a wide range of ages at which veterans could begin to receive such benefits . many of these problems remain to be addressed . you asked us to examine the criteria va uses in determining initial eligibility for iu benefits and va's efforts to enforce ongoing eligibility .