agency cio authority enhancements . cios at covered agencies are required to ( 1 ) approve the it budget requests of their respective agencies , ( 2 ) certify that it investments are adequately implementing incremental development , as defined in capital planning guidance issued by omb , ( 3 ) review and approve contracts for it , and ( 4 ) approve the appointment of other agency employees with the title of cio . government - wide software purchasing program . the general services administration is to develop a strategic sourcing initiative to enhance government - wide acquisition and management of software . in doing so , the law requires that , to the maximum extent practicable , the general services administration should allow for the purchase of a software license agreement that is available for use by all executive branch agencies as a single user . expanding upon fitara , the making electronic government accountable by yielding tangible efficiencies act of 2016 , or the “megabyte act,” further enhanced cios' management of software licenses by requiring agency cios to establish an agency software licensing policy and a comprehensive software license inventory to track and maintain licenses , among other requirements . in june 2015 , omb released guidance describing how agencies are to implement fitara . this guidance is intended to , among other things: assist agencies in aligning their it resources with statutory establish government - wide it management controls that will meet the law's requirements , while providing agencies with flexibility to adapt to unique agency processes and requirements ; clarify the cio's role and strengthen the relationship between agency cios and bureau cios ; and strengthen cio accountability for it costs , schedules , performance , and security . in our draft report that is currently with va for comments , we discuss the history of va's efforts to modernize its health information system , vista . these four efforts — healthevet , the integrated electronic health record ( iehr ) , vista evolution , and the electronic health record modernization ( ehrm ) — reflect varying approaches that the department has considered to achieve a modernized health care system over the course of nearly two decades . the modernization efforts are described as follows . in 2001 , va undertook its first vista modernization project , the healthevet initiative , with the goals of standardizing the department's health care system and eliminating the approximately 130 different systems used by its field locations at that time . healthevet was scheduled to be fully implemented by 2018 at a total estimated development and deployment cost of about $11 billion . as part of the effort , the department had planned to develop or enhance specific areas of system functionality through six projects , which were to be completed between 2006 and 2012 . specifically , these projects were to provide capabilities to support va's health data repository and patient financial services system , as well as the laboratory , pharmacy , imaging , and scheduling functions . in june 2008 , we reported that the department had made progress on the healthevet initiative , but noted issues with project planning and governance .