104-104 , 110 stat . after 4 years of work , ieee's standards - setting committee has made considerable progress in developing draft standards . agreement appears to have been reached on many of the important issues , including standardizing the properties of the mixture that simulates human tissue and the testing positions of the phone . the industry has prevailed in this and other suits that have been brought . how has the federal government set the radiofrequency exposure limit for mobile phones and how does it ensure compliance with it ? oet officials noted that information on sars is provided on its “rf safety program” web page , which also contains instructions on using the equipment authorization database . however , we found that this information does not provide adequate consumer - oriented information on radiofrequency exposure and sar issues . in addition , consumers may access the database directly , without first accessing any other fcc material , because organizations outside of fcc are providing the database's web address to consumers . for example , ctia announced last summer that all new mobile phones receiving ctia certification after august 1 , 2000 , would include labeling on the outside of the phone's box that includes both the phone's fcc identification number and the internet address for the equipment authorization database . these ctia - certified phones will also include text material inside the boxes that provides each phone's sar number and information on radiofrequency exposure issues . is no scientific evidence that proves wireless phone usage can cause cancer , increased blood pressure , memory loss , or other health problems,” though research is continuing . when they were asked to comment on it , oet officials shared our concern that this characterization could be misleading , because it implies that the health issue is settled . we also pointed out that the bureau's web page did not direct consumers to information resources on radiofrequency exposure issues found elsewhere on the fcc web site , such as oet's documents . after we brought these issues to the attention of officials in the consumer information bureau and oet , they began discussions to improve this situation . by the time we concluded our review , the bureau had created web links between its consumer web page and oet's rf safety web page and began working with oet to revise the market sense brochure . though these steps to improve coordination are in the right direction , there is still a need for a consumer - oriented fcc document that provides lay readers with clear , concise , and accurate information on radiofrequency exposure and sar issues . scientific research to date does not demonstrate that the radiofrequency energy emitted from mobile phones has adverse health effects , but the findings of some studies have raised questions indicating the need for further investigation . the u.s. government sponsors and supports some research efforts on mobile phone health issues , but wider research efforts are under way internationally . the world health organization has identified priorities for research on mobile phone health issues , and a variety of organizations in europe , the united states , and elsewhere , have begun efforts to address these research needs .