discretionary . for seven of the eight discretionary grantees we reviewed , some performance measure data had not been approved by the project officer in cmhs's performance measure data tracking system . cmhs officials said that project officers are expected to record their approval of performance measure data in cmhs's performance measure data tracking system . for the eighth discretionary grantee we reviewed , the grantee had not submitted any performance measure data since the grant was awarded in july 2013 . according to cmhs officials , the performance measure data did not appear to have been approved because cmhs's performance measure tracking system locked , meaning that it did not allow the project officer to enter his or her approval , to enforce project officer deadlines . in some of these cases , project officers used other methods to document their approval of performance measure data , such as hand - written notes . however , according to officials , these notes are generally stored at project officers' workstations and cannot be easily accessed by other cmhs officials , making it difficult for a third party to follow the trail of project officer oversight and for other officials to access the documents if the project officer is unavailable . in other cases , there was no documentation that the project officer approved this performance measure data . we found that there were a variety of reasons why documentation used to oversee grantees was missing or not readily available . for example , officials told us that in some cases they lack program - specific guidance for the processes officials use to document their oversight of mhbg and paimi grantees . for the mhbg program , officials told us that they did not have program - specific guidance for the period of our review that indicated how project officers and the branch chief are to document their approval of the application if there are technological problems with the application review system . for the paimi program , officials told us that they have some program - specific guidance ; however , officials told us that there is no written guidance with instructions for how officials are to calculate the paimi aggregate performance measure data from the data submitted by grantees . further , there is no written guidance that describes how this information should be maintained . for its discretionary grant programs , cmhs does have program - specific guidance that indicates how project officers should review some performance measure data submitted by grantees ; however , this guidance does not indicate how project officers should approve performance measure data after the system locks . cmhs officials said that some grantees have difficulty meeting the requirements of their grants because they serve high need populations . however , most of the problems we identified were related to documentation that is to be completed by cmhs officials for grants management and not due to issues with the grantees . without proper documentation of information used to oversee grantees that is readily available , cmhs runs the risk that it does not have complete and accurate information needed to provide sufficient oversight of its grant programs .