the south atlantic council has revised few allocations more than once . specifically , they revised allocations for two fish stocks twice and for one , dolphin , three times . for example , the council first established an allocation for dolphin ( also known as mahimahi , dolphinfish , and dorado ) in 2003 . we also reviewed available documents on those steps . to determine the extent to which the councils have developed processes to help guide their allocation reviews , we obtained documents on the councils' plans for future reviews of mixed - use fisheries allocations . these documents include their council policies for specific criteria that will trigger reviews and available documents on their plans for when and how they plan to conduct those reviews . we compared this information with criteria in nmfs' allocations policy and guidance , the agency's operational guidelines for processes under the magnuson - stevens act and associated regional operating agreements , and the framework for internal controls established by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission . this framework is recognized as a leading model for designing , implementing , and conducting internal control and assessing the effectiveness of internal control . in addition , we interviewed or received written comments from nmfs officials and council staff and members to obtain information on how the planned allocation reviews may affect their workloads and priorities . we conducted this performance audit from april 2019 to march 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . nmfs and the eight regional fishery management councils are responsible for managing approximately 460 fish stocks in federal waters , as shown in figure 1 . nmfs has overall responsibility for collecting data on fish stocks and ocean conditions and for generating scientific information for the conservation , management , and use of marine resources . for instance , in september 2019 nmfs issued procedural guidance to help ensure that survey estimates from the marine recreational information program are based upon the best scientific information available and to promote nationwide consistency in collecting data and estimating recreational catch . nmfs is also working with gulf of mexico states to evaluate the critical assumptions made by each state's data collection program and to help ensure that the states' recreational catch estimates are comparable across years and with other states . nmfs officials said this makes it challenging for councils to incorporate the information into their allocation reviews for specific fish stocks . the officials said that given current resource limitations and limited data available , it would be difficult to generate social indicators that are specific to fish stocks . in some instances , nmfs has some stock - specific information at the community level for the commercial fishing sector . they said that it will be difficult to use ecosystem models in allocation decisions until such models are more fully developed .