you requested that we review fltcip . in this report , we describe ( 1 ) factors affecting insurance carriers' interest in contracting to insure fltcip enrollees and administer the program ; ( 2 ) key changes made to fltcip since the second contract was awarded ; ( 3 ) the benefit options offered to enrollees who faced a premium increase and the options they selected ; ( 4 ) how actuarial assumptions used to set premiums for fltcip have changed since the program's inception ; and ( 5 ) opm's oversight of fltcip's actuarial assumptions and experience , and its communications with current and prospective enrollees . factors related to fltcip's history generally detracted from carriers' interest in the program at the time of opm's solicitation for the second contract and had the second most significant influence on carriers' interest in fltcip at that time . when asked about how fltcip's history affected the carrier's interest at the time of the second contract , officials from four of the carriers noted that as a result of the program's history — including the premiums charged for the benefits offered during the first contract period and the actuarial experience of the program — a premium increase was warranted . these officials raised concerns about having to implement a premium increase for fltcip . specifically , officials from three of the carriers , none of which were involved in the program's first contract , raised concerns that implementing a premium increase as the program's new carrier would result in negative implications for the carrier's reputation . additionally , officials from two carriers told us that opm's 25 percent cap on premium increases was a concern because they estimated that a larger premium increase was warranted . four carriers also cited concerns about transitioning the program from other carriers . specifically , officials from some of these carriers stated that transitions are difficult for the smallest programs , and the large size and complexity of fltcip would add to other challenges related to transitioning the program . in addition , officials from two carriers explained that their concerns over transitioning fltcip were linked to taking on the risk of insuring a population that the carrier had no involvement in underwriting . premiums that have already been paid by those who lapse generally remain with the carrier and are used to subsidize the cost of future claims by other enrollees .  the mortality assumption summarizes the expected death rate of the enrollee population , by age . similar to the lapse assumption , mortality reduces future liabilities without affecting assets .  the morbidity assumption reflects the amount of claims costs expected for enrollees , by age , and accounts for the portion of enrollees of each age who file a claim and the duration of those claims . appendix i: influence of carriers' business strategies on their interest in the federal long term care insurance program ( fltcip ) . to summarize changes in the cost of long - term care services from 2002 through 2010 , we analyzed consumer price index data from the bureau of labor statistics on changes in the cost of nursing home care and home care .