gao - 08-112 . washington , d.c.: february 14 , 2008 . veterans' disability benefits: claims processing challenges persist , while va continues to take steps to address them . gao - 08-473t . washington , d.c.: february 14 , 2008 . identifying the right amount of training is crucial . an overly burdensome training requirement may needlessly take staff away from essential claims processing duties , while too little training could contribute to processing and quality errors . in addition to lacking a clear process for assessing the appropriateness of the 80-hour training requirement , vba also has no policy outlining consequences for individual staff who do not complete the requirement . because it does not hold staff accountable , vba is missing an opportunity to clearly convey to staff the importance of managing their time to meet training requirements , as well as production and accuracy goals . in fiscal year 2008 , vba implemented a new learning management system that allows it to track the training hours completed by individual staff . although vba now has the capacity to monitor staff's completion of the training requirement , the agency has not indicated any specific consequences for staff who fail to meet the requirement . va's performance management system for claims processors is consistent with a number of accepted practices for effective performance management systems in the public sector . for example , the elements used to evaluate individual claims processors — such as quality , productivity , and workload management — appear to be generally aligned with vba's organizational performance measures . aligning individual and organizational performance measures helps staff see the connection between their daily work activities and their organization's goals and the importance of their roles and responsibilities in helping to achieve these goals . va also requires supervisors to provide claims processors with regular feedback on their performance , and it has actively involved its employees and other stakeholders in developing its performance management system . however , va's system may not be consistent with a key accepted practice — clear differentiation among staff performance levels . we have previously reported that , in order to provide meaningful distinctions in performance for experienced staff , agencies should preferably use rating systems with four or five performance categories . if staff members' ratings are concentrated in just one or two of multiple categories , the system may not be making meaningful distinctions in performance . systems that do not make meaningful distinctions in performance fail to give ( 1 ) employees the constructive feedback they need to improve and ( 2 ) managers the information they need to reward top performers and address performance issues . va's performance appraisal system has the potential to clearly differentiate among staff performance levels . each fiscal year , regional offices give their staff a rating on each individual performance element: exceptional , fully successful , or less than fully successful . for example , a staff member might be rated exceptional on quality , fully successful on productivity , and so forth . some elements are considered critical elements , and some are considered noncritical .