pub . and additional findings or recommendations , as appropriate . the air force has taken actions to expand its knowledge about eelv since our 2011 audit work was completed and we look forward to assessing this progress . quality is paramount to the success of u.s. space and missile defense programs due to their complexity , the environment they operate in , and the high degree of accuracy and precision needed for their operations . yet in recent years , many programs have experienced difficulties with quality workmanship and parts . less visible problems have led to unnecessary repair , scrap , rework , and stoppage ; long delays ; and millions of dollars in cost growth . in some instances , entire missions have been endangered . as a result , we assessed the extent to which such problems affect related programs , their causes , and what initiatives have been undertaken in response . we found that parts quality problems had affected all 21 programs we reviewed , in some cases contributing to significant cost overruns and schedule delays associated with electronic versus mechanical parts or materials . we also found that if quality problems were discovered late in the development cycle they had more significant cost and schedule consequences: in one such case , an additional cost of at least $250 million and a 2-year launch delay . we found several causes of these problems: poor workmanship , undocumented and untested manufacturing processes , poor control of those processes and materials and failure to prevent contamination , poor part design , design complexity , and an inattention to manufacturing risks . ineffective supplier management also resulted in concerns about whether subcontractors and contractors met program requirements . recognition of these difficulties has spurred agencies to adopt new policies , but they were still in early stages of implementation at the time of our review . post - policy programs are not yet mature enough for parts problems to be apparent . to address current and future problems , agencies and industry have begun to collect and share information , develop testing guidance and criteria , manage subcontractors , and mitigate problems , although their impact has yet to be determined . in any event , significant barriers hinder such efforts , including broader acquisition management problems , workforce gaps , diffuse leadership in the national security space community , the government's decreasing influence on the electronics parts market , and an increase in counterfeited parts . our reports over the past decade have made recommendations for addressing these broader barriers , such as stabilizing requirements before beginning product development , separating technology development from product development , and strengthening leadership . the dod is in the process of adopting these recommendations . because space agencies and the missile defense agency were undertaking additional actions to address parts quality problems and they had recently established a broad range of coordination mechanisms , we recommended that the community undertake periodic assessments of progress being made to address parts quality problems . the agencies generally agreed with our recommendation .