these observations are not generalizable . we also interviewed bureau headquarters officials to discuss the use of management reports for monitoring and overseeing the operation . we reviewed workload estimates , address lister productivity rates , and hiring information for each test site in order to report how many housing units were included at each test site , how many addresses the bureau expected to canvass per hour , and how many people they needed to hire . to assess the reliability of these data , we reviewed available documentation and interviewed knowledgeable officials . we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives . we also met periodically with bureau headquarters staff to discuss progress of the operation . we conducted this performance audit from july 2017 to june 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the bureau's address canvassing operation updates its address list and maps , which are the foundation of the decennial census . an accurate address list both identifies all households that are to receive a notice by mail requesting participation in the census ( by internet , phone , or mailed - in questionnaire ) and serves as the control mechanism for following up with households that fail to respond to the initial request . precise maps are critical for counting the population in the proper locations — the basis of congressional apportionment and redistricting . our prior work has shown that developing an accurate address list is challenging — in part because people can reside in unconventional dwellings , such as converted garages , basements , and other forms of hidden housing . for example , as shown in figure 1 , what appears to be a single - family house could contain an apartment , as suggested by its two doorbells . during address canvassing , the bureau verifies that its master address list and maps are accurate to ensure the tabulation for all housing units and group quarters is correct . for the 2010 census , the address canvassing operation mobilized almost 150,000 field workers to canvass almost every street in the united states and puerto rico to update the bureau's address list and map data — and in 2012 reported the cost at nearly $450 million . the cost of going door - to - door in 2010 , along with the emerging availability of imagery data , led the bureau to explore an approach for 2020 address canvassing that would allow for fewer boots on the ground . traditionally , the bureau went door - to - door to homes across the country to verify addresses . this “in - field address canvassing” is a labor - intensive and expensive operation .