no recommendations . not applicable . main issues: in fiscal year 2000 , state's average review time for license applications was 46 days while commerce's average was 50 days . variables identified as affecting application processing times include the commodity to be exported and the extent of interagency coordination . both departments approved more than 80 percent of license applications during fiscal year 2000 . export controls: regulatory change needed to comply with missile technology licensing requirements ( may 31 , 2001 , gao - 01-530 ) background: concerned about missile proliferation , the united states and several major trading partners in 1987 created an international voluntary agreement , the missile technology control regime ( mtcr ) , to control the spread of missiles and their related technologies . congress passed the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1991 to fulfill the u.s. government's mtcr commitments . this act amended the export administration act of 1979 , which regulates the export of dual - use items , by requiring a license for all exports of controlled dual - use missile technologies to all countries . the national defense authorization act also amended the arms export control act , which regulates the export of military items , by providing the state department the discretion to require licenses or provide licensing exemptions for missile technology exports . our recommendations have not been implemented . however , the commerce department has a regulatory change pending that , once implemented , will require licenses for the export of dual - use missile technologies to canada . congress to specifically permit mtcr items to be exempted from licensing requirements . main issues: the state department's regulations require licenses for the exports of missile technology items to all countries — including canada , which is consistent with the national defense authorization act . however , the commerce department's export regulations are not consistent with the act as they do not require licenses for the export of controlled missile equipment and technology to canada . if commerce seeks a statutory change , revise the export administration regulations to comply with the current statute until such time as a statutory change occurs . export controls: clarification of jurisdiction for missile technology items needed ( oct. 9 , 2001 , gao - 02-120 ) background: the united states has committed to work with other countries through the mtcr to control the export of missile - related items . the regime is a voluntary agreement among member countries to limit missile proliferation and consists of common export policy guidelines and a list of items to be controlled . in 1990 , congress amended existing export control statutes to strengthen missile - related export controls consistent with u.s. commitments to the regime . under the amended statutes , the commerce department is required to place regime items that are dual - use on its list of controlled items . all other regime items are to appear on the state department's list of controlled items . jointly review the listing of items included on the mtcr list , determine the appropriate jurisdiction for those items , and revise their respective export control lists to ensure that proposed exports of regime items are subject to the appropriate review process .