categories do not exist for all diseases . rcdc also does not capture the funding for all diseases that nih studies . therefore , a project that is only minimally related to a particular category may not be included in the funding for that category because the description of the project does not adequately match the terms defining that category . nih officials told us that 3 to 5 percent of nih funded research projects do not appear in any rcdc category . some ics have their own systems that track and report funding within their research portfolios . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or kohnl@gao.gov . ( see app . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . to provide information on studies about the relationship between research funding and burden of disease at the national institutes of health ( nih ) and in other countries , we identified such studies relevant to nih through on - line searches and we provide information on the two most recent of the studies . extramural research accounted for more than 80 percent of nih's budget in fiscal year 2012 . this research is conducted at 2,500 universities , medical schools , research organizations , and companies who are awarded extramural research grants or extramural research and development contracts through nih's competitive process . twenty - four of the 27 ics fund extramural research projects , and these ics make final decisions on which extramural research projects to fund following a standard peer review process.what nih considers “unsolicited” research and research training projects for which applications are submitted in response to broad funding opportunity announcements that span the breadth of the nih mission . in addition , to encourage and stimulate research and the submission of research applications in specific areas , many ics will issue solicitations that are more narrow in scope in the form of , requests for applications , and requests for proposals . when reviewing applications for extramural research projects , nih follows a process of peer review , established by law.sequential levels of peer review . according to nih officials , the first level involves panels of experts to assess the scientific merit of the proposed science . the second level involves panels of experts and leaders of non - science fields including patient advocates that , in addition to scientific merit , also consider the ic's mission and strategic plan goals , public health needs , scientific opportunities , and portfolio balance . after nih's most ic extramural funding is provided for this peer review system has two peer review process is concluded , ic directors make extramural funding decisions . intramural research , which accounts for approximately 10 percent of nih's budget , is conducted by nih scientists in nih laboratories . this includes about 5,300 scientists and technical support staff who are employees , and another 5,000 young scientists at various stages of research training who come to nih for a few years to work as non - employee trainees , including 3,800 postdoctoral fellows .