no material weaknesses were reported . in this case , doe incurred a cost: it paid a total of $194.3 million in federal uranium assets for accelerated cleanup services . it allowed usec to retain cash from the sale of these assets as compensation for services usec provided to doe , services for which doe would otherwise have had to pay out of its appropriated funds . doing so violated the miscellaneous receipts statute . with regard to our estimate of the value of doe's depleted uranium tails , doe stated that the draft report did not include any source or backup information for our $4.2 billion estimate of the tails' value . doe's statement is incorrect . to develop an understanding of the impact that doe's uranium transactions might have on the market for uranium products , we also interviewed a wide range of uranium industry representatives . these representatives included officials from uranium trade associations ; startup and established mining companies ; converdyn's conversion facility in metropolis , illinois ; and usec's gaseous diffusion enrichment plant in paducah , kentucky . we also interviewed officials from selected utility companies operating commercial nuclear power plants , commodities brokers and traders , and market analysts . we visited two mining operations , a cameco corporation “in situ” uranium mine at smith ranch , wyoming , and the denison mines corporation underground mine and uranium milling facility near blanding , utah . finally , to determine the extent to which doe's uranium transactions were consistent with applicable federal law , we reviewed requirements of the atomic energy act , the usec privatization act and the miscellaneous receipts statute . we obtained and reviewed internal doe documentation authorizing uranium transactions and changing ownership of cylinders containing natural uranium to usec and to fluor - b&w portsmouth . we reviewed market impact analyses prepared by energy resources international , inc. , under contract with doe ; internal documents certifying that doe would receive fair market value for its natural uranium ; and secretarial determinations that uranium transactions would have no adverse impact on the uranium market and that the uranium was not needed for national security purposes . for information on how the uranium transactions were documented for accounting purposes , we also reviewed usec's annual 10-k report to the securities and exchange commission and interviewed usec and fluor - b&w portsmouth business and accounting officials . we conducted this performance audit from november 2010 through september 2011 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . finding uranium deposits unlike coal , which forms continuous seams in rock , uranium forms discrete , concentrated deposits distributed like the specks in blue cheese . uranium can be found by detecting the presence of radioactivity from the air , from the earth's surface , or by excavation . uranium mining regulation and startup the uranium mining industry is regulated by various federal and state authorities .