ongoing hostilities also contribute to increased claims . for example , according to va , the claim rate of veterans from ongoing hostilities is 35 percent . in addition , claims filed by veterans currently receiving compensation whose conditions have worsened contribute to increased claims . va anticipates that the number of reopened claims will increase as current disability benefit recipients — many of whom suffer from chronic progressive disabilities such as diabetes , mental illness , and cardiovascular disabilities — submit claims for increased benefits as they age and their conditions worsen . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the committee may have . for further information , please contact daniel bertoni at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or bertonid@gao.gov . also contributing to this statement were shelia drake , cynthia grant , joel green , lisa mcmillen , jessica orr , bryan rogowski , christine san , and walter vance . these centers currently process thousands of cases annually . such efforts may ultimately increase the timeliness and consistency of va's decisions ; however , va has not collected data to evaluate the effect of its workload redistribution efforts . we plan to issue a final report at a later date . in summary , over the past several fiscal years , va disability compensation claims workloads at both the initial and appellate levels have improved in some areas and worsened in others . for example , at the initial level , the number of claims va completes annually increased about 60 percent from fiscal year 1999 to fiscal year 2008 . however , the number of claims pending during this period increased by more than 65 percent to about 343,000 , and the average time va took to complete a claim increased about 9 days . a number of factors contribute to these results , including an approximately 53 percent increase in va's claims workload , more complex claims , and court decisions that have expanded benefit entitlement . workloads at the appellate level have also improved in some areas and worsened in others . for example , for the past several fiscal years , the number of appeals resolved increased 21 percent from more than 72,000 in fiscal year 2003 to almost 88,000 in fiscal year 2008 . on the other hand , it took va 96 days longer in fiscal 2008 to resolve appeals than it did in fiscal year 2003 . one factor that contributes to the challenge in further improving workloads at the appellate level is the submission of new evidence or claims that must be evaluated . va has taken several steps in an effort to improve claims processing , such as increasing staffing , redistributing workloads , implementing a joint pilot with the department of defense ( dod ) to perform disability evaluations and other initiatives , but the effect of some of these actions is not yet known . for example , va increased claims processing staff an estimated 58 percent from fiscal years 2005 to 2009 , which has helped to increase the total number of decision va issues annually .