they already knew . and then i got the stuff in the mail a few weeks later , pretty quick.” in contrast , in all six focus groups , claimants who filed their claims online said it was generally easy to do so , though they occasionally experienced system disruptions . for example , claimants described the internet filing process as “quick,” “user - friendly,” and “convenient,” and said they found certain features helpful , such as the ability to view their past and future benefit payments and print out information about their claims . in addition , claimants said they preferred filing online to filing by phone because it was faster , or because they were less likely to make mistakes . less frequently , claimants in five groups told us that they experienced challenges filing online . for example , claimants said that some state ui program websites only accepted claims during business hours or were temporarily unavailable due to system outages . claimant quote “the online works well . the amount of information , if you actually spend the time to look through all of the information , it answers many more questions than they would have time for on the phone.” in all six focus groups , claimants had mixed opinions about the sufficiency of the information provided by their state ui programs . for example , in all six groups , some claimants reported that the state ui program website or written program materials provided answers to their questions — such as next steps in the application process , or the amount of their benefit payment and when they could expect to receive it . however , others reported that the ui program website or written materials did not answer their questions — such as how to calculate their quarterly wages , or what activities qualify as “work.” in five of six groups , claimants reported that these sources did not provide answers to questions about their unique or complex situations , such as how medical leave or severance pay affected their claims , or how to report income from multiple jobs . in addition to the challenges reported by recent ui claimants , advocacy groups told us that claimants with limited english proficiency have experienced challenges accessing translated materials and program representatives who speak their language when filing claims . for example , in one state , advocates told us that program materials are available in a limited number of languages , despite the many languages spoken in the state . in addition , advocates in two states said that program representatives speak a limited variety of languages , which can make it difficult for claimants to provide additional information after they file claims . advocates noted that these challenges can be particularly difficult for claimants who speak languages that are less common in their states . for example , in one state , advocates said that an arabic - speaking claimant did not receive benefits for over 3 months because of delays he experienced in receiving translated application materials and receiving an interpreter for his appeal hearing .