see appendix i . improvements in command , control , communications , computers , and intelligence ( c4i ) equipment or procedures . we identified 20 such lessons . see appendix ii . areas needing additional training . we identified 30 such lessons . see appendix iii . the need for additional capability in areas other than c4i . we identified 24 such lessons . see appendix iv . potential force structure changes . we identified 14 such lessons . see appendix v. we determined the status of each of the 107 lessons learned as of january 2001 . we did not evaluate the merit of the actions proposed or completed . we placed them into one of two status categories: recommended for closure: we placed 47 items in this category . however , there are varying degrees of closure within this category . first , there are items that specifically have had actions completed , such as procuring night vision goggles for apache pilots . according to army officials , the goggles have been procured and fielded . twenty - three of the 47 lessons fell into this subgroup . second , there are lessons that have had actions taken , but will require a long lead - time for implementation , such as the procurement of survival radios and a deployable flight mission rehearsal system for aviation units . for example , while approval for the survival radios has been obtained , they will not begin fielding until fiscal year 2003 . in addition , the army has recommended an interim fix for a mission rehearsal system , but it is costly . the far - term solution is the joint mission planning system , which will not be fielded until 2007 . fifteen of the 47 lessons fell into this subgroup . finally , there are items that army officials are recommending for closure because , upon further review , they determined the lessons should not have been submitted or events have overtaken the initial lesson and they are no longer applicable . the remaining nine lessons fell into this subgroup . lessons learned that were recommended for closure are indicated as such in appendixes i - v . in progress: we placed 60 lessons in this category . these items are still considered open issues by the army officials tracking task force hawk lessons learned and they have been assigned to responsible bodies for resolution . seventeen of the 60 in progress lessons reside with the department of the army — headquarters , 10 with the joint staff or joint forces command , 27 with the army's training and doctrine command , and 6 with u.s. army europe . many issues remain open because they require efforts that are being incorporated into much larger overall army projects , such as transformation or flight school xxi , that will require a much longer time frame to implement . other lessons learned remain open because efforts to address them are just beginning . lessons learned where solutions are in progress are indicated as such in appendixes i - v . figure 3 shows the 107 lessons learned issues by category and by status grouping .