schedule development . our best practices work stresses the importance of a reliable schedule because not only is it a road map for systematic project execution , but also a means by which to gauge progress , identify and resolve potential problems , and promote accountability . according to nasa officials , a project's ability to efficiently execute a quality jcl analysis is directly tied to the quality of the underlying data , especially a project schedule . independent assessors — a group of technical experts within nasa who do not actively work on a specific project or program — noted that when they are reviewing a project's jcl , one of the most common areas that projects struggle with is developing a reliable schedule . for example , our ongoing work found that the orion program's standing review board raised concerns that the program's schedule is missing activities which could affect the program's ability to accurately identify what is driving the schedule . officials in nasa's cost analysis division told us that various schedule related tools have been developed and already made available to projects and additional tools are in development . a key management challenge that nasa faces is whether the improvement in the cost and schedule performance we have seen in the agency's overall portfolio of major projects can be translated to new , large projects that have been recently baselined and added to the portfolio . these additions include its human spaceflight projects , which includes the space launch system , orion , and exploration ground systems program that is developing systems and infrastructure to support assembly , test , and launch of the space launch system and orion . in our february 2015 high risk update , we noted that nasa's human spaceflight projects are at critical points in implementation and , as i noted earlier , we found that all three projects are entering the stage where most project rebaselines appear most likely to occur — between their critical design and system integrations reviews . this is an area where the agency has not been tested since a similarly large and complex project , the james webb space telescope , underwent a replan in september 2011 that resulted in a 78 percent increase in life - cycle costs — increasing to $8.835 billion — and a schedule delay of 52 months — delaying the planned launch date to october 2018 . in addition , nasa will have to demonstrate that it is able to sustain cost and schedule performance in its commercial crew program , which is nasa's effort to facilitate the private demonstration of safe and reliable transportation services to carry nasa astronauts and cargo to and from the international space station . nasa is partnering with commercial providers and its approach includes tailoring its spaceflight project life cycle . our high - risk report identified key areas where nasa could better anticipate and mitigate risks with respect to these human spaceflight programs , including ensuring that adequate and ongoing assessments of risks are conducted given that the impacts of any potential miscalculations will be felt across the portfolio , ensuring that projects' jcls are updated regularly , and ensuring that the long - term project costs are understood .