this agreement has been completed . site was transferred to doe's office of science and receives no further environmental management funding . to determine the types of compliance agreements and what progress doe is making in meeting milestone commitments , we administered a questionnaire to all doe sites with compliance agreements funded by doe's environmental management program . we defined a “compliance agreement” as a legally enforceable agreement between doe and another party or parties that contained enforceable milestones defining cleanup activities that doe must achieve by specified or ascertainable dates and that are funded by doe's em program . to determine the universe of compliance agreements , we obtained a list of all em - funded compliance agreements from doe . you asked us to address four questions with regard to these agreements: what are the major types of compliance agreements ? these include the federal epa and state environmental agencies , county and local governmental agencies , citizen groups , advisory groups , native american tribes , and other organizations . what progress is doe making in complying with milestones specified in the agreements ? other stakeholders advocate their views through various public involvement processes including site - specific advisory boards . the 70 compliance agreements at doe sites vary greatly but can be divided into three main types: ( 1 ) 29 are agreements specifically required by cercla to address cleanup of federal sites on epa's national priorities list of the nation's worst hazardous waste sites or by rcra to address the management of hazardous waste or mixed radioactive and hazardous waste at doe facilities , ( 2 ) 6 are court - ordered agreements resulting from lawsuits initiated primarily by states , and ( 3 ) 35 are other agreements , including state administrative orders enforcing state hazardous waste management laws . all of doe's major sites have at least one compliance agreement in place , and many of these sites have all three types of agreements . regardless of type , the agreements all contain enforceable milestones that doe has agreed to meet . to what extent is the cost to comply with these agreements reflected in the doe budget submitted to the congress ? to what extent do these agreements allow doe to prioritize work across sites according to the relative risk posed by the various wastes ? as we were conducting our work , the secretary of energy announced a new doe initiative aimed at improving management of the cleanup program , shortening the program's life by at least 30 years , and reducing program costs by at least $100 billion . see appendix i for a complete list of the 70 compliance agreements and information on the schedule milestones they contain . agreements of the first type — those specifically required by cercla or by rcra — are in effect at all of doe's major sites . they tend to cover a relatively large number of cleanup activities and have the majority of schedule milestones that doe must meet . even within this category of agreements , however , the number of milestones in a particular agreement varies widely .