( as was shown in fig . 1 , almost two - thirds of these moves for managers are unfunded. ) the association was concerned that , because not all qualified potential applicants may apply for promotions , less qualified managers may bid on and be selected for promotion opportunities because they are willing to make the financial commitment to pay for some or all of the costs associated with a pcs move . how did the likelihood of being offered pcs benefits differ for controllers and managers ? what has been the impact of pcs policies on air traffic services' annual pcs costs and its ability to staff vacant positions ? to address these questions , we obtained and analyzed information on trends since fiscal year 1996 in pcs policies and funding for air traffic controllers and air traffic managers . we also analyzed data on the type of funding for , and purpose of , controllers' and managers' pcs moves between field offices from 1999 through 2001 . we also examined available information regarding moves other than those between field offices . see appendix i for details about our data analyses . we also met with representatives of air traffic services and faa's conference managers association to discuss the impact of faa's pcs policies . we conducted our review from march 2002 through august 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . faa currently employs almost 20,000 employees to operate and manage the nation's air traffic control system . most of these employees ( about 15,250 ) are air traffic control specialists , or controllers , who are responsible for controlling the takeoff , landing , and ground movement of planes and are assigned to field facilities . ( natca represents these controllers. ) in addition , about 4,500 managers , supervisors , and staff specialists within faa's air traffic services work to oversee and administer the air traffic control program . ( about 3,900 of these 4,500 managers , supervisors , and specialists work in the various field facilities around the country and the other 600 provide management , direction , and oversight , as well as overall support , of the air traffic control system at headquarters and regional locations. ) for this report , we focused our analysis on these two groups in faa's occupational job series 2152 , which we refer to as controllers and managers , respectively . in 1994 , congress directed the secretary of transportation to undertake a study of management , regulatory , and legislative reforms that would enable faa to provide better air traffic control services . faa's resulting 1995 report to congress stated that existing federal personnel rules and procedures limited faa's ability to attract and retain qualified staff at key facilities or to reassign employees in response to changing needs . the report also stated that exemption from federal personnel regulations would provide faa with the flexibility to hire , reward , and relocate employees to better manage the air traffic control system . on november 15 , 1995 , congress directed the faa administrator to develop and implement a new personnel management system to provide greater flexibility in the hiring , training , compensation , and location of personnel .