state has mischaracterized our statement . in our report , we stated that , based on survey results , posts do not consider the eph particularly useful in preparing for the possibility of evacuation . half of overseas posts rated the eph as “somewhat useful” in preparing for an evacuation . this , along with the 9 percent who said the eph was “not very useful” or “not at all useful,” as well as comments by a number of state officials that it was too generic , formulaic , and voluminous , indicate that while the eph is of some utility , there is a definite opportunity to improve the eph when it comes to helping posts prepare for an evacuation . there can be several gradations of unaccompanied status . for example , abidjan , côte d'ivoire , is currently a partially unaccompanied post , where spouses and preschool - aged children are allowed ; however , state does not consider the post safe enough for school - aged children who generally travel to and from school and other activities on their own . a post can continue on unaccompanied status for some time . three posts in one persian gulf country were placed on ordered departure in april 2004 and switched to unaccompanied status in august 2004 ; all three remain unaccompanied as of april 2007 . however , almost 60 percent of posts reported that they do not have standing arrangements with foreign missions on evacuation planning and coordination or do not know if such arrangements are in place . the importance of working with other foreign missions in planning , preparing , and coordinating an evacuation was highlighted by the july 2006 evacuation from lebanon . state officials said that good coordination with other foreign missions was an important contributor to the success of the evacuation . close coordination and communication with other foreign missions can also be important for smaller evacuations . for example , a state official reported that during an evacuation of about 400 american citizens from west africa in 2004 , the post extensively coordinated and communicated with foreign missions because all american citizens were evacuated on foreign government - arranged aircraft . deficiencies in state's guidance and plans can hinder post efforts to prepare for a possible evacuation of post staff , dependents , and american citizens . posts are supposed to provide an estimation of the number of private american citizens in a country in f - 77 reports , based in part on traveler registration . these reports play a central role in state and dod's planning for and conducting evacuations of american citizens . however , we found that more than three - quarters of posts reported that the last f - 77 at post was , at best , only somewhat accurate in its estimation of the american citizen population . in addition , of those posts able to provide an estimate of the nature of the inaccuracies , over two - thirds reported that the f - 77 report tends to underestimate the american citizen population . several factors may complicate the estimation of american citizens in country .