ii. ) as of february 2008 , dhs reported that approximately 61 percent of the minimum required level and 38 percent of the optimal level of contract specialists were in place , departmentwide . we have ongoing work on acquisition workforce issues and initiatives at dhs and plan to report on the results of these efforts in the final product for that engagement . while other transaction agreements can carry the benefit of tapping into innovative homeland security technologies through nontraditional contractors , as they are exempt from federal procurement regulations , they also carry the risk of reduced accountability and transparency if not properly managed . dhs has successfully used its other transaction authority to attract nontraditional contractors to develop innovative technologies to address homeland security needs , and it continues to implement the policies and procedures needed to manage the inherent risks of these agreements . however , dhs continues to lack the resources — in terms of knowledge and workforce capacity — to ensure that its agreements are transparent and maximize their potential benefits . if other transaction authority is made permanent , it will be important for dhs to take a systematic approach to assessing its experience with other transaction authority and identifying and addressing contracting workforce needs . these steps would not only enable dhs to more strategically manage its agreements in the future , they also would provide congress with useful information on the benefits of the authority . to promote the efficient and effective use by dhs of its other transactions authority to meet its mission needs , we recommend that the secretary of homeland security direct the under secretary for management and the under secretary for science and technology to take the following two actions: collect relevant data on other transaction agreements , including the roles of and funding to nontraditional contractors and intellectual property rights , and systematically assess and report to congress on the use of these agreements to ensure that the intended benefits of the authority are achieved . direct the office of procurement operations to work with the science and technology directorate to determine the number of contracting officers needed to help ensure a sufficient contracting workforce to execute other transaction authority . we provided a draft of this report to dhs for review and comment . in written comments , dhs concurred with our recommendations and provided some information on efforts under way to improve information on its use of other transaction authority . dhs's comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix iii . dhs also provided technical comments that were incorporated where appropriate . in response to our first recommendation , that dhs collect relevant data on other transactions agreements , including the roles of and funding to nontraditional contractors and intellectual property rights , and systematically assess and report to congress on the use of these agreements to ensure that the intended benefits of the authority are achieved , dhs stated that the chief procurement officer is taking steps to improve the information dhs has on its other transactions . dhs reiterated changes it has made to its procurement data system which are described in our report . dhs also noted the information included in its annual report to congress on s&t's other transactions .