( app . i provides a detailed analysis of employment trends in the u.s. border region. ) despite the contractions in manufacturing and certain other trade - related sectors , other sectors in the u.s. border region grew . as a result , total nonagriculture - related employment in the border area grew by 4 percent even after the u.s. economic slowdown began in 2000 and national employment contracted 1 percent through 2002 . some border metropolitan areas maintained even stronger employment growth . for example , the mcallen area grew by 9 percent between 2000 and 2002 , while laredo grew by 6 percent , and san diego and las cruces grew by 5 percent each over the same period . on the other hand , el paso's overall nonfarm employment fell , primarily because its mix of industries is weighted towards sectors that have been shrinking ( see app . i for details ) . the decline in maquiladora production and employment since the last quarter of 2000 is attributable to both cyclical and structural factors . government researchers , academicians , economic studies , and industry representatives agree that the cyclical downturn in the u.s. economy has been a primary factor in the decline . however , industry sources and other experts emphasized that the maquiladoras have also been adversely affected by structural factors , such as increased competition in the u.s. market , particularly from china , central america and the caribbean , and by the strength of the mexican peso , which has further eroded the maquiladoras' competitiveness . changing mexican tax policies have also contributed to the maquiladora decline by creating a climate of uncertainty for foreign investors . meanwhile , owing to commitments undertaken under nafta , mexico has phased out some of the key benefits of the maquiladora program . it is clear from our research that all of these factors were at work before and during the recent maquiladora downturn , and that each was changing in a direction adverse for maquiladora production and employment . however , the sheer number of simultaneous changes over a relatively brief period makes it difficult to isolate or quantify the impact of individual factors . although many government , academic , and industry sources generally refer to the cyclical downturn in the u.s. economy as a principal factor in the decrease in maquiladora employment and production since the last quarter of 2000 , there is no such agreement on the relative importance of other factors associated with the decline of the maquiladoras . a local ( competitive ) effect seeks to isolate the extent to which factors unique to the local area have caused growth or decline in regional employment . the effect is defined as the employment change that remains after the national and industrial mix components have been accounted for , and it is therefore the purely regional aspect of the region's employment growth . if a region's competitive share is positive , the region is considered to have local advantage in promoting employment growth . this advantage could result from such factors as local businesses having superior technology , management , location , market access or the local labor force's having higher productivity , lower wages , or both .