senate committee on appropriations . we plan to issue our report next month . as discussed above , nnsa remains on our high - risk list and remains vulnerable to fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement . doe has recently taken a number of actions to improve management of major projects , including those overseen by nnsa . for example , doe has updated program and project management policies and guidance in an effort to improve the reliability of project cost estimates , better assess project risks , and better ensure project reviews that are timely , useful and identify problems early . however , doe needs to ensure that nnsa has the capacity — that is , the people and other resources — to resolve its project management difficulties and that it has a program to monitor and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of its corrective measures . this is particularly important as nnsa embarks on its long - term , multibillion dollar effort to modernize the nuclear security enterprise . another underlying reason for the creation of nnsa was a series of security issues at the national laboratories . work carried out at nnsa's sites may involve plutonium and highly enriched uranium , which are extremely hazardous . for example , exposure to small quantities of plutonium is dangerous to human health , so that even inhaling a few micrograms creates a long - term risk of lung , liver , and bone cancer and inhaling larger doses can cause immediate lung injuries and death . also , if not safely contained and managed , plutonium can be unstable and spontaneously ignite under certain conditions . nnsa's sites also conduct a wide range of other activities , including construction and routine maintenance and operation of equipment and facilities that also run the risk of accidents , such as those involving heavy machinery or electrical mishaps . the consequences of such accidents could be less severe than those involving nuclear materials , but they could also lead to long - term illnesses , injuries , or even deaths among workers or the public . plutonium and highly enriched uranium must also be stored under extremely high security to protect it from theft or terrorist attack . in numerous reports , we have expressed concerns about nnsa's oversight of safety and security across the nuclear security enterprise . with regard to nuclear and worker safety: in october 2007 , we reported that there had been nearly 60 serious accidents or near misses at nnsa's national laboratories since 2000 . these incidents included worker exposure to radiation , inhalation of toxic vapors , and electrical shocks . although no one was killed , many of the accidents caused serious harm to workers or damage to facilities . for example , at los alamos in july 2004 , an undergraduate student who was not wearing required eye protection was partially blinded in a laser accident . accidents and nuclear safety violations also contributed to the temporary shutdown of facilities at both los alamos and livermore in 2004 and 2005 . in the case of los alamos , laboratory employees disregarded established procedures and then attempted to cover up the incident , according to los alamos officials .