permanent work . of the more than $1.4 billion in public assistance funding fema had obligated as of october 1 , 2018 , about $516.3 million ( 36 percent ) was obligated for 153 permanent work projects across categories c through g. these permanent work projects include about $349.4 million for cost - effective hazard mitigation measures aimed at reducing the future risk of disaster - damaged facilities in conjunction with their repair . further , of the $516.3 million fema obligated for permanent work in the usvi , approximately $500.4 million — or 97 percent of all permanent work obligations — was obligated to the usvi water and power authority for the permanent repair of electrical distribution systems and other utilities across the territory . category c: roads and bridges . fema obligated about $5.2 million for 35 projects focused on repairing roads and bridges in the territory , 18 of which included hazard mitigation measures totaling about $1.5 million . for example , fema obligated about $410,000 for one project to repair a road on st. thomas damaged by floodwaters . this project included approximately $227,000 for hazard mitigation measures , such as replacing the damaged road surface with reinforced concrete and building a retaining wall . as of october 1 , 2018 , the usvi had not expended funding in this category . category d: water control facilities . as of october 1 , 2018 , fema did not have any projects in this category . they explained that because of the financial liquidity challenges facing the territory , this process was problematic and required usvi officials to prioritize projects based on the availability of the territory's funding . usvi officials stated that the public assistance alternative procedures will help to address this challenge by providing the territory with more flexibility regarding when and how to fund projects . for example , in certain cases , the usvi is able to consolidate permanent work projects approved under the alternative procedures and share obligated funding across these projects . in addition , the usvi is able to use any excess funds for cost - effective hazard mitigation measures or for activities that improve the recipient's or subrecipient's future public assistance operations or planning . emergency work . fema obligated about $94.0 million for 71 projects focused on debris removal activities across the territory . for example , fema obligated $45.0 million to the usvi department of public works for territorywide debris removal efforts and $39.1 million to the usvi water and power authority for these activities in st. croix ( see fig . of the $94.0 million fema obligated for debris removal , the usvi had expended about $54.6 million ( 58 percent ) as of october 1 , 2018 . category b: emergency protective measures . fema obligated about $780 million for 251 projects focused on emergency measures . for example , fema obligated about $187 million for the sheltering and temporary essential power program , which is intended to provide essential repairs or restore power to private residences to allow affected individuals to return or remain in their homes , thereby reducing the demand for other shelter options .