critical change . a critical change must be declared if a program failed to achieve a full deployment decision within 5 years after the milestone a decision or , if there was no milestone a decision , the date when the preferred alternative was selected for the program ; experienced a schedule delay of 1 year or more ; experienced an estimated total acquisition or full life - cycle cost increase of 25 percent or more over the original estimate ; or experienced a change in the expected performance of the system that will undermine the ability of the system to perform as intended . if such an event occurs , the senior dod official responsible for the program must carry out an evaluation and submit a critical change report to the congressional defense committees no later than 60 days after receiving the quarterly report . since the december 19 , 2014 , enactment of the carl levin and howard p. “buck” mckeon national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 , mais programs are now required to declare a significant change — instead of a critical change — if they fail to achieve a full deployment decision within 5 years after the milestone a decision , the date when the preferred alternative was selected for the program ( excluding any time during which program activity is delayed as a result of a bid protest ) . more recently , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 directed the secretary of defense to issue guidance for mais programs to establish an acquisition baseline within 2 years after program initiation . this statute provides a response to a recommendation we made in our last annual report on mais programs . in particular , we found that these programs spent , on average , more than 5 years and $450 million prior to establishing baselines . we noted that programs that have not established baselines were subject to less oversight and could not be measured against cost , schedule , and performance targets . also , the propensity to carry out mais programs for multiple years prior to committing to baselines is inconsistent with incremental and rapid development as called for in federal law and gao's it management best practices . accordingly , we recommended that these programs be baselined within 2 years ; for which dod partially concurred . we maintained that establishing baselines within 2 years would improve outcomes and increase accountability . dod's cio , along with other agencies , must report on the progress of its it investments , including mais programs , on a public website known as the it dashboard . omb established this website in june 2009 to improve the transparency and oversight of agencies' investments . the dashboard visually displays federal agencies' cost , schedule , and performance data for over 700 major federal investments at 26 federal agencies . it also includes a risk rating that is to be performed by agency cios . according to omb , these data are intended to provide a near - real - time perspective on the performance of these investments .