the locations varied by district . table 3 shows the number and location of elementary schools offered in the districts we visited . some districts offered schools based on geographic location within the district and some offered schools districtwide . for example , as table 3 shows , students in memphis attending one of the 40 schools identified for choice selected from among 3-10 transfer schools that were in the same general area of the city , while students in each of the 6 schools identified in akron selected from a group of 33 schools spread across the district . what were the experiences of selected school districts in implementing the choice provision ? what guidance and technical assistance did the department of education provide states and districts as they implemented public school choice ? to determine the numbers of schools and students affected by choice nationwide during the first 2 years of nclba , we compiled and analyzed data from a variety of sources , including our surveys of state education agencies and school districts , department of education ( education ) reports of state agencies' data , and other education databases . we assessed the reliability of these data and determined that they were adequate for our purposes . to obtain information on district implementation , we visited 8 districts that had schools identified for choice and interviewed district and school officials about their experiences . located in seven states — california , illinois , ohio , mississippi , pennsylvania , tennessee , and washington — these districts were selected to achieve variation in geographic , demographic , and program characteristics . all but one district we visited had students transferring under choice . one rural district — north panola , mississippi — offered supplemental educational services instead of transfers under choice , as permitted , because the middle school identified for choice was the only middle school in the district . to ascertain the role of education in providing guidance and technical assistance , we reviewed regulations and other forms of guidance available from education and interviewed officials at the federal , state , and district levels , as well as representatives of national educational organizations and other experts in the area . see appendix i for a more detailed description of our methodology . we conducted our work from october 2003 through november 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the department of education is responsible for overseeing state implementation of nclba , which amended and reauthorized the elementary and secondary education act . title i of this act authorizes funds to states for local school districts with high concentrations of children from low - income families to improve the academic achievement of students failing or at risk of failing to meet state standards . title i is the single largest federal program supporting education in kindergarten through 12th grade , supplying over $12 billion in federal funds in 2004 . these funds are designed to supplement the instructional services and support that districts and schools provide . title i and other federal funding represent about 8 percent of total spending on elementary and secondary public education , with the remaining 92 percent provided primarily by states and localities .