iv . in june 2013 , dod produced detailed supporting plans that included phased operations as well as milestones and objectives for equipment reduction . the specific goals are classified ; however , dod officials in theater stated that in the period from june 2013 to september 2013 , dod's afghanistan equipment reductions exceeded these goals . uncertainties about the future force in afghanistan could affect the progress of the drawdown . because the united states has not yet announced its post - 2014 force level and mission in afghanistan , the future equipment needs are still uncertain . a high - level army official has stated that the goal is to draw down all equipment not needed by the enduring force from afghanistan by october 2014 . however , with the bilateral security agreement pending , the mission and size of the enduring force has not yet been finalized , and the date by which all equipment must be drawn down could change . dod will need this information to determine the amounts and types of equipment that will remain in afghanistan for the enduring presence and consequently the amount and types of vehicles that will be drawn down . these post - 2014 uncertainties may affect the rate that vehicles are turned in by units in afghanistan , affecting the progress of dod's drawdown . the current vehicle drawdown pace has been limited by lower - than - forecast quantities being turned in by units for drawdown . from march 2013 to october 2013 , the number of vehicles turned in by units for the drawdown averaged 55 percent of what had been forecasted . in some instances , vehicles that had been forecast for reduction were redistributed to other units in afghanistan instead of turned in for destruction or return . commanders in afghanistan must ensure that they have the equipment necessary to accomplish their mission and sometimes have found it necessary to retain equipment rather than release it . a senior dod official stated that in some cases units have retained equipment because of uncertainty related to future operational needs in afghanistan . consequently , the flow of vehicles to be destroyed at dla sites or returned via rpat yards and transportation routes has been limited . these turn - in rates may increase once the post - 2014 force level and mission are announced . dod has taken some steps to improve efficiencies and manage costs in its afghanistan drawdown processes . for example , centcom amended its drawdown instruction to allow for aggregation of equipment at u.s. ports . according to dod officials , this will allow for shipment of equipment via rail , resulting in potential savings when compared with trucking costs . however , as a result of ineffective internal controls , the army and marine corps may be incurring unnecessary costs by returning equipment that potentially exceeds service needs or that is not economical to return and repair . dod guidance on supply chain materiel management indicates that equipment exceeding certain service - approved quantities should not be retained unless economic or contingency reasons support its retention .