we did not modify our report . education's central automated processing system ( edcaps ) included in figure 1 and table 1 in our report is not the same as the central data system ( cds ) , which has been retired . edcaps is the primary accounting system for the department . the department's management improvement team accomplishments document , dated october 30 , 2001 , describes edcaps as education's “financial records and accounting system.” cds is not discussed in our report . we modified our report to reflect that the pbo was established in 1998 . we modified our report to clarify responsibilities of sfa under the pbo legislation . we modified our report to indicate sfa's participation . we believe the appointment of sfa's coo was a relevant milestone . we have clarified or modified these points where appropriate . education's written comments , along with our responses , are reproduced in appendix ii . as we agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from the date of this letter . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of education , education's office of student financial assistance's chief operating officer , the director of the office of management and budget , and appropriate congressional committees . copies will also be available to other interested parties upon request . this report will be available on our web site at www.gao.gov . if you or your offices have questions regarding this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-6257 or david b. alston , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-6369 . we can also be reached by e - mail at mcclured@gao.gov and alstond@gao.gov , respectively . other individuals making key contributions to this report included nabajyoti barkakati , michael p. fruitman , and glenn r. nichols . our objectives were to provide information on the use of middleware technology , and to evaluate the viability of sfa's approach to using it to integrate student financial aid information . to achieve these objectives , we examined sfa documents , including the modernization blueprint and updates and information technology target architectures . we assessed how critical information technology integration issues are being addressed at sfa , including the merits and risks of the blueprint , and assessed agency documentation to determine whether sfa's systems environment lends itself to a technically feasible middleware solution . in addition , we analyzed several technical documents on the general function and use of middleware , and interviewed officials from sfa and accenture , its modernization partner . we also interviewed officials from the advisory committee on student financial assistance to obtain their perspective on sfa's use of middleware . further , we spoke with officials from ibm , the developer of the middleware product ( mqseries ) being implemented by sfa . we analyzed technical documents describing the operation of the mqseries in general , as well as design documents addressing the implementation of this middleware product at sfa .