the comments are reprinted in appendix i . commerce generally agreed with the overall findings and recommendations and appreciated our efforts in helping the census bureau develop a successful evaluation plan for the 2020 census . commerce also provided additional information and comments on certain statements and conclusions in the report . with respect to our second recommendation to complete the master trace project's assessment of linking key census and ccm data systems , to identify any potential data gaps , and to identify other related steps for future action , commerce maintained that it would be taking action to preserve adequate documentation and maximize the amount of data retained from each major decennial system . we commend the bureau for committing to these steps and encourage its follow - through on them and its identification of remaining data gaps and additional steps needed . with respect to our third recommendation to fully assess the trade - offs between two types of error related to starting ccm data collection either earlier or later relative to census day , commerce responded that ( 1 ) it is too late to create a new study for 2010 census ; ( 2 ) it considers a bureau contamination study from 2000 to be definitive ; and ( 3 ) it has recently developed a study on recall bias to try to measure some of the effects of scheduling ccm data collection at various periods of time following the census enumeration . we agree that it is too late to attempt any additional unplanned data collection during the 2010 census , and we revised our discussion to clarify our intent that the recommended research be conducted after the 2010 census . we also recognize the thoroughness of the 2000 contamination study the bureau cites , commend the bureau on undertaking additional study of recall bias , and look forward to reviewing its study plans when they are available . however , we recommended research comparing trade - offs between the two types of errors at a variety of start dates for ccm data collection — something the 2000 study did not discuss and something it is unclear that a study of only recall bias will achieve . furthermore as we discussed in our draft report , the bureau expressed concerns over possible contamination between ccm and new parts of census follow - up in 2010 — parts that were introduced after the 2000 study and that were not included in the scope of the 2000 study . we clarified our discussion of this in the report to better focus on the need for research that relates the trade - offs between the two types of error at different timing of data collection . commerce provided additional information that in response to advice from various advisory panels and after additional research , it would soon make public its proposed geographic levels for ccm estimates . we reflected this decision in table 1 of our report . finally , commerce provided additional information about its plans to produce highly technical documentation of the results of ccm estimation including modeling , missing data , and errors in the estimates in a series of memorandums as it did for census 2000 .