state generally agreed with our findings and recommendations . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for questions regarding this testimony , please contact jess t. ford , ( 202 ) 512-4268 or fordj@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , anthony moran , assistant director ; lisa helmer ; shirley min ; joe carney ; virginia chanley ; kieran cusack ; david dayton ; patrick lockett ; reid lowe ; and mary moutsos provided significant contributions to the work . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . this is especially important given evidence of variances in training across the department . for example , while training officials we interviewed at some bureaus and posts indicated they had sufficient funding and support for training , others noted they faced significant resource challenges that impacted the ability of employees to get necessary training . more information on our scope and methodology and detailed findings is available in the full report . in brief , mr. chairman , we found that state has taken many steps to incorporate the interrelated elements of an effective training program — planning , design , implementation , and evaluation — into its training for personnel , but the department's strategic approach to workforce training could be improved in several key areas . specifically , we identified five areas where state can improve its training . first , state lacks a comprehensive training needs assessment process incorporating all bureaus and posts . second , state developed guidance for employees about training opportunities , career paths , and how training can help employees attain career goals , but the guidance does not provide complete and accurate information . third , state lacks a data collection and analysis plan for evaluating training , and thus cannot be assured that proper practices and procedures are systematically and comprehensively applied . fourth , state could not sufficiently demonstrate consistent and appropriate support for training , because the department does not track detailed information on training cost and delivery that would allow for an analysis and comparison of employees in different groups , bureaus , regions , or posts . lastly , state performance measures for training generally do not fully address training goals , and are generally output - rather than outcome - oriented .