roles and responsibilities . commerce and dod provided comments regarding the roles and responsibilities of commerce that were also related to the comments on our recommendation and are discussed above . commerce and dod also emphasized the nature of ( 1 ) the amnpo as an interagency team hosted at nist , and ( 2 ) the manufacturing usa institutes as public - private partnerships , owned and managed by an industry - led consortium , with the sponsoring federal agency providing a minority of funding . we made several edits to reflect these points . commerce and dod also commented that present non - federal funding is over a 2 to 1 match to federal financial assistance . we believe we accurately present information on these relative contributions in our report . interagency engagement . commerce and dod stated that all agencies were invited to be part of the manufacturing usa program , and noted that a number of agencies , including some non - sponsoring agencies , have been members of the interagency team . commerce and dod also stated that gao correctly stated that dol was not a principal agency involved with the program ; although , commerce noted attempts had been made to reach out to dol and both agencies discussed providing information on dol initiatives to the manufacturing usa institutes . we added information to our report to acknowledge these efforts . other comments commerce provided regarding interagency engagement through the manufacturing usa governance system are discussed above . performance metrics . commerce and dod stated that there is agreement on the initial set of performance measures for the manufacturing usa program and that information on each of these measures will be provided in the upcoming manufacturing usa annual report ( for fiscal year 2016 ) . in the draft report , we included information on the extent to which all dod and doe institutes planned to provide information on all of the initial performance measures for the manufacturing usa program . this information was based on documentation provided to us during the course of our review , which showed that not all dod institutes planned to report data on all of the initial performance measures . in response to the comments received from commerce and dod , we followed up with dod . a dod official responsible for overseeing dod's manufacturing usa institutes said via email that dod recently tasked the institutes to provide data in support of these measures for aggregation in the fiscal year 2016 report . therefore , we revised our report to remove information related to a difference in the extent to which dod and doe planned to have all their institutes report on all the initial measures . in its comments on our draft report dod also provided information on other information dod collects from its institutes consistent with its mission , and emphasized that performance measures included in our report are only initial metrics which could evolve over time . we did not make any additional changes based on these comments as we believe these concepts are already reflected in our report .