reg . we conducted this performance audit from july 2011 to february 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . medicare comprises 12 percent of the federal budget and is the third largest federal program after defense and social security . for fiscal year 2011 , hhs reported an estimate of almost $29 billion in medicare ffs improper payments . our standards for internal control in the federal government suggests that agencies should continually perform monitoring activities to reduce the incidence of improper payments . however , our prior reports found weaknesses in cms's monitoring of medicare provider and supplier enrollment and claims payment contractors . partly in response to our work , cms took steps to implement new dmepos supplier quality standards in an accreditation rule issued in august 2006 and proposed additional dmepos supplier enrollment standards in january 2008 . to further address these concerns and create a focal point for all medicare program integrity activities , in cpi , in 2010 , cms established a center for program integrity ( cpi ) .collaboration with other components within cms , develops and implements the agency's medicare program integrity mission and goals . among these goals is a reduction in instances of fraud , waste , and abuse , as well as strategies to ensure program vulnerabilities are identified and resolved . according to cms , the agency is pursuing an aggressive program integrity strategy to prevent payment of potentially fraudulent claims , rather than to recover funds from providers and suppliers after payment has already been made . because identifying and prosecuting providers and suppliers engaged in potentially fraudulent activity is time consuming , resource intensive , and costly , cms has designed measures intended to prevent enrollment by entities that might attempt to defraud or abuse the medicare program . for example , the agency requires that applicants use a unique 10 digit national provider identifier ( npi ) number and affirm that they are not excluded from participating in another federal health program . dmepos suppliers must also undergo pre - enrollment site visits . in addition , the agency requires enrollment information to be entered into pecos , a single , centralized , provider and supplier enrollment database that assists with data sharing across the contractors' different geographic coverage areas . in addition , cms has historically required the a / b macs and the nsc to conduct activities , such as monthly reviews of state licensing board actions , to determine if individual providers continue to meet state licensing requirements and to conduct periodic checks to determine if entities continue to meet federal and state requirements for their respective provider or supplier type . with the implementation of the automated screening contract , these checks will be automated and conducted on a continuous basis , according to cms . since the medicare program was created in 1965 , it has been administered through a network of private contractors .