in the nation . other sources of information for the strategic planning included the national capital region program and capability enhancement plan , the nationwide plan review , and the national preparedness goal and related target capabilities . we are encouraged that the ncr plan emphasizes enhancing capabilities consistent with currently known regional capability shortfalls and others based on a variety of information sources . it is clear that a great deal of work has gone into identifying needed capabilities as part of the planning approach . in revising the plan , ncr officials might consider two observations . first , although the plan recognized the importance of the nationwide plan review's specific phase 2 findings for the ncr emergency plans and the status of catastrophic and evacuation planning , it did not reflect specific ncr findings . as you know , the review was conducted in response to the shortfalls in preparedness identified during hurricane katrina . a brief scorecard presenting review ncr findings provided to us said that , overall , the dhs review found the ncr plan's adequacy , feasibility , and acceptability not sufficient to meet the requirements of a catastrophic incident . while the assessment found the ncr's resource management annex and communications annex sufficient to meet the requirements of a catastrophic incident , others were only partially sufficient or not sufficient , including the basic plan , direction and control annex , warning annex , emergency public information annex , evacuation annex , mass care annex , and the health and medical annex . according to ncr officials , the assessment tools of the review and the emap assessment were flawed because they focus on a single jurisdiction , not a multi - jurisdictional approach . in addition , the assessments assume that the entity under review is an operational jurisdiction which the ncr is not . ncr officials told us they found the reviews of limited usefulness because of this flaw . the officials said ncr states have individual state plan reviews that are more valid . however , they said the ncr addressed findings they thought were appropriate and useful and did focus on the national findings , which are included in the ncr strategic plan . if the plan was to include all sources of capability gaps , to guide problem definition and risk assessment , ncr officials should consider if it would be useful to describe the specific review's findings for the ncr that the officials did accept , and align plan objectives and specific initiatives to those accepted findings . also , instead of referencing preparedness capabilities from different sources , it might be more useful for the plan to have one set of capabilities for action . this would integrate all sources of necessary capabilities ( and their varying definitions ) into a common set on which the region agrees , whether the source of the needed capability is national goal directives , assessment standards , or individual regional gap analysis . this integration might also include remarks on the progress in developing a capability . while all of the capabilities may be important , it is unclear from the plan those capabilities are fully or partially developed and those that remain to be developed .