we did not do work to assess the 1993 estimate . their responses are discussed later in this report . st. elizabeths hospital is located approximately 2 miles south of the capitol building and is divided by martin luther king , jr. , ave. into what are known as the west and east campuses . st. elizabeths began operations in 1855 as the “government hospital for the insane.” during the civil war , st. elizabeths was used to house soldiers recuperating from amputations , and the west campus includes a civil war cemetery . in 1916 , congress formally changed its name to st. elizabeths hospital , which refers to the historic name of the old royal land grant of which the hospital was a part . however , they recognized that the poor conditions at the site may not make interim use a feasible option . because hhs officially notified gsa of its intention to declare the property excess , the property act , as amended , and related gsa regulations for disposing of excess real property govern this process . on the basis of our interviews with hhs , gsa , and district officials , we identified a number of key actions that need to take place to facilitate a reuse of the site . gsa officials said that gsa , hhs , and the district are in the process of developing memoranda of understanding that will outline responsibilities for costs and actions during the excess and disposal process . much work needs to be done to facilitate a reuse of the west campus . as mentioned before , the vacant buildings on the west campus are in a badly deteriorated condition , and action is needed to prevent the situation from getting worse . the work is needed to preserve the buildings while the excess and disposal process takes place ; and this work is the responsibility of hhs , the holding agency , under the property act and nhpa . the district plans to vacate the west campus and likely will have little reason to continue providing protection and maintenance services . therefore , protection and maintenance plans and funding will need to be reevaluated for the period during the excess and disposal process . also , gsa officials said that a well - planned interim use policy could sometimes help generate reuse of the site , but poor conditions may not make interim use a feasible option . west campus buildings not being used by the district are vacant . in addition , the district plans to completely vacate the west campus in 2001 . hhs is responsible for the environmental assessment and any required remediation under the gsa implementing regulations for the property act . in addition , gsa is required under nepa to consider the impact of the federal government's actions to dispose of the site . gsa said that the district would have input to this part of the process . given the property's nhl designation , several historic preservation issues will need to be addressed as part of the excess and disposal process . at a minimum , hhs , gsa , the district , and the advisory council would be participants in a consultation process to address these issues .