we have previously testified in support of this legislation . omb plays a key role in helping federal agencies manage their investments by working with them to better plan , justify , and determine how much they need to spend on projects and how to manage approved projects . in june 2009 , omb established the it dashboard to improve the transparency into and oversight of agencies' it investments . according to omb officials , agency cios are required to update each major investment in the it dashboard with a rating based on the cio's evaluation of certain aspects of the investment , such as risk management , requirements management , contractor oversight , and human capital . according to omb , these data are intended to provide a near real - time perspective of the performance of these investments , as well as a historical perspective . further , the public display of these data is intended to allow omb , congressional and other oversight bodies , and the general public to hold government agencies accountable for results and progress . in january 2010 , the federal cio began leading techstat sessions — reviews of selected it investments between omb and agency leadership — to increase accountability and transparency and improve performance . omb has identified factors that may result in an investment being selected for a techstat session , such as — but not limited to — evidence of ( 1 ) poor performance ; ( 2 ) duplication with other systems or projects ; ( 3 ) unmitigated risks ; and ( 4 ) misalignment with policies and best practices . omb reported that as of april 2013 , 79 techstat sessions had been held with federal agencies . according to omb , these sessions enabled the government to improve or terminate it investments that were experiencing performance problems . for example , in june 2010 the federal cio led a techstat on the national archives and records administration's ( nara ) electronic records archives investment that resulted in six corrective actions , including halting fiscal year 2012 development funding pending the completion of a strategic plan . similarly , in january 2011 , we reported that nara had not been positioned to identify potential cost and schedule problems early , and had not been able to take timely actions to correct problems , delays , and cost increases on this system acquisition program . moreover , we estimated that the program would likely overrun costs by between $205 and $405 million if the agency completed the program as originally designed . we made multiple recommendations to the archivist of the united states , including establishing a comprehensive plan for all remaining work , improving the accuracy of key performance reports , and engaging executive leadership in correcting negative performance trends . drawing on the visibility into federal it investments provided by the it dashboard and techstat sessions , in december 2010 , omb issued a plan to reform it management throughout the federal government over an 18-month time frame . among other things , the plan noted the goal of turning around or terminating at least one - third of underperforming projects by june 2012 .