december 2018 . 2 ) 2016 prc analysis: section 701 report: analysis of the postal accountability and enhancement act of 2006 , postal regulatory commission , november 2016 3 ) 2010 usps comprehensive statement: foundation for the future: 2010 usps comprehensive statement on postal operations united states postal service . 4 ) 2003 presidential commission report: embracing the future: making the tough choices to preserve universal mail service . report of the president's commission on the united states postal service , july 2003 . in addition to the individual named above , kyle browning ( assistant director ) ; jade winfree ( analyst - in - charge ) ; thanh lu , silda nikaj ; josh ormond ; steven putansu ; oliver richard , frank todisco , michelle weathers ; seyda wentworth ; and crystal wesco made key contributions to this report . we performed the following calculations . 1.0 percent reduction in pay: hours*δwage= hours* ( wage*0.01 ) 5.0 percent reduction in pay: hours* δwage = hours* ( wage*0.05 ) 10.0 percent reduction in pay: hours* δwage= hours* ( wage*0.10 ) we found the cost savings associated with cuts of 1.0 percent , 5.0 percent , and 10.0 percent across all current employees are $322 million , $1.61 billion , and $3.22 billion respectively for fiscal year 2018 . across the board wage cuts will produce both direct and indirect effects on overall compensation costs for usps . in the section above , we provided a calculation of the savings that usps may realize from the direct effect of a policy that cuts worker pay . the direct effect implies that a pay cut reduces the total wages paid . for example , a 10 percent reduction in pay should reduce the total wage paid by 10 percent , other things constant . however , workers who face pay cuts may exhibit responses to wage cuts that include: adjusting hours worked , adjusting their level of effort for each hour of work . these responses may negate or reinforce additional savings from a wage cut and are examples of indirect effects of wage cuts . workers may adjust the hours of work from changes in wages , as these wage changes produce to both substitution and income effects on hours worked . the substitution effect implies that a pay cut reduces the incentive for employees to work because each hour of work generates less money than it did before , decreasing the opportunity cost of leisure ( the time spent not working for pay ) , holding income constant . thus a reduction in pay could lead to additional reductions in work hours that employees are willing to supply . consequently , the reduction in pay may lead to additional savings for usps in its labor costs from the substitution effect . in contrast , the income effect implies that a pay cut reduces the income of the worker ; this reduction in income induces the employee to work more hours because the employee feels poorer . the income effect would therefore increase the hours worked , and could lead to reductions in savings for usps . income and substitution effects generally run in opposite directions , and uncertainty regarding which effect will dominate determines the overall effect on hours worked .