eligibility related to other programs . the selected states ranked bases of eligibility associated with enrollment in other federal and state assistance programs at or near the top of their hierarchies . for instance , eligibility associated with receipt of ssi was generally at the top of the states' hierarchies , and eligibility associated with receipt of federal foster care and adoption assistance benefits was ranked above other bases for which a child might be eligible . although the selected states considered similar factors when deciding an individual's basis of eligibility for medicaid , a similarly situated individual could be enrolled under a different basis of eligibility in one state versus another state . decisions varied across states , in part , because of differences in ( 1 ) how states factored in the length of the enrollment period ; and ( 2 ) the degree to which states' eligibility systems and processes were integrated . length of the enrollment period . officials in selected states considered the length of the enrollment period when deciding bases of eligibility for certain populations , such as pregnant mothers ( pregnant women who were also eligible as caretakers of dependent children ) . pregnant women who are eligible for medicaid have continuous eligibility , which guarantees enrollment through at least 60 days postpartum regardless of income changes . for this reason , oklahoma enrolled pregnant mothers under a basis of eligibility applicable to pregnant women . in contrast , virginia enrolled pregnant mothers under a basis of eligibility applicable to caretakers , because it has a 12-month enrollment period . however , pregnant women have continuous eligibility through at least 60 days postpartum regardless of income changes or whether they are enrolled as caretakers or on some other basis . as such , if a pregnant woman enrolled as a caretaker no longer met the income standard for a caretaker , for example , she could still remain eligible through her postpartum period . alternatively , a woman enrolled under a pregnancy - related basis of eligibility would be redetermined for eligibility at the end of her postpartum period and could continue enrollment as a caretaker if she continued to meet the financial and other eligibility criteria . cms noted that such variations in eligibility policies are allowable and expected among state medicaid programs . eligibility system integration . differences in the degree to which selected states integrated their eligibility systems affected how individuals were assessed for potential bases of eligibility and potentially resulted in different eligibility determinations . officials in four of our five selected states — new mexico , oklahoma , tennessee , and virginia — reported operating unified or integrated eligibility systems through which individuals could be considered for both magi and magi - exempt bases of eligibility . the fifth state , maryland , had separate eligibility systems for magi and magi - exempt bases of eligibility , so an individual would need to apply through both systems to have all potential bases of eligibility considered . as such , an individual who is over age 65 and a caretaker of a dependent child would have to submit two separate applications to be assessed for all potential bases of eligibility in maryland .