inadequate documentation . as we reported last week , we continue to find that the navy and marine corps have issues with maintaining adequate documentation for their transactions . on the basis of the sample of items we tested for an ongoing audit , the navy did not maintain adequate documentation for us to independently validate its efforts to research and resolve differences between its fund balance with treasury balances with the records of the department of the treasury , which is a process similar to reconciling a checkbook with a bank statement . some payments are considered improper payments due to insufficient or missing documentation . in july 2011 , the dod ig reported that dfas made potentially improper payments of $4.2 million from january 2005 through december 2009 related to active duty military personnel . according to the report , dod did not ensure that the defense joint military pay system – active component contained only valid active - duty military accounts . for example , the dod ig found that this system contained military personnel that received payments after their reported date of death .  financial system deficiencies . in 2009 , we reported that dod traced the root cause of many improper payments in its military and civilian pay to the inaccurate or untimely reporting of entitlement data to dod's automated systems on such areas as time and attendance , personnel actions , and pay allowances . we reported that dod had described steps to monitor and track these improper payments ; however , it was unclear whether these actions would address the root causes of these deficiencies . in august 2011 , the dod ig reported that the army's controls over its deployable disbursing system ( dds ) payments were inadequate and resulted in , among other things , improper payments . the dod ig found that the army was at risk of improper payments because its financial management centers did not effectively review user access to dds or oversee the payment process . the dod ig reported that the army's disbursing personnel made nine duplicate payments to vendors and did not collect on these improper payments . two of the duplicate payments were referred by the dod ig to the defense criminal investigative service because of the suspicious and potentially fraudulent nature of the payments .  weak contract audit and payment controls . as we testified in february 2011 , our 2009 audit work identified , among other weaknesses in dod's contract payment controls , weaknesses in contract auditing , which increase the risk of improper payments . in 2009 , we reported on audit quality problems at defense contract audit agency ( dcaa ) offices nationwide , including compromise of auditor independence , insufficient audit testing , and inadequate planning and supervision . in addition , dcaa's management environment and quality assurance structure were based on a production - oriented mission that put dcaa in the role of facilitating dod contracting without also protecting the public interest .