inventories . the inventories that federal agencies are required to develop under congressional mandate will be used to inform a variety of workforce decisions . for example , at dod , the inventories are to contain a number of different elements for service contracts , including information on the functions and missions performed by the contractor , the funding source for the contract , and the number of contractor full - time equivalents working under the contract . once compiled , the inventories may be used to inform a variety of workforce decisions , including how various agency functions should be sourced . o what is the likelihood of contractor staff in the function applying to work for the agency ? o what is the estimated cost to maintain an acceptable level of performance if the function is brought in - house ? human capital flexibilities . once agencies determine which functions they want to have provided by federal employees , taking advantage of the variety of human - capital flexibilities is crucial to making improvements in agencies' efforts to recruit , hire , and manage their workforces . for example , monetary recruitment and retention incentives and special hiring authorities provide agencies with flexibility in helping them manage their human - capital strategically to fulfill insourcing needs . omb's criteria for insourcing decisions provide a basis for agencies in establishing their insourcing plans and can be used to facilitate balancing the mix of federal employees and contractors to better assure government control over critical functions . however , it will be in the implementation of agency plans and in the individual sourcing decisions that federal agencies make that will determine the ultimate success of this effort . making use of the full range of information and human - capital tools available to implement these plans will be important to assuring effective government control of critical functions , mitigating risks , and providing value to the taxpayer . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you or the other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact john needham at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or needhamjk1@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this product . staff making key contributions to this statement were amelia shachoy , assistant director ; brendan culley ; noah bleicher ; erin carson ; lauren heft ; and john krump . o what are the number of staff and skill level of staff needed o what is the ability of the agency to recruit the workforce to perform the function ? with the appropriate skills to continue to provide services the contractor currently provides ? o what is the current state of technology used by the function and what is the likelihood of the agency being able to acquire and sustain the technology if the function is brought in - house ? business case analysis . a balanced analytical approach , used by some agencies when deciding to outsource functions , could facilitate agency decisions in determining whether insourcing a particular function has the potential to achieve mission requirements .