however , the department has not conducted such an assessment . what other factors might affect the implementation of the plan ? to accomplish these objectives , we analyzed the contractor study that supports the plan by reviewing its methodology , major assumptions , and modeling input and approach . we also obtained information from officials at navy and marine corps headquarters , navy and marine corps reserve headquarters , joint forces command , atlantic and pacific naval air forces headquarters , and marine forces atlantic headquarters in order to verify and assess both the information contained in the study and the resulting decisions about force structure , procurement plans , and operational impacts . we assessed the reliability of the services' data by reviewing the methodology and pertinent contractor and service information used for the study and the plan . in addition , as part of our analysis , we visited selected navy and marine corps reserve tactical aviation units in order to get their perspective on the possible decommissioning of reserve squadrons as well as future roles and missions . the department of defense's 2001 defense planning guidance tasked the department of the navy to conduct a comprehensive review to assess the feasibility of fully integrating navy and marine corps aviation force structure to achieve both effectiveness and efficiency . the department of the navy narrowed the study to include only fixed - wing tactical aviation assets because of affordability concerns . specifically , navy officials were concerned that the projected procurement budget would not be sufficient to buy as many f / a - 18e / fs and joint strike fighter aircraft as originally planned . the difference between the funding needed to support the navy's original plan for procuring tactical aircraft and the navy's projected procurement budget is shown in figure 1 . figure 1 shows that , starting in fiscal year 2005 , the navy's typical aviation allocation of $3,200 million per year would not be sufficient to support the previous procurement plan for f / a - 18e / f and joint strike fighter aircraft . in december 2001 , the chief of naval operations and the commandant of the marine corps jointly commissioned a contractor to study the feasibility of integrating naval tactical aviation . the study prompted a memorandum of agreement between the navy and marine corps in august 2002 to integrate their tactical aviation assets and buy fewer aircraft than originally planned . the plan proposes that the navy and marine corps ( 1 ) merge operational concepts ; ( 2 ) reduce the number of squadrons , aircraft per squadron , and backup aircraft ; and ( 3 ) reduce the total number of aircraft to be procured in the future . the department of the navy anticipates that these changes will save approximately $28 billion in procurement costs over the next 18 years through fiscal year 2021 . operationally , the navy and marine corps would increase the extent to which their tactical aviation units are used as a combined force for both services .