madam chair , this concludes my statement . products disseminated and services provided also vary . for further information on this testimony , please contact eileen larence at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or by e - mail at larencee@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include susan quinlan , assistant director ; michael blinde ; jill evancho ; and mary catherine hult . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . dhs and doj , recognizing the importance of fusion centers in information sharing , have undertaken efforts that begin to address challenges fusion center officials identified in establishing and operating their centers , such as accessing information , obtaining security clearances , obtaining and retaining personnel , obtaining funding , and finding sufficient guidance and training . fusion center officials cited challenges accessing and managing multiple information systems . for example , officials in some centers cited challenges with dhs and fbi not providing fusion center personnel with direct access to their classified systems . fusion centers reported issuing a variety of products , such as daily and weekly bulletins on general criminal or intelligence information and intelligence assessments that , in general , provide in - depth reporting on an emerging threat , group , or crime . in addition some centers provide investigative support for law enforcement officers . dhs and fbi have provided information system access , such as to hsin and leo , to a number of state and local fusion centers and have outlined plans to provide greater access to their classified networks . however , officials at 31 of the 58 centers we contacted still reported challenges obtaining access to federal information systems or networks . in these centers , fusion center personnel must rely on federal personnel who are assigned to the center or other state personnel assigned to fbi task forces to access these systems , obtain the relevant information , and share it with them . officials in 48 of the 58 fusion centers we contacted said that they found the guidelines generally good or useful , although others said they were not specific enough to address their challenges . officials at 19 fusion centers said they lacked guidance on specific policies and procedures on information sharing or lacked national standards and guidelines on training or qualifications for analysts . furthermore , officials at 31 of the fusion centers we contacted said they had challenges training their personnel , and officials at 11 centers we contacted , most of whom were operational centers that had been in existence for more than 2 years , expressed a need for the federal government to establish standards for training fusion center analysts .