this upward trend continues . according to omb , agencies reported 77,183 incidents in fiscal year 2015 . similarly , the number of incidents involving pii reported by federal agencies has more than doubled in recent years , from 10,481 in 2009 to 27,624 in 2014 . moreover , for fiscal year 2015 , omb reported that federal agencies spent about $13.1 billion on cybersecurity , and agencies budgeted about $14 billion for cybersecurity for fiscal year 2016 . this amount may increase significantly , as the president's fiscal year 2017 budget proposes investing over $19 billion in resources for cybersecurity . cyber incidents can adversely affect national security , damage public health and safety , and compromise sensitive information . regarding irs specifically , two recent incidents illustrate the impact on taxpayer and other sensitive information: in june 2015 , the commissioner of the irs testified that unauthorized third parties had gained access to taxpayer information from its get transcript application . according to officials , criminals used taxpayer - specific data acquired from non - agency sources to gain unauthorized access to information on approximately 100,000 tax accounts . these data included social security information , dates of birth , and street addresses . in an august 2015 update , irs reported this number to be about 114,000 , and reported that an additional 220,000 accounts had been inappropriately accessed . in a february 2016 update , the agency reported that an additional 390,000 accounts had been accessed . thus , about 724,000 accounts were reportedly affected . the online get transcript service has been unavailable since may 2015 . in march 2016 , irs stated that as part of its ongoing security review , it had temporarily suspended the identity protection personal identification number ( ip pin ) service on irs.gov . the ip pin is a single - use identification number provided to taxpayers who are victims of identity theft ( idt ) to help prevent future idt refund fraud . the service on irs's website allowed taxpayers to retrieve their ip pins online by passing irs's authentication checks . these checks confirm taxpayer identity by asking for personal , financial , and tax - related information . the irs stated that it was conducting further review of the ip pin service and is looking at further strengthening the security features . as of april 7 , the online service was still suspended . as we reported in march 2016 , irs has implemented numerous protections over key financial and tax processing systems ; however , it had not always effectively implemented access and other controls , including elements of its information security program . access controls are intended to prevent , limit , and detect unauthorized access to computing resources , programs , information , and facilities . they include identification and authentication , authorization , cryptography , audit and monitoring , and physical security , among others . in our most recent review we determined that irs had improved access controls , but some weaknesses remain . identifying and authenticating users — such as through user account - password combinations — provides the basis for establishing accountability and controlling access to a system .