enrollment . separate child health programs may establish separate eligibility rules and establish enrollment caps . in addition , a separate child health program may limit its own annual contribution , create waiting lists , or stop enrollment once the funds it budgeted for schip are exhausted . a medicaid expansion must follow medicaid eligibility rules regarding income , residency , and disability status , and thus generally cannot limit enrollment . given the policy goal of reducing the rate of uninsured among the nation's children , to what extent should schip funds be targeted to those states that have not yet achieved certain minimum coverage levels ? given current and future federal fiscal constraints , to what extent should the federal government provide federal financial participation above certain thresholds ? what broader implications might this have for flexibility , choice , and equity across state programs ? another consideration is whether the formulas used in schip — both the formula to determine the federal matching rate and the formula to allocate funds to states — could be refined to better target funding to certain states for the benefit of covering uninsured children . because the schip formula is based on the medicaid formula for federal matching funds , it has some inherent shortcomings that are likely beyond the scope of consideration for schip reauthorization . for the allocation formula that determines the amount of funds a state will receive each year , several analysts , including crs , have noted alternatives that could be considered . these include altering the methods for estimating the number of children at the state level , adjusting the extent to which the schip formula for allocating funds to states includes the number of uninsured versus low - income children , and incorporating states' actual spending experiences to date into the formula . considering the effects of any one or combination of these — or other — policy options would likely entail iterative analysis and thoughtful consideration of relevant trade - offs . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared remarks . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for future contacts regarding this testimony , please contact kathryn g. allen at ( 202 ) 512-7118 or at allenk@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . carolyn l. yocom , assistant director ; nancy fasciano ; kaycee m. glavich ; paul b . gold ; joann martinez - shriver ; and elizabeth t. morrison made key contributions to this statement . appendix i: schip upper income eligibility by state , fiscal year 2005 expressed as a percentage of fpl 200 expressed as a percentage of fpl while tennessee has not had a schip program since october 2002 , in january 2007 , cms approved tennessee's schip plan , which covers pregnant women and children in families with incomes up to 250 percent of fpl . according to state information , the program will be implemented in early 2007 . children's health insurance: state experiences in implementing schip and considerations for reauthorization . gao - 07-447t . washington , d.c.: february 1 , 2007 .