pub . sufficient to recover all of the agency's operating costs . the secretary attributed the decline , in part , to other agencies making their research results freely and publicly available on the web . he also proposed transferring ntis's research report archives to the library of congress and requiring federal agencies to give the public free online access to new research reports . in june 2000 , we reported that although ntis could remain solvent for a few years because commerce and ntis officials had acted to reduce costs , the agency's solvency beyond fiscal year 2003 was in doubt , based accordingly , we suggested that on our forecast of its revenue and costs.congress consider whether ntis ( or another agency ) was needed to serve as a permanent repository for and disseminator of research reports . we again reported on ntis's operations in may 2001 , according to ntis's deputy director , the agency had significantly reduced its costs after our june 2000 report and had shown net revenues of $2.2 million for fiscal year 2000 . moreover , the deputy director had projected net earned revenue of $1.5 million for fiscal year 2001 . we further reported that the agency was providing a variety of fee - based services to other agencies , and while demand for electronic products was on the rise , research reports and other scientific , technical , and engineering information maintained by ntis were increasingly available through agency websites and other public sources — often at no cost . thus , we suggested that congress look at how this information was defined ; whether there was a need for a central repository of this information ; and , if a central repository was maintained , whether all information should be retained permanently and what business model should be used to manage it . the secretary of commerce agreed with our assessment and raised the question of whether there was a need for a central repository in view of the increasing availability of newer publications . however , ntis continued to operate as this repository . gao , information management: dissemination of technical reports , gao - 01-490 ( washington , d.c.: may 18 , 2001 ) . our most recent reporting on ntis , in november 2012 , continued to highlight the need for attention to ntis's basic statutory role of disseminating technical reports and the fee - based model upon which it in particular , while the agency was carrying out a variety of operates.mission - related functions , it was being financially sustained primarily by information - related services it offered to other federal agencies . further , we noted that additions to ntis's repository since 1990 had mostly included older reports , but the demand was greater for more recent reports . more significantly , we found that most of the reports added to ntis's repository since 1990 were freely available from other websites . in our 2012 report , we identified the types of products offered by ntis as part of its basic statutory function to collect and disseminate technical information: technical reports: ntis maintains a searchable repository containing bibliographic records on over 2.5 million scientific , technical , engineering , and business research reports .