unfortunately , this provision has not been implemented fully . in addition to the annual performance plan , a governmentwide strategic plan could identify long - term goals and strategies to address issues that cut across federal agencies . such a plan for the federal government could be supported by a set of key national outcome - based indicators of where the nation stands on a range of economic , environmental , safety / security , social , and cultural issues . a governmentwide strategic plan combined with indicators could help in assessing the government's performance , position , and progress , and could be a valuable tool for governmentwide reexamination of existing programs , as well as proposals for new programs . the response rate across the 29 agencies ranged from about 55 percent to 84 percent . the overall survey results are generalizable to the population of managers as described above at the cfo act agencies . significant differences are reported at the 95 percent confidence interval . in reporting federal managers' positive responses to survey questions asking about the extent to which a condition or practice was present ( ranging in five categories from “no” to “very great” extent ) , we are reporting responses that indicated to a “great” or “very great” extent . we believe this is an important development that can play a role in getting managers to pay attention to their performance ; we will discuss this in more detail later in this statement . while in general there has been little change in federal managers' reported use of performance information governmentwide , agency level comparisons between 2000 and 2007 reveal that some agencies have made notable progress . for example , over the last 7 years , the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) showed a significant increase in positive responses to eight questions related to use of performance information in management activities . at the same time , dod showed no change in their responses to questions related to the use of performance information and the small business administration ( sba ) reported significantly lower use of performance in 2007 than 2000 on two questions . as seen in table 1 , the range of use also varied considerably among agencies with forest service ( fs ) and department of the interior ( interior ) managers among the lowest users , and the social security administration ( ssa ) and national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) among the highest . individuals making key contributions to this testimony were matt barranca , thomas beall , laura craig , scott doubleday , daniel dunn , catherine hurley , stuart kauffman , alison keller , anna maria ortiz , mark ramage , kaitlin riley , jerry sandau , and katherine hudson walker . a web - based questionnaire on performance and management issues was administered to a stratified random probability sample of 4,412 persons from a population of approximately 107,326 mid - level and upper - level civilian managers and supervisors working in the 24 executive branch agencies covered by the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 .