the federal workforce is aging . this has created a large number of retirement - eligible employees and a potential loss of skills and experience that could hinder agencies' ability to meet their missions . by september 2017 , nearly 31 percent of the federal workforce that was on board in 2012 is projected to be eligible for retirement . increased federal retirements can pose both human capital challenges and opportunities to improve workforce planning . strategic workforce planning that is integrated with broader organizational strategic planning is essential for ensuring that agencies have the mix of talent , skill , and experience they need to execute their missions cost - effectively and to achieve program goals , especially as agencies face long - term fiscal constraints . § 8344 ( i ) and § 8468 ( f ) . for information on other dual compensation waiver authorities , see gao , reemployment of retirees: six agencies' use of dual compensation waiver authority is limited , gao - 12-855r ( washington , d.c.: sept. 10 , 2012 ) . not administered by opm ( eg , the department of defense authority under 5 u.s.c . § 9902 ( g ) ) . you asked us to provide information on reemployed annuitants in the federal workforce and opm's management of its dual compensation waiver authority . this report: ( 1 ) describes the trends in all reemployed annuitants for fiscal years 2004 to 2013 ; ( 2 ) identifies the extent to which opm analyzes trends in the reasons for dual compensation waiver requests under its authority , and provides guidance to agencies , as appropriate ; and ( 3 ) evaluates the extent to which opm ensures agencies' compliance with the conditions under which the waivers were granted . to describe the trends in agencies' use of all reemployed annuitants — both individuals who did and did not receive dual compensation , including retired uniformed service members whose retirement or retainer pay is not subject to reduction — we analyzed data from opm's database , the enterprise human resources integration ( ehri ) statistical data mart , for fiscal years 2004 to 2013 . we compared data on the number of annuitants and their types of occupations to all federal employees . in addition , we conducted interviews with opm officials and reviewed our prior reports on workforce issues . to evaluate the extent to which opm analyzes trends in the reasons for waiver requests under its authority and provides related guidance , we reviewed opm's policies and procedures for evaluating waiver requests , analyzed documentation from opm , and interviewed officials . to evaluate the extent to which opm ensures compliance with conditions under which the waivers were granted , we reviewed relevant statutes , regulations , and opm's policies and procedures for reviewing waiver requests , and we interviewed opm officials . we also reviewed the 16 waiver decision letters that opm was able to provide . according to opm officials , the waivers were selected to represent examples of the different purposes for which waivers may be authorized . we were unable to assess whether the examples opm provided were representative of the universe of waiver requests because of the conditions in which opm maintains the files .