onc financial awards . onc has funded cooperative agreements with state governments and other entities that in turn fund programs that promote ehr use and health information exchange among post - acute providers and others not eligible for meaningful use incentives . onc provides this funding through its advance interoperable health information technology services to support health information exchange program , and funding recipients offer training , education , and technical assistance to providers , such as assistance with incorporating health information exchange into their existing workflows . onc funded 12 awards totaling over $29 million , each covering 2 years of activities from 2015 through 2017 . for example , a health information organization in nebraska received funding to help nursing homes , home health agencies , and assisted living facilities adopt direct messaging , which provides basic exchange capabilities . another awardee helps post - acute providers and others , such as acute care hospitals , electronically exchange health information by , for example , submitting health information documents to a state hie . in addition to their individual activities , awardees are expected to communicate with each other and with onc to identify best practices , such as techniques for explaining to providers the potential benefits of ehrs and electronic information exchange . medicaid matching funds . states may also be eligible to receive federal funding through the medicaid program to help providers who are not eligible for meaningful use incentives for hies and other related technology . in february 2016 , cms issued a letter to state medicaid directors indicating that federal matching funds ( with a 90 percent federal and 10 percent state match ) could be used for these activities . in other words , states may claim a 90 percent match for medicaid expenditures related to electronically connecting eligible providers to other medicaid providers , including post - acute care facilities . for example , in order to increase electronic health information exchange between post - acute care providers and acute care providers , cms indicated that states may use the matching funds to connect post - acute care providers to state hie organizations . onc officials told us that as of october 2016 , five states have received these matching funds , which are not exclusively for post - acute care providers . cms's february 2016 letter also indicated that states may use funds to build web - based provider directories , which facilitate information exchange by allowing providers to identify relevant electronic information and the providers who have the capability to send or receive it . cloud - based provider directories allow providers without ehrs to import and export relevant information . onc certification of ehrs for post - acute care . the 2015 edition of onc's health it certification criteria supports the certification of health it , including ehrs , designed for post - acute settings , though as we have reported , there is no regulatory requirement or incentive for post - acute care settings to use certified ehrs . cms's efforts are focused on the data elements for quality measures calculated using the patient assessment instruments that post - acute care providers are required to submit electronically to cms .