ii. ) we commend cms for the actions it has begun to take to address its medicaid financial management challenges . as we have reported in recent years , cms had fallen short in providing the level of oversight required to ensure states' medicaid financial responsibility . when fully implemented , cms's efforts to increase the number of staff dedicated to reviewing the states' financial management reports should help it strengthen the fiscal integrity of medicaid's state and federal partnership . however , financial management and program integrity , while related functions , are not interchangeable . financial management focuses on the propriety of states' claims for federal reimbursement , such as the matching , administrative , and disproportionate share funds that cms provides the states . in contrast , program integrity — the focus of this report — addresses federal and state efforts to ensure the propriety of payments made to providers . unlike the commitment to expand resources for medicaid financial management activities , cms has not indicated a similar commitment to enhancing its support and oversight of states' program integrity efforts . cms officials also provided technical comments , which we incorporated into the report where appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days after its date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of hhs , administrator of cms , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . we will also make copies available to others upon request . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please call me at ( 312 ) 220-7600 . another contact and key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . appendix i: states' approaches to medicaid program integrity a surety bond may protect the state against certain financial losses . a data warehouse stores information on claims , providers , and beneficiaries in an integrated database . data mining is the analysis of large databases to identify unusual utilization patterns . data matching and modeling are techniques that allow comparisons of providers within specialties to determine normative patterns in claims data so that aberrant patterns can be identified . smart technology is software that analyzes patterns in claims data and feeds the information back into the system to identify new patterns . a drug formulary is a list of prescription medications approved for coverage . national association of surveillance and utilization review officials . in addition to the contact named above , enchelle bolden , helen chung , hannah fein , shirin hormozi , and geri redican made key contributions to this report . ( see app . improper payments can result from inadvertent errors as well as fraud and abuse . inadvertent errors are typically due to clerical mistakes or a misunderstanding of program rules , whereas fraud is an intentional act of deception to benefit the provider or another person . abuse typically involves actions that are inconsistent with acceptable business and medical practices .