mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . the security situation in iraq has affected the cost and schedule of reconstruction efforts . security conditions have , in part , led to project delays and increased costs for security services . although it is difficult to quantify the costs in time and money resulting from poor security conditions , both agency and contractor officials acknowledged that security costs have diverted a considerable amount of reconstruction resources and have led to canceling or reducing the scope of some reconstruction projects . for example , in march 2005 , the usaid cancelled two electrical power generation - related task orders totaling nearly $15 million to help pay for increased security costs incurred at another power generation project in southern baghdad . in another example , work was suspended at a sewer repair project in central iraq for 4 months in 2004 due to security concerns . in a september 2005 testimony , the special inspector general for iraq reconstruction and a usaid official also observed that the cost of security had taken money away from reconstruction and slowed down reconstruction efforts . however , the actual cost that security has added to reconstruction projects is uncertain . the insurgency intensified through early 2005 and has remained strong since then . as we reported in march 2005 , the insurgency in iraq — particularly the sunni insurgency — grew in complexity , intensity , and lethality from june 2003 through early 2005 . enemy - initiated attacks against the coalition , its iraqi partners , and infrastructure had increased in number over time , with the highest peaks occurring in august and november 2004 and in january 2005 . the november 2004 and january 2005 attacks primarily occurred in sunni - majority areas , whereas the august 2004 attacks took place countrywide . mnf - i is the primary target of the attacks , but the number of attacks against iraqi civilians and security forces increased significantly during january 2005 , prior to iraq's national election for a transitional government that was held january 30 , 2005 . according to the director of the defense intelligence agency ( dia ) , attacks on iraq's election day reached about 300 , double the previous 1-day high of about 150 attacks on a day during ramadan in 2004 . although the number of attacks decreased immediately after the january elections , the strength of the insurgency in iraq has remained strong and generally unchanged since early 2005 , according to senior u.s. military officers . as shown in figure 2 , although enemy - initiated attacks had decreased in february and march 2005 , they generally increased through the end of august 2005 . according to a senior u.s. military officer , attack levels ebb and flow as the various insurgent groups — which are an intrinsic part of iraq's population — rearm and attack again . as dod reported in july 2005 , insurgents share a goal of expelling the coalition from iraq and destabilizing the iraqi government to pursue their individual and , at times , conflicting goals . iraqi sunnis make up the largest proportion of the insurgency and present the most significant threat to stability in iraq .