cigars . in april 2001 a cardholder at schofield barracks in hawaii purchased three boxes of hula girl cigars for $300 . according to information provided in response to our inquiry about the purchase , the cardholder bought the cigars for gifts to vips to be presented by the commanding general , 25th infantry division , schofield barracks , during deployment on an exercise in thailand . the purchaser was an acting protocol officer during a changeover in officers and did not have an approving official reviewing the purchases . no documentation was available from the army to demonstrate that this purchase was a valid government need . the current chief of protocol said that no other cigars had been purchased . wine . a cardholder purchased two cases of wine on september 20 , 2001 , from the naked mountain vineyard . after we questioned this purchase , the army concluded that the cardholder had used the wrong card to purchase the wine , but it had corrected the error to put the purchase in the correct accounting classification . an army official assured us that the purchase was appropriately authorized by “competent authority in the course of execution of a highly classified , compartmented program.” we were provided no evidence that this purchase was a valid government need . we support the use of a well - controlled purchase card program . it is a valuable tool for streamlining the government's acquisition processes . however , the army program is not well controlled . the army's weak control environment was the root cause of the problems we saw with purchase card transactions , including the potentially fraudulent , improper , and abusive or questionable purchases . the army has not provided the aggressive leadership needed to build and maintain an internal control infrastructure that encourages a strong control environment that provides accountability . such an environment is an important counterbalance to the increased risk of potentially fraudulent and wasteful spending that results from the rapidly expanding use of the purchase card . the army now spends billions of dollars through a purchase card program for which internal control is not adequate and for which appropriate management oversight does not exist . the army needs to ensure that installation - level program coordinators , the primary program management officials , have the tools to develop local control systems and oversight activities . strengthening the control environment will require a renewed focus on , and commitment to , building a robust purchase card infrastructure . the installations and major commands we audited have been responsive to our findings , and they have begun to make changes at their levels . however , the major changes to the army purchase card program infrastructure that are essential to encouraging and enabling improvements in the overall control environment await action at the army and dod management levels . to strengthen the overall control environment and improve internal control for the army's purchase card program , we recommend that the secretary of the army direct the deputy assistant secretary of the army ( procurement ) and other army officials as appropriate to improve the overall army purchase card infrastructure by taking the following actions .