( recommendation 4 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dod for review and comment . in written comments , dod concurred with our recommendations . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . dod's comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix iii . we initially made our recommendations to the dcmo ; however , because section 910 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2018 disestablished the position of dcmo on february 1 , 2018 and established the position of cmo , we have updated our recommendations to be directed to the cmo . in response to our first recommendation , dod emphasized the importance of collaboration across the department in pursuing dod's goals . in response to our second recommendation , dod stated that finalizing the organizational strategy has been dependent on finalizing the national defense strategy and the agency strategic plan . dod also mentioned the reform teams established by the deputy secretary of defense being aligned with strategic guidance . while dod's efforts to establish these reform teams are notable , as we discussed in our report , these reform teams do not meet the requirements for cross - functional teams established pursuant to section 911 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2017 . finally , dod concurred with our third and fourth recommendations and stated that criteria for waiving training for presidentially - appointed , senate - confirmed individuals will be completed and appropriate waivers submitted to the president for key personnel by march 30 , 2018 . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , and dod's chief management officer . in addition , the report is available at no charge on our website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2775 or fielde1@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . section 911 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 requires the secretary of defense to take several actions . table 5 below summarizes some of these requirements , the due date , and the date completed . we identified leading practices for effective cross - functional teams and compared the department of defense's ( dod ) steps to establish cross - functional teams against these leading practices . to identify the leading practices , we reviewed literature as well as five case studies of cross - functional teams . in addition , we selected six academic and practitioner experts to interview based on their publications or research , prior testimony before the senate armed services committee on the implementation of cross - functional teams at dod , and recommendations from dod officials .