logistical factors . dod officials reported that several logistical factors have led to delays in transfers of equipment to yemen , such as paperwork errors , customs challenges , challenges presented by the type of delivery vehicle used ( sea versus air ) , as well as lengthy equipment procurement timeframes and competing worldwide procurement and shipment prioritizations . for example , a cn - 235 aircraft was transferred more than 3 years after congressional notification , in part because of a lengthy procurement process , in addition to country and security factors described earlier . in april 2010 , dod notified congress of the plan to transfer the aircraft and associated training and spare parts within 18 months . however , the aircraft was ultimately transferred to yemeni security forces in september 2013 — more than 41 months after congressional notification . officials reported that procurement was delayed and , although the contract was complete by september 2010 , the aircraft cost more than originally anticipated . as a result of this discovery late in the fiscal year , dod determined that the funding allocated to the project would be used to cover the costs of the aircraft and a new project would be developed with additional funding to provide the training and 2 years of spare parts that had been included in the original project . the transfer of the aircraft and training was further delayed because of political unrest in 2011 . to address some of these factors and other challenges dod previously identified with shipping equipment for building partner capacity programs , such as section 1206 and 1207 ( n ) , dod began using the jcp in pennsylvania in 2010 . dod officials report that the jcp is used to consolidate equipment , generate additional data on equipment that transits there , and ensure that the equipment is accompanied by documents designed to improve customs processing and transfer processes in yemen . dod officials report that the jcp helps ensure that equipment that passes through the point is documented in dod data and includes sufficient documentation to aid its clearance through customs and efficient transfer to partner country security forces , including those in yemen . dod assessments and dod officials from the office of military cooperation in sanaa reported that the jcp has improved the timeliness of security assistance for yemen . our analysis of dod data for security assistance for yemen from fiscal years 2009 from 2013 indicated that equipment that passed through the jcp stayed there for an average of about 10 months . jcp officials noted a number of criteria used to determine when to time the shipments from the jcp to yemen . specifically , officials reported that they work to balance delivering equipment in a timely manner to address critical needs with making efficient use of each shipment and trying to fill an entire government - contracted aircraft . they also aim , in consultation with the u.s. office of military cooperation in sanaa , to deliver complete capabilities in one delivery and to time these deliveries so training can begin on those capabilities rather than delaying deliveries and training until shipment processing of equipment for other capabilities is complete .