we also interviewed dod officials . we determined that there are three primary fees charged on fms cases: ( 1 ) the administrative fee , ( 2 ) the cas fee , and ( 3 ) the transportation fee . these three fees represented 99 percent of the amount of funding held in fms trust fund overhead accounts as of the beginning of fiscal year 2016 . we will review the transportation account in a separate report because of the different ways in which the collections and expenditures from the account operate . to assess the balance of the administrative account , we analyzed administrative account collections , expenditures , and balance data for fiscal years 2007 to 2017 maintained in the defense integrated financial system by the defense finance and accounting service ( dfas ) , the dod component that acts as the accounting service for the fms program . according to dfas , the defense integrated financial system was implemented in 1980 , and is used for fms case management , financial reporting , and customer billing . we chose to review this number of fiscal years of data based on data availability . to understand the structure and functioning of the administrative account and to determine the reliability of these data , we reviewed relevant dod documents , including explanations of changes to the administrative fee rate over time , and we interviewed dfas and dsca officials in various policy , financial , or technical roles . we asked knowledgeable agency officials a set of standard questions on this system , data entry procedures and checks , and other relevant aspects of data reliability . we reviewed their responses , examined the data ourselves , and conducted basic logic checks . where questions arose , we followed up with agency officials for explanation and clarification . we did not conduct any independent testing of these data to determine whether these were the amounts that should have been paid into and out of the account during that period , such as through correct payments having been made based on accurate billings . we determined the administrative account data to be sufficiently reliable for assessing the account balance and related trends over the period , and for projecting future trends in the account balances , under a variety of assumptions , using statistical modeling . to assess the controls dsca uses to manage the administrative account balance , we reviewed relevant documents and interviewed dod officials . to determine what controls dsca should be using to manage the account , we reviewed dod's financial management regulations , dsca's security assistance management manual , dsca's managers' internal control program procedures , and other internal dsca guidance . we also reviewed reports resulting from dsca's implementation of its account monitoring and comprehensive rate review processes , including annual administrative account assessments from fiscal years 2012 to 2016 , quarterly administrative account assessments from fiscal years 2015 and 2016 , and reports resulting from the 2005 and 2011-2012 comprehensive fee rate reviews . we chose to review the annual and quarterly assessments for different periods of time to review manageable numbers of the most recent assessments conducted . we also interviewed dsca policy officials regarding their implementation of these processes .