( fig . 1 shows the number of drugs added by each visn. ) adding drugs to supplement the national formulary is intended to allow visns to be responsive to the unique needs of their patients and to allow quicker formulary designation of new fda - approved drugs . we expect that its nonformulary approval activities will include tracking denied requests , as well as approved nonformulary drug requests , to determine the appropriateness of all medical center prescribing decisions . va plans to implement these corrective actions by june 2001 . its comments are included in appendix ii . we are sending copies of this report to the honorable anthony j. principi , secretary of veterans affairs ; appropriate congressional committees ; and other interested parties . in the previous example , this means that we are 95-percent certain that between 66.5 and 71.7 percent of prescribers believe that the va formulary contains to a “great extent” or “very great extent” the drugs they believe their patients need . surveys can also be subject to other types of systematic error or bias that can affect results , known as nonsampling errors . one potential source of nonsampling error can be the questionnaire itself . to ensure that questions were clear and unbiased , we consulted with subject matter and questionnaire experts within gao and obtained comments from individuals representing va's pbm and medical advisory panel , a working group of 11 practicing va physicians and 1 practicing department of defense physician who help manage va's national formulary , as well as individuals representing the institute of medicine . finally , the questionnaire was tested with 14 va prescribers in va medical centers in four locations: phoenix , arizona ; washington , d.c. ; hampton , virginia ; and cincinnati , ohio . prescribers were asked to provide demographic and va employment information as well as opinions about the relevance and usefulness of va's formulary . on average , va prescribers in our sample have worked for va for 11 years , with most of those years at their current medical facility . physicians and nurses constitute the largest groups of prescribers ( 65 and 15 percent , respectively ) , followed by physician assistants ( 7 percent ) and other allied health professionals , such as dentists ( 14 percent ) . most of the prescribers' time working in va is spent treating patients — on average , 26 hours each week . according to the national prescription file from which we drew our sample , va prescribers who completed our questionnaire averaged 849 prescription fills from october through december 1999 , the 3- month period we chose as the basis of our survey . we will also make copies available to others upon request . please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7101 if you or your staff have questions about this report or need additional assistance . another contact and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix iii . to obtain policies and procedures from the 22 veterans integrated service networks ( visn ) , we mailed a questionnaire to each of the 22 visn formulary leaders — pharmacists or physicians who serve on the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) pharmacy benefits management advisory board .