wic . as with food stamp participants , women in wic have about the same low fruit and vegetable consumption as similar nonparticipants.for example , according to usda data , a 30-year - old woman in wic would consume 0.2 serving more fruit ( 1.3 versus 1.1 ) and the same number of servings of vegetables ( 3.5 ) as a similar nonparticipant , according to usda estimates . children ages 2 through 4 in wic consume 0.3 more serving of fruit ( 1.4 versus 1.1 ) and 0.1 serving more of vegetables ( 1.2 versus 1.1 ) . the five wic packages for women and children designate allowable foods selected to improve nutrient intake . only one wic food package includes vegetables , and it provides only about one - quarter serving — all in carrots . in contrast , the five wic packages for women and children provide far more servings of other food groups . for example , all five wic packages for women and children provide from 3.2 to 4.1 of the recommended 3 to 5 daily servings of dairy products . appendix vi shows the foods in the five wic packages for women and children . the national school lunch and breakfast programs . the millions of children who participate in school lunch consume daily , on average , twice as many servings of vegetables as nonparticipants for lunch ( 1.3 servings versus 0.6 ) ; however , most of that difference is in the form of white potatoes — mostly french fries . with respect to fruit consumption , there is no difference between the participants of school lunch and similar nonparticipants . the millions of children who participate in school breakfast consume daily , on average , 0.4 more serving of fruit than nonparticipants for breakfast ( 0.7 serving versus 0.3 ) . fns officials pointed out that their most significant initiative to improve school meals ( the school meals initiative ) was begun in 1995 and that the most current consumption data ( for 1994-96 ) would not capture potential increases in consumption that may have occurred after 1996 . the school meals initiative included new nutrition standards for school meals and educational and technical resources to assist food service personnel in preparing nutritious and appealing meals . in 2001 usda reported , from a survey of school food service authorities , that schools reported an increase in ( 1 ) the numbers of fruits and / or vegetables offered , ( 2 ) the purchases of fruits and vegetables , and ( 3 ) plate waste for cooked vegetables . however , it is unclear whether the increased overall purchases or offerings resulted in increased consumption because purchases or offerings per student or meal were not reported . although participation in the school lunch and breakfast programs has been shown to improve dietary quality , 40 percent of children do not eat the school lunch and 83 percent do not eat school breakfast in schools where the meals are offered . usda reported that participation might be affected by other meal options available to students such as foods sold a la carte , in vending machines , and school stores or snack bars .