, reciprocity ) . our selection does not represent the universe of federal access control efforts . for instance , the nipp lists 16 critical infrastructure sectors ; while the access control efforts in our review relate to 4 of the sectors: chemical ; government facilities ( military installations ) ; nuclear reactors , materials , and waste ; and transportation . the results from our selection are not generalizable , but they provide perspectives on organizational structures and operational policies and procedures across different infrastructure types and different federal agencies . users are individuals who require access to critical infrastructure as an essential function of their job . operators own or are responsible for managing facilities , such as airports , seaports , and chemical facilities , which are generally privately owned , but can also include government facilities such as military installations . the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 included a provision for us to report on the background check , access control , and credentialing requirements of federal efforts for the protection of critical infrastructure and key resources , with an emphasis on harmonization — identifying and implementing opportunities to enhance efficiency within or across related processes — by enhancing interoperability and reducing redundancy . this report ( 1 ) describes key characteristics of selected federal critical infrastructure access control efforts and factors that have an impact on stakeholders' use of them ; ( 2 ) examines the extent to which dhs has taken actions to harmonize federally - administered access control efforts across critical infrastructure sectors ; and ( 3 ) examines the extent to which dhs's screening coordination office has taken actions to harmonize critical infrastructure access control efforts across the department . to answer our first objective , we examined six federally - administered access control efforts across three federal departments — dhs , the department of defense ( dod ) , and the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) . we focused on efforts that ( 1 ) were regulated or guided by the federal government and ( 2 ) facilitated access to physical facilities or assets . the six federal access control efforts included are: transportation worker identification credential ( twic ) , hazardous materials endorsement ( hme ) , secure identification display area ( sida ) , common access card ( cac ) , chemical facility anti - terrorism standards ( cfats ) , and commercial nuclear power plant regulations ( nrc ) . to select the access control efforts , we initially focused on dhs - administered programs and reviewed dhs's 2006 credentialing initiative report ( cir ) . we selected four access control efforts administered by dhs based on our review of the cir and identified the seven dhs screening and credentialing effort related to access control . those seven access related efforts are a subset of other dhs credentialing efforts that focused on screening efforts related to access to controlled locations , such as ports or secure areas . this council's activities primarily focus on identifying and disseminating critical infrastructure security and resilience best practices across sectors , and identifying areas where cross - sector collaboration could advance national priorities .