exhibit 53 . the purpose of the exhibit 53 is to identify all it investments — both major and nonmajor within a federal organization . information included on agency exhibit 53s is designed , in part , to help omb better understand what agencies are spending on it investments . the information also supports cost analyses prescribed by the clinger - cohen act . as part of the annual budget , omb publishes a report on it spending for the federal government representing a compilation of exhibit 53 data submitted by agencies . according to omb guidance , a major it investment requires special management attention because of its importance to the mission or function to the government ; significant program or policy implications ; high executive visibility ; high development , operating , or maintenance costs ; unusual funding mechanism ; or definition as major by the agency's capital planning and investment control process . exhibit 300 . the purpose of the exhibit 300 is to provide a business case for each major it investment and to allow omb to monitor it investments once they are funded . agencies are required to provide information on each major investment's cost , schedule , and performance . in addition , in june 2009 , to further improve the transparency into and oversight of agencies' it investments , omb publicly deployed a website , known as the federal it dashboard ( dashboard ) , which replaced its management watch list and high - risk list . as part of this effort , omb issued guidance directing federal agencies to report , via the dashboard , the performance of their it investments . currently , the dashboard publicly displays information on the cost , schedule , and performance of major federal it investments at key federal agencies . in addition , the dashboard allows users to download exhibit 53 data , which include information on both major and nonmajor investments . according to omb , these data are intended to provide a near real - time perspective of the performance of these investments , as well as a historical perspective . further , the public display of these data is intended to allow omb , other oversight bodies , and the general public to hold the government agencies accountable for results and progress . since the dashboard has been implemented , we have reported and made recommendations to improve the data accuracy and reliability . in 2010 , 2011 , and 2012 , we reported on the progress of the dashboard and made recommendations to further improve how it rates investments relative to current performance . in commenting on a draft of this report , four agencies — dhs , nasa , ssa , and va — agreed with our recommendations ; two agencies — dod and doe — partially agreed ; and two agencies — hhs and treasury — had no comments . the specific comments from the four agencies that agreed are as follows: dhs in its written comments , which are reprinted in appendix ii , stated that it concurred with our findings and recommendation .