deter . physical security controls that deter an intruder are intended to reduce the intruder's perception that an attack will be successful — an armed guard posted in front of a lab , for example . detect . controls that detect an intruder could include video cameras and alarm systems . they could also include roving guard patrols . delay . controls that delay an intruder increase the opportunity for a successful security response . these controls include barriers such as perimeter fences . deny . some security controls serve multiple purposes . for example , a perimeter fence is a basic security feature that can deter , delay , and deny intruders . however , a perimeter fence on its own will not stop a determined intruder . this is why , in practice , layers of security must be integrated in order to provide the strongest protection . thus , a perimeter fence should be combined with an intrusion detection system that would alert security officials if the perimeter has been breached . a strong system would then tie the intrusion detection alarm to the closed - circuit television ( cctv ) network , allowing security officers to immediately identify intruders . a central command center is a key element for an integrated , active system . it allows security officers to monitor alarm and camera activity — and plan the security response — from a single location . table 2 shows 15 physical security controls we focused on during our assessment work . controls that can deny an intruder include visitor screening that only permits authorized individuals to access the building housing the lab . furthermore , a lack of windows or other obvious means of accessing a lab is an effective denial mechanism . in addition to the contact named above , the following individuals made contributions to this report: andy o'connell , assistant director ; verginie amirkhanian ; randall cole ; john cooney ; elizabeth isom ; barbara lewis ; jeffrey mcdermott ; and andrew mcintosh . hhs's comment letter is reprinted in appendix ii . as agreed with your office , unless you announce the contents of this report earlier , we will not distribute it until 30 days after its issue date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services , the director of the cdc , and other interested parties . the report will also be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or kutzg@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . to perform our perimeter security assessment of biosafety level ( bsl ) 4 labs , we identified 15 key perimeter security controls , based on our expertise and research of commonly accepted physical security principles , that contribute to a strong perimeter security system .