this legislation has not been acted on . legislation was introduced and passed to limit state - plan program rules to rules identical to osha unless there is a clear and convincing need to go beyond . south carolina returned whistleblower program coverage to osha . does your state have occupational safety and / or health standards that are substantively different from federal standards or that cover hazards for which there are currently no federal standards ? seventeen state - run programs responded “yes” five state - run programs responded “no . examples of state occupational safety and health standards that respondents indicated differ substantively from federal standards include states' requirements for employers to have written safety programs , permissible exposure limits for hazardous substances at different levels or for substances not covered by federal standards , and agricultural standards that cover additional areas not addressed by the federal standards . in addition to the contact named above , meeta engle , assistant director ; linda siegel , analyst in charge ; bryan rogowski ; and suzanne rubins made significant contributions to this report . in addition , assistance and guidance were provided by susan aschoff , sarah cornetto , mary crenshaw , gretta goodwin , duewa kamara , stu kaufman , lara laufer , kathleen peyman , kathy leslie , luann moy , mimi nguyen , carol patey , paul schearf , and kathleen van gelder . workplace safety and health: further steps by osha would enhance monitoring of enforcement and effectiveness . gao - 13-61 . washington , d.c.: january 24 , 2013 . which of the following sources of funds did your state use in federal fiscal year 2011 to meet the funding requirements to obtain a federal grant under section 23 ( g ) of the occupational safety and health act ? earmarked and restricted accounts within the agency arizona , california , michigan , and tennessee specified a tax on workers' compensation premiums as the state funding source . virginia state - run program officials reported that they are in discussions with the virginia workers' compensation commission on a proposal in which they would provide matching funds to the state for one full - time equivalent staff member as a pilot project to assist industries and employers identified by the commission . approximately what percentage of safety and health inspectors , that were employed by your state occupational safety and health program as of december 31 , 2011 , had the following years of service ? in your state , has there been any legislation or administrative action , either proposed or enacted in calendar years 2010 , 2011 , or 2012 , that would partially or fully limit the state's responsibility for occupational safety and health ( eg , returning enforcement authority to osha for a certain group of workers or withdrawing the state plan altogether ) ? the program's designation has been changed from final approval to initial approval status . legislation was introduced to eliminate the state - plan program and return responsibility to osha . some states' staffing figures include 100 percent state - funded positions . federal ( osha ) . in its technical comments on our report , osha provided utah's responses to its salary survey .