gao - 15-758t . washington , d.c.: july 8 , 2015 . responding to cyber incidents . in april 2014 , we reported that the 24 agencies did not consistently demonstrate that they had effectively responded to cyber incidents . specifically , we estimated that agencies had not completely documented actions taken in response to detected incidents reported in fiscal year 2012 in about 65 percent of cases . in addition , the 6 agencies we reviewed had not fully developed comprehensive policies , plans , and procedures to guide their incident response activities . responding to breaches of pii . in december 2013 , we reported that eight federal agencies had inconsistently implemented policies and procedures for responding to data breaches involving pii . in addition , omb requirements for reporting pii - related data breaches were not always feasible or necessary . thus , we concluded that agencies may not be consistently taking actions to limit the risk to individuals from pii - related data breaches and may be expending resources to meet omb reporting requirements that provide little value . over the last several years , we and agency inspectors general have made thousands of recommendations to agencies aimed at improving their implementation of information security controls . for example , we have made about 2,000 recommendations over the last 6 years . these recommendations identify actions for agencies to take in protecting their information and systems . to illustrate , we and inspectors general have made recommendations for agencies to correct weaknesses in controls intended to prevent , limit , and detect unauthorized access to computer resources , such as controls for protecting system boundaries , identifying and authenticating users , authorizing users to access systems , encrypting sensitive data , and auditing and monitoring activity on their systems . we have also made recommendations for agencies to implement their information security programs and protect the privacy of pii held on their systems . however , many agencies continue to have weaknesses in implementing these controls in part because many of these recommendations remain unimplemented . for example , about 42 percent of the recommendations we have made during the last 6 years remain unimplemented . until federal agencies take actions to implement the recommendations made by us and the inspectors general — federal systems and information , as well as sensitive personal information about the public , will be at an increased risk of compromise from cyber - based attacks and other threats . in conclusion , the dangers posed by a wide array of cyber threats facing the nation are heightened by weaknesses in the federal government's approach to protecting its systems and information . while recent government - wide initiatives , including the 30-day cybersecurity sprint , hold promise for bolstering the federal cybersecurity posture , it is important to note that no single technology or set of practices is sufficient to protect against all these threats . a “defense in depth” strategy that includes well - trained personnel , effective and consistently applied processes , and appropriately implemented technologies is required . while agencies have elements of such a strategy in place , more needs to be done to fully implement it and to address existing weaknesses .