central to this initiative is part . omb developed part as a diagnostic tool meant to provide a consistent approach to evaluating federal programs and applied it in formulating the president's fiscal years 2004 and 2005 budget requests . part covers four broad topics for all “programs” selected for review: ( 1 ) program purpose and design , ( 2 ) strategic planning , ( 3 ) program management , and ( 4 ) program results ( i.e. , whether a program is meeting its long - term and annual goals ) as well as additional questions that are specific to one of seven mechanisms or approaches used to deliver the program . gpra expanded the supply of performance information generated by federal agencies , although as the part assessments demonstrate , more must be done to develop credible performance information . however , improving the supply of performance information is in and of itself insufficient to sustain performance management and achieve real improvements in management and program results . rather , it needs to be accompanied by a demand for that information by decision makers and managers alike . part may mark a new chapter in performance - based budgeting by more successfully stimulating demand for this information — that is , using the performance information generated through gpra's planning and reporting processes to more directly feed into executive branch budgetary decisions . my statement today focuses on seven points: part helped structure omb's use of performance information for its internal program and budget analysis , made the use of this information more transparent , and stimulated agency interest in budget and performance integration . moreover , it illustrated the potential to build on gpra's foundation to more actively promote the use of performance information in budget decisions . the goal of part is to evaluate programs systematically , consistently , and transparently . omb went to great lengths to encourage consistent application of part in the evaluation of government programs , including pilot testing the instrument , issuing detailed guidance , and conducting consistency reviews . although there is undoubtedly room for continued improvement , any tool is inherently limited in providing a single performance answer or judgment on complex federal programs with multiple goals . performance measurement challenges in evaluating complex federal programs make it difficult to meaningfully interpret a bottom - line rating . the individual section ratings for each part review provided a better understanding of areas needing improvement than the overall rating alone . as is to be expected with any new reform , part is a work in progress and we have noted in our work where omb might make improvements . reviews of language in public laws and committee reports show an increasing number of references to gpra - related provisions . although there is potential for complementary approaches to gpra and part , the following examples clearly illustrate the importance of carefully considering the implications of selecting a unit of analysis , including its impact on the availability of performance data . they also reveal some of the unresolved tensions between the president's budget and performance initiative — a detailed budget perspective — and gpra — a more strategic planning view .