postal service . however , during our focus group discussions , servicemembers cited problems with the mail , such as it being a low priority when a unit is moving from one location to another ; susceptibility of mail shipments to attack while in theater ; and the absence of daily mail service on some military ships . for example , some servicemembers said that mail sat on the ships for as long as a week , waiting for pick up . others stated that in the desert , mail trucks are sometimes destroyed during enemy attacks . voters must also cope with registration requirements that vary when local jurisdictions interpret state requirements differently . we found variation in the counties we visited in several states as to how they implemented state laws and regulations , with some holding strictly to the letter of the law and others applying more flexibility in accepting registration applications and ballots . for example: in florida , officials in three counties told us they allow registration of applicants who have never lived in the county , while the fourth county said they require a specific address where the applicant actually lived . in new jersey , officials in three counties said they accepted any ballot that showed a signature anywhere on the envelope while the fourth county disqualified any ballot that did not strictly meet all technical requirements . some local election officials in the states we visited took actions to help absentee voters comply with state and local voting requirements by tracking down missing information on the registration form or ballot envelope and ensuring that applications and ballots went to the right jurisdiction . however , local officials told us they must balance voting convenience with ensuring the integrity of the voting process . this balance often requires the exercise of judgment on the part of local election officials . developing and implementing a secure electronic registration and voting system , which would likely improve the timely delivery of ballots and increase voter participation , has proven to be a challenging task for fvap . eighty - seven percent of servicemembers who responded to our focus group survey said they were likely to vote over the internet if security was guaranteed . however , fvap has not developed a system that would protect the security and privacy of absentee ballots cast over the internet . for example , during the 2000 presidential election , fvap conducted a small proof of concept internet voting project that enabled 84 voters to vote over the internet . while the project demonstrated that it was possible for a limited number of voters to cast ballots online , fvap's project assessment concluded that security concerns needed to be addressed before expanding remote ( i.e. , internet ) voting to a larger population . in 2001 , we also reported that remote internet - based registration and voting are unlikely to be implemented on a large scale in the near future because of security risks with such a system . for the 2004 election , fvap developed a secure registration and voting experiment . however , it was not used by any voters .