gsa expects these assessments to be completed by 2002 . for properties with documented environmental contamination , subsequent phases of the approach will involve identifying the nature and extent of such contamination . using this information , gsa's overall strategy is to establish environmental financial liability baselines that will help the agency set targets for reducing such liabilities in future years . the following table identifies the six major management challenges confronting the general services administration ( gsa ) , which were identified by gsa's inspector general ( ig ) . two of the six challenges also addressed two issues — strategic human capital management and information security — that gao identified as governmentwide high - risk areas . the first column lists the challenges identified by gsa's ig and highlights the two agency challenges — human capital and information technology solutions — that addressed issues related to our two governmentwide high - risk areas . the second column discusses gsa's progress in resolving its challenges , which was discussed in the agency's fiscal year 2000 performance report . the third column discusses the extent to which gsa's fiscal year 2002 performance plan includes performance goals and measures to address the two high - risk areas that gao identified and the management challenges that gsa's ig identified . in reviewing gsa's fiscal year 2000 performance report and fiscal year 2002 performance plan , we found that both documents included expanded discussions of the gsa ig's challenges , which represented a general improvement over the fiscal year 1999 report and fiscal year 2001 plan . in the fiscal year 2000 report and the fiscal year 2002 plan , gsa recognized the importance of continued attention to the challenges and described overall efforts to address them . furthermore , gsa's fiscal year 2000 report and fiscal year 2002 plan included various goals that appeared to be related to most or all of the challenges . specifically , the performance report contained various goals that appeared to be related to four of the six challenges , and the performance plan had goals and measures that appeared to be related to all six challenges . specifically , gsa's deputy budget director and the managing director for planning told us that they agreed with the contents of the report . also , the officials told us that the name of fts' office of information security has been changed to the office of information assurance and critical infrastructure protection . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to appropriate congressional committees ; the administrator , gsa ; and the director , omb . copies will also be made available to others upon request . if you or your staff have any questions , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-8387 or notify me at ungarb@gao.gov . key contributors to this report were william dowdal , anne hilleary , david sausville , and gerald stankosky . the measures generally indicated progress toward meeting the goals .