the differences and similarities between sba loan programs and rural 2 . the kind of cooperation that is already taking place between sba and rural development offices , and 3 . any opportunities or barriers that may exist to cooperation and collaboration between sba and rural development . to assess the differences and similarities between sba loan programs and rural development business programs , we will review relevant sba and rural development documents describing their loan and business programs . we will examine relevant laws , regulations , policies , and program rules , including eligibility requirements and types of assistance , funding levels , and eligible use of program funds . we will obtain data on both agencies' loan processes and procedures , including any agency goals for awarding loans , documentation requirements , and loan processing times . to determine what cooperation has taken place between sba and rural development , we will examine previous collaboration efforts and cooperation between the agencies in providing programs and services . we will also review documents such as mous , informal interagency agreements , and other documentation and will conduct interviews with sba and rural development staff at headquarters and field offices to obtain a fuller understanding of these initiatives . to determine what opportunities or barriers exist to cooperation and collaboration between sba and rural development , we will review relevant laws , regulations , and policies . we will review data from sba and rural development on each agency's field structure , including office space and personnel , and interview relevant parties on the advantages and disadvantages to co - locating offices . we plan to interview headquarters and field office staff at each agency about past collaboration efforts and any plans to work collaboratively in the future . we also plan to obtain the perspectives of select lenders that participate in sba loan programs and rural development business programs . other states consolidated their local offices to form district offices . for example , when we performed our audit work in 2000 we found that mississippi , which maintains a county - based field structure , had more staff and field offices than any other state . today , mississippi still maintains that structure and has a large number of field offices , including 2 area offices , 24 local offices and 3 sub - area offices . the maine rural development office changed its operational structure , moving from 28 offices before the reorganization to 15 afterward . in 2000 , it operated out of 3 district offices and currently has 4 area offices . sba currently has 68 district offices , many of which are not located in rural communities or are not readily accessible to rural small businesses . a total of $10 million was available for the rbip in fiscal years 2005 and 2006 . rural development and sba conditionally elected to fund three rural business investment companies . however , according to sba officials only one of these companies has been formed because of challenges in finding investment companies that can undertake such investments . section 1403 of the deficit reduction act of 2005 rescinded funding for the program at the end of fiscal year 2006 .