bleve . experts were split on whether a bleve is theoretically possible in an lng tanker . of the ten experts who agreed it was theoretically possible , six thought that a bleve is unlikely to occur following an lng spill caused by a terrorist attack on a tanker . lng is colorless , odorless , and nontoxic . when lng is spilled , it boils and forms lng vapor ( natural gas ) . the lng vapor is initially denser than ambient air and visible ; lng vapor will stay close to the surface as it mixes with air and disperses . lng and lng vapor pose four possible hazards: freeze burns , asphyxiation , fire hazard , and explosions . what is your level of agreement with this paragraph ? ( finalized in the second iteration. ) lng poses a threat of freeze burns to people who come into contact with the liquid or with very cold lng vapor . since lng boils immediately and vaporizes after it leaves an lng tank and lng vapor warms as it mixes with air , only people in close proximity to the release , such as personnel on the tanker or nearby escort vessels , might come into contact with lng or lng vapor while it is still cold enough to result in freeze burns . freeze burns do not present a direct hazard to the public . what is your level of agreement with this paragraph ? ( finalized in the second iteration. ) after an lng spill , lng vapor forms a dense , visible vapor cloud that is initially heavier than air and remains close to the surface . the cloud warms as it mixes with air and as portions of the cloud reach ambient air temperatures , they begin to rise and disperse . asphyxiation occurs when lng vapor displaces oxygen in the air . asphyxiation is a threat primarily to personnel on the lng tanker or to people aboard vessels escorting the tanker at close range . an lng vapor cloud could move away from the tanker as it mixes with air and begins to disperse . however , it is unlikely that the vapor cloud could reach a populated area while still sufficiently concentrated to pose an asphyxiation threat to the public . what is your level of agreement with this paragraph ? ( finalized in the second iteration. ) the effect of wind on an lng vapor cloud varies with wind speed . the most hazardous wind conditions , however , are low winds , which can push a vapor cloud downwind without accelerating the lng vapor dispersion into the atmosphere . low wind conditions have the highest potential of allowing an lng vapor cloud to move a significant distance downwind . what is your level of agreement with this paragraph ? ( finalized in the third iteration. ) because lng vapor in an approximately 5 to 15 percent mixture with air is flammable , lng vapor within this flammability range is likely to ignite if it encounters a sufficiently strong ignition source such as a cigarette lighter or strong static charge . what is your level of agreement with this paragraph ? ( finalized in the third iteration. )