other lenders . a variety of other businesses and individuals provide agricultural credit to farmers and ranchers , including credit unions , life insurance companies , farm implement dealers , and family members . according to the national credit union administration , agricultural lending represents a small portion ( less than several basis points ) of credit union lending . historically , life insurance companies have used agricultural real estate mortgages as part of their investment portfolios . farm implement dealers sell machinery , parts , and services and offer financing for those products . according to usda survey data , implement dealers currently provide almost one - third of the agricultural sector's farm operating debt with terms longer than 1 year and are an increasing source of agricultural credit . according to usda's economic research service , in 2017 , the farm credit system and commercial banks accounted for the bulk of agricultural lending in the united states , comprising about 80 percent of the total outstanding farm debt . the remaining debt was usda farm service agency direct loans and loans made by other lenders . information on the types and amount of agricultural credit to sdfrs is limited . in our may 2019 report about lending on tribal lands , we discussed how these issues also have posed problems for american indian farmers . as we also reported in may 2019 , american indian farmers on tribal lands face additional challenges in using tribal land as collateral for agricultural loans because of statutory restrictions and some lenders' concerns about their ability to enforce a foreclosure . sdfr advocates we spoke with said that in addition to difficulty meeting loan underwriting standards , sdfrs face challenges related to historical discrimination , ongoing unfair treatment by lenders , and a lack of familiarity with some programs and technologies when trying to obtain private agricultural credit . as the congressional research service reported in 2013 , allegations of unlawful discrimination against sdfrs in the management of usda programs are long - standing and well - documented . for example , in 1965 , the u.s. commission on civil rights found evidence of discrimination in the delivery of usda farm programs , including loan programs . a subsequent report by the commission in 1982 and a report by the usda civil rights action team in 1997 found continuing problems with the experience or treatment of sdfrs in usda programs . usda has also settled several class action lawsuits that sdfrs filed for , among other things , discrimination in the agency's farm assistance programs . the allegations in these lawsuits included that usda systematically denied sdfrs agricultural credit and other program benefits in violation of ecoa and failed to investigate complaints of discrimination , as required by usda regulations . the settlements made more than $4 billion in awards available to farmers and ranchers whose claims were approved through administrative procedures . some sdfr advocates told us that historical discrimination in agricultural lending adversely affects sdfrs' current ability to obtain private credit in several ways .