hud - assisted veteran households were more likely to have a disability . in fiscal year 2005 , hud provided assistance to about 88,000 veteran households with a disability , or about 34 percent of assisted veteran households . contact points from our office of congressional relations may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included marianne anderson , michelle bowsky , daniel garcia - diaz , john t. mcgrail , josephine perez , and rose schuville . the estimated numbers of low - income veteran renter households in 2005 varied greatly by state , as shown in figure 4 . the estimated median number of low - income veteran renters in any state was about 34,000 . california had significantly more low - income veteran renter households than any other state — more than 236,000 , or about 10 percent of all such households nationwide — followed by texas with about 142,000 , and new york with about 135,000 . the states with the smallest number of low - income veteran households were vermont , delaware , and wyoming with less than 6,000 each . as shown in figure 5 , the percentages of veteran renter households that were low - income in 2005 also varied considerably by state . michigan had the highest percentage — about 65 percent of its veteran renter households were low income , while virginia had the lowest — about 41 percent . preferences affect only the order of applicants on a waiting list for assistance ; they do not determine eligibility for housing assistance . before 1998 , federal law required housing agencies and property owners to offer a preference to eligible applicants to their subsidized housing programs who ( 1 ) had been involuntarily displaced , ( 2 ) were living in substandard housing , or ( 3 ) were paying more than half their income for rent . the two exclusions are identified in federal statutes that are separate from those authorizing the three major rental assistance programs . hud does provide rental assistance vouchers specifically to veterans under a small program called the housing and urban development - veterans affairs supportive housing program ( hud - vash ) . established in 1992 , hud - vash is jointly funded by hud and va and offers homeless veterans an opportunity to obtain permanent housing , as well as ongoing case management and supportive services . hud allocated these special vouchers to selected public housing agencies that had applied for funding , and va was responsible for identifying participants based on specific eligibility criteria , including the veteran's need for treatment of a mental illness or substance abuse disorder . under the hud - vash initiative , hud allocated 1,753 vouchers from fiscal years 1992 through 1994 . hud funded these vouchers for 5 years and , if a veteran left the program during this period , the housing agency had to reissue the voucher to another eligible veteran .