be prevented under any interstate air quality rule . epa acknowledged the recommendation in its response , but did not address how this would be ensured , stating instead that in implementing cap - and - trade programs in the past , the agency has not observed the creation of hot spots , and that a cap - and - trade program creates incentives for the utility sector to aggressively seek reductions in nitrogen oxides ( nox ) and sulfur dioxide ( so ) , which ultimately provide early mercury reductions . only in its 1998 response to the committee's mercury - related recommendations did epa acknowledge the recommendations offered by the committee and detail how it had addressed or intended to address each of the recommendations raised . for example , to address the committee's recommendation about the need to take a holistic approach to evaluate all sources of mercury emissions , epa pointed to a november 1998 draft strategy that addressed the multimedia nature of mercury . with respect to the committee's recommendation to consider mercury releases from municipal and medical waste combustion sources , epa described actions that , once fully implemented , would reduce mercury emissions caused by human activities at these types of sources by 50 percent from 1990 levels . similarly , our review of epa's responses to the advisory committee's 14 recommendations regarding vccep indicates that the agency largely did not acknowledge the committee's recommendations . half of the recommendations were in a june 2006 letter to epa . in its response , epa stated that it would carefully consider the committee's comments and undertake a thorough evaluation of the program in the coming months , but , stopped short of providing detail or information on if or how it would address six of the seven recommendations in this committee letter . moreover , in addition to its specific recommendations , the committee concluded in its letter to epa that the pilot program , as implemented , was not on track to fulfilling its stated goal , and that there has been limited information on specific chemicals relevant to children's health provided to the public . the advisory committee added that an opportunity had been lost to develop and disseminate more advanced methods for assessing children's exposures and consequent risks . the president's task force was authorized by executive order in april 1997 for a period of 4 years to provide high - level leadership and interagency coordination on children's environmental health . it was comprised of nine cabinet officials and seven white house office directors and was co - chaired by the administrator of epa and the secretary of health and human services . the task force convened for meetings five times — in october 1997 , april 1998 , january 1999 , september 1999 , and in october 2001 after the president extended it until april 2003 . at the urging of the epa administrator in april 2003 , the president ordered the task force to be extended for a final 2 years . however , this order eliminated the provision for reassessing the need for continuance of the task force , which was not convened after october 2001 .