see table 1 . while consortia varied according to individual community needs and resources , charlotte and milwaukee were examples of the evolution and organization of community workforce efforts . what is known about the outcomes of workforce consortia ? to respond to these questions , we identified and consulted with nationally recognized experts in workforce development and officials from community workforce consortia organizations . we also reviewed literature on community workforce development efforts . on the basis of recommendations from these sources , we identified communities with well - regarded community workforce development efforts and selected four communities that had established consortia of local organizations to address workforce needs . in making this selection , we also considered the length of time the consortia had been operating as well as including a variety of community sizes and economic bases . we conducted on - site reviews of workforce consortia in austin , texas ; cedar rapids , iowa ; charlotte , north carolina ; and milwaukee , wisconsin . at each location , we discussed consortia development , operations , and activities with officials from key consortia organizations and with local small business officials . during the 1990s , employers — including small businesses — reported increasing difficulty finding , hiring , training , and retaining employees with the appropriate sets of skills . this problem is due in part to that decade's unprecedented economic growth and the resulting record low unemployment levels and has been compounded by the widespread and increasing use of advanced technologies in nearly all sectors of the u.s. economy . the u.s. department of labor reported that employment increased by nearly 21 million in the 1990s , with the service sector — which includes skilled jobs in health and legal services — showing the greatest growth . significant growth also occurred in high - skill occupations , such as some types of manufacturing and automobile repair , that now use computer technology in their work processes . additionally , employers report that many new job market entrants , especially youth , are not equipped with the basic skills and job experience they need to succeed in the present environment . many have deficits in important employment readiness knowledge and skills such as self - reliance , work ethics , teamwork , and communications . labor projects that the number of young adults , ages 16 to 24 , will increase to 25.2 million , or 16.3 percent , of the civilian labor force by 2008 . while all businesses face current and future workforce development challenges , small businesses confront additional barriers — both economic and informational — to meeting their workforce needs . small business employers typically have fewer economic resources and staff to devote to identifying , hiring , training , and retaining employees . the employers may be discouraged from participation in some federal or state workforce development programs because they do not have the staff capacity to manage administrative procedures . additionally , because they may not be able to dedicate staff to training and personnel matters , small businesses often have more difficulty than larger employers obtaining information to help them identify and address their workforce development needs .