in this testimony , i will refer to these as human services programs . consolidation has been a useful approach in the past to easing the burdens of federal rules and requirements , though care must be taken to ensure intended target groups still have their needs meet . in addition , adequate accountability measures can be challenging to design . what actions may help address these problems ? for this testimony , we focused on several of the programs under the jurisdiction of the subcommittee that provide assistance to individuals and families with low incomes , in need of child welfare services , and experiencing a job loss . we generally did not include programs targeted to the elderly . we also refer to a few related tax expenditures under the jurisdiction of the full committee . in addition , we refer to some programs under the jurisdiction of other committees that often provide assistance to these types of households also . for purposes of this hearing we have drawn upon prior work and our subject matter knowledge to develop an illustrative but not all - inclusive list of such programs . we generally sought to illustrate the wide variety of such programs that can help address the needs of this population . we did not conduct any legal analysis in order to identify the programs or to determine their administration , objectives , funding , requirements , or goals . to address the objectives , we drew upon reports we issued between 2001 and 2011 . in this work , we have employed an array of methodologies , including surveys of federal and state officials ; site visits to states and local areas ; interviews with local , state , and federal officials ; and analysis of agency data and documents . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence we obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions . we issued a report on march 1 , 2011 , outlining opportunities to reduce duplication across a wide range of federal programs , raising attention to these issues . that report was prepared in response to a new statutory requirement that gao identify and report annually on federal programs , agencies , offices , and initiatives — either within departments or governmentwide — that have duplicative goals and activities . in that work , we also considered fragmentation and overlap among government programs or activities as these can be harbingers of unnecessary duplication . fragmentation of programs exists when programs serve the same broad area of need but are administered across different federal agencies or offices . program overlap exists when multiple agencies or programs have similar goals , engage in similar activities or strategies to achieve them , or target similar beneficiaries . unnecessary duplication of program services can occur when two or more programs are engaged in the same activities or provide the same services to the same beneficiaries , and this can in turn result in inefficient service delivery and unnecessary program costs .