( see fig . these facilities were ineligible because , on the basis of applicable data and methods specified by cms in its guidance ( and clarified through our interviews with cms ) , they did not meet the regulatory requirements of having ( 1 ) provided under 4,000 dialysis treatments in each of the 3 years preceding the payment year and ( 2 ) not opened , closed , or had a change of ownership in the 3 years preceding the payment year . medicare contractors are expected to recoup payments made in error within 6 months of detecting the error , but as of january 2013 , cms did not know whether any of these overpayments had been recouped . these overpayments were of two types: payments to dialysis facilities that were ineligible at the beginning of 2011 and payments to facilities that were potentially eligible given the data available at the beginning of 2011 but proved ineligible when all pertinent information became most of these payments — about $4.8 million — were to available.73 facilities that were clearly ineligible at the beginning of the year because data available prior to 2011 showed that the facility did not meet one or more of the eligibility criteria . the remaining $0.5 million was paid to 10 facilities that met the eligibility criteria for 2008 and 2009 , but when data on 2010 activity became available were shown not to have met the eligibility criteria for that year . in cases where medicare contractors could not make a final eligibility determination at the beginning of the payment year , they were to conditionally approve lvpa payments , reassess eligibility when facilities' 2010 data became available , and , for facilities determined to be ineligible , recoup payments within 6 months of determining ineligibility . furthermore , many eligible dialysis facilities did not receive any lvpa payments in 2011 and others received payments for only part of the year . these nonpayments amounted to about $6.7 million and affected 273 facilities . seventy - nine eligible facilities did not receive payments for any treatments ; these payments would have amounted to about $3.4 million . it is probable that these facilities did not claim the lvpa — that is , they did not attest to their eligibility , as required in regulations — although it is also possible that some attested to their eligibility and were incorrectly denied by their medicare contractor . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our study . we conducted this performance audit from may 2012 through january 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . treatment options for individuals with esrd include kidney transplants or maintenance dialysis . most individuals with esrd are eligible for medicare regardless of their age .