v . table 22 describes the three types of home equity loans — lump sum home equity loans , home equity lines of credit , and refinancings — that smr research included in its calculations of home equity loan debt that exceeded $100,000 , the home equity debt limitation . although smr research data do not include social security numbers useful in data matching , its data include ( 1 ) homeowner names and addresses ; ( 2 ) loan dollar amounts useful for determining if loan limitations for deductible interest were exceeded ; and ( 3 ) other information useful in audit selection or other compliance activities . an example of this other smr research information that might be useful for compliance purposes is information showing that more than a third of the cash - out refinancing dollar amounts and the home equity loan dollar amounts not known to be associated with lines of credit were in just 14 counties . pinpointing homeowners with the largest home equity loans or who live in one of a few counties with taxpayers having large proportions of the nation's home equity loan dollar value might ease irs's burden in matching large amounts of information to its own databases . however , we recognize that matching databases using names and addresses is much more difficult than using social security numbers and that its viability would have to be tested . for instance , irs could run a name and address match for a particular geographic location and follow up with only those taxpayers whose information matched without extensive effort . if the test were to show a low return on investment or did not deserve a higher priority than competing efforts , it could be abandoned . irs follow - up could be examinations , possibly targeted at geographic areas or taxpayers with the largest potential overdeductions ; correspondence to taxpayers as described in an earlier section ; or outreach to the tax return preparation community . outreach to preparers could inform them that the home equity area is being scrutinized by irs and , if taxpayers' returns had not properly considered the $100,000 or fair market value limitations , amended returns might be warranted . non - examination efforts might be preferable to resource - intensive examinations because the amounts of possible extra tax per noncompliant taxpayer might be relatively small . for example , if a taxpayer with an 8- percent interest rate on a $200,000 home equity loan deducted interest on the entire loan , the overdeduction would be about $8,000 , or about $2,000 in taxes for a taxpayer in the 25-percent bracket . in addition to the contact named above , charlie daniel , assistant director ; amy bowser ; sara daleski ; eric gorman ; lawrence korb ; karen o'conor ; anne stevens ; and john zombro made key contributions to this report . vi . table 7 breaks down the pattern of schedule a , line 10 , deduction amounts compared with the number of form 1098 filings . for example , in 2006 , 75 percent of taxpayers with two form 1098 filings had deduction amounts of $14,325 or less .