waivers for a required shared system . officials from three of the four generic companies we spoke with had experience with waivers . officials from one of these three companies said the waiver guidance was helpful . however , officials from this generic company and a second company said it took fda almost a year to grant their waivers . according to officials from a third company , they obtained their waiver within a month , in part , because negotiations had been ongoing for more than a year . according to fda officials , the review of a waiver request is part of the generic drug company's drug application . fda will not grant a waiver unless the generic drug company meets the waiver requirements and its generic drug application is approved . reference drug companies and other stakeholders expressed concerns about these waivers . officials from three of the five reference drug companies we spoke with said the burden on health care providers or patients should be considered when granting waivers . officials from one company specifically expressed concerns that as fda grants additional waivers , it could place an additional burden on the health care system . for example , health care providers could be required to use multiple systems to access rems information on the drug's risks or to complete administrative requirements , such as required certification . the remaining reference drug companies did not have comments on the topic . in comments we reviewed on fda's draft guidance on these waivers , stakeholders noted concerns similar to those raised by the reference drug companies . for example , two groups representing pharmacists and pharmacies said that if fda grants additional waivers , it could place a burden on the health care system . historically , fda has attempted to limit the number of required shared systems created under waivers . if a generic drug company is granted a waiver , it is allowed to create a separate system that includes the same etasu measures required of the reference listed drug . however , to date , fda has only granted waivers to generic drug companies that agree to share their systems with other drug companies that concurrently or subsequently develop generic or brand versions of the same reference listed drugs . we provided a draft of this product to fda and ftc for their review and comment . both agencies provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of hhs , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or dickenj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii .