this is the model followed in h.r . 3268 for gao's statutory ig . report on executive branch cooperation although the comptroller general has certain statutory mechanisms available to aid in conducting gao audits and investigations , voluntary cooperation of agency officers and employees of audited agencies is essential to the efficiency of gao's work . the gao act includes two new reporting requirements to provide more transparency related to the level of cooperation gao is receiving from audited agencies . the first would require an annual report card on the overall cooperation of federal agencies in all aspects of gao's work , including any unreasonable delays in making personnel available for interviews , providing written answers to questions , granting access to records , providing timely comments on draft reports , and responding appropriately to report recommendations . the second reporting requirement would require that the comptroller general inform the congress as soon as practicable regarding specific impediments , such as when an agency or other entity does not make personnel available for interviews or does not provide written answers to questions . obtain reimbursement of certain financial audit costs the gao act also includes a provision to enable gao to be reimbursed for the financial audits it performs that , in the first instance , are the specific responsibility of an executive branch agency . since 1997 , the comptroller general has elected to exercise his statutory discretion to audit the financial statements of the internal revenue service and the schedule of federal debt , issued by the bureau of the public debt , in lieu of the treasury ig or an independent certified public accountant hired by the ig . as a result , the department of the treasury has received these audit services at no cost and without reimbursing gao . this legislation would require , beginning in fiscal year 2009 , any executive branch agency covered by the chief financial officers act ( cfo act ) and accountability for tax dollars act for which gao elects to audit financial statements or related schedules to reimburse the comptroller general for the cost of performing such audits . such payment would be consistent with the principle that agencies should pay for financial statement audit services , as they otherwise must when the audit is conducted by their igs or independent contracted auditors . this principle already has been applied to reimbursements made to gao by the securities and exchange commission and the federal deposit insurance corporation , as well as other government corporations for financial statement audits conducted by gao under separate legal authorities . provide gao with greater flexibilities in administering oaths currently , the comptroller general is authorized to administer oaths to witnesses when auditing and settling accounts . although in 1921 , when the congress established gao , auditing and settling accounts represented the bulk of our work , that is not the case today . the comptroller general has been called upon to perform many other audit , investigative , and adjudicative roles for the congress . these roles periodically raise situations involving , for example , potential criminal or ethical violations , or conflicting testimony or assertions of material and sensitive subjects .