omb circular no . a - 11 , preparation , submission , and execution of the budget , pt . 6 ( august 2012 ) . howto.gov is a key source of leading practices for federal website development and management . the website is managed by gsa and designed as a resource to improve how agencies communicate and interact with customers and use innovative tools and technologies to provide services and information . howto.gov offers best practices , guidance , and training on strategic planning ; federal web requirements and policies ; applications , data , and web infrastructure tools ; web content management , usability , and design ; and performance metrics . according to gsa staff , to provide access to key industry practices howto.gov makes available a list of the “top 10 best practices” for federal websites and provides detailed information on how to implement each practice ( see table 2 ) . omb has also encouraged the more widespread application of many of these practices across the federal government in its digital government strategy . in addition to these leading practices for the development of federal websites , lessons learned from the experiences of those who have developed other government performance reporting websites and views of potential users provide useful insights that could help inform the continued development of performance.gov . omb staff stated that , thus far , the specific legal requirements of gprama have been the primary framework used to guide efforts to develop performance.gov . they have been focused on working to comply with these requirements by providing information on agency and cross - agency priority goals and by establishing a phased development plan for integrating additional information from agency strategic plans , performance plans , and performance reports and the inventory of federal programs . omb and gsa staff members have said , however , that the leading practices provided by howto.gov will help guide the future development of performance.gov . leading practices for the development of federal websites from howto.gov recommend identifying the purposes of a website and the ways in which specific audiences could use a website to accomplish various tasks , from finding relevant information to commenting on a government regulation to conducting a transaction , and then structuring information and navigation to help visitors quickly complete these tasks . according to howto.gov , this is important because people often visit government websites with a specific task in mind , and if it is not easy to find the information they want to quickly complete that task , they will leave the site . providing guidance about the tasks that can be accomplished on a website , along with explanations and navigation assistance , can help website users successfully achieve their objectives . similarly , some officials we interviewed from other governments with experience developing performance reporting websites emphasized the importance of understanding and articulating the purposes that a performance reporting website is designed to achieve . they noted that the audiences the website is designed to serve , along with the intended uses of a site , should influence its design and content .