federal aviation administration . the congress granted faa wide - ranging personnel authorities in 1996 by exempting the agency from key parts of title 5 . among the initiatives faa subsequently introduced were a pay system in which compensation levels are set within pay bands and a performance management system intended to improve employees' performance through more frequent feedback with no summary rating . the pay band system includes plans tailored to specific employee segments: a core compensation plan for the majority of nonunion employees and negotiated versions of the core compensation plan for employees represented by unions ; a unique pay plan for air traffic controllers and air traffic managers ; and an executive pay plan for nonpolitical executives , managers , and some senior professionals . under its core compensation plan , all eligible employees can receive permanent pay increases , called organizational success increases , based on the faa administrator's assessment of the extent to which the entire agency has achieved its annual goals . in addition , notably high - performing individuals may receive additional permanent pay increases , called superior contribution increases , based on supervisory recommendation . the criteria for awarding a superior contribution increase include collaboration , customer service , and impact on organizational success . at the end of the performance evaluation cycle , employees receive a narrative performance summary instead of a year end rating that defines employees' performance in specific categories . irs anticipates that the complete redesign and implementation of the performance management systems will take about 5 years . opm personnel demonstration projects . personnel demonstration projects , authorized by opm under the authority provided by the civil service reform act of 1978 , provide a means for testing and introducing beneficial change in governmentwide human resources management systems . over the past 25 years , 17 demonstration projects have been implemented across the federal government . twelve of these demonstration projects have implemented some form of pay for performance compensation system . opm reports that demonstration projects that have implemented pay for performance have shown increased retention of high performers . to become a demonstration project , a federal agency obtains authority from opm to waive existing federal human resources management law and regulations in title 5 and propose , develop , test , and evaluate interventions for its own human resources management system that shape the future of federal human resource management . under the demonstration project authority , opm approves project plans and regulations , approves project evaluation plans , provides technical assistance to agencies , publishes plans , and disseminates results . the agencies are responsible for designing and implementing project plans and regulations ; consulting with unions and employees about project design ; and designing , conducting , and funding evaluations . for example , the department of defense ( dod ) implemented a personnel demonstration project covering members of its civilian acquisition , technology , and logistics workforce in 1999 .