we interviewed fema officials . see appendix i for more details about our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from may 2014 to december 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . fema first reported this percentage as 35 – 40 percent for 2002 , but gradually increased the percentage after making adjustments to the subsidized rates . we note several limitations to using these statements to produce our estimates . first , fema officials said the statements should not be considered definitive or precise ; therefore , our estimates also are not precise . the officials stated they based the statements on their analysis of a 1999 pricewaterhousecoopers ( pwc ) report , which sampled pre - firm structures around the nation , determined their flood zones , elevations relative to bfe , and full - risk rates , and then projected a nationwide distribution of the policies . fema officials said they used this information to arrive at the 35 – 40 percent estimate for 2002 . they used professional judgment to make adjustments to the statements over the years based on how rate increases for subsidized policies compared with inflation . second , relying on these statements limited the scope of our analysis because fema did not include these statements in actuarial reviews for years before 2002 . therefore , we could not estimate the total historic forgone premiums of these subsidies and limited our scope to 2002 – 2013 . in the past , fema subsidized a much larger percentage of policies ( 76 percent in 1978 , compared with 21 percent in 2013 ) , so current estimates should not be applied to previous years . third , fema's statements do not account for any changes in program participation that could result from increasing the premium rates of subsidized policies to full - risk rates . according to fema officials and insurance industry stakeholders , higher premiums could have resulted in reduced participation in nfip over time as policyholders either decided to drop policies or were priced out of the market . the 1968 law authorized subsidies to encourage community and property owner participation . to participate in the program , communities must adopt and agree to enforce floodplain management regulations to reduce future flood damage . in exchange , nfip makes federally backed flood insurance available to homeowners and other property owners in these communities . fema also found these errors during its annual operational review of the direct agent about 6 months after the changes were effective . according to fema , no corrections were made to the affected policies because by that time hfiaa had been enacted which reinstated subsidies for this category of policies . fema officials stated that most of these errors were attributable to software provided by the company that is both the direct agent to fema and a software vendor for wyos .