noninstitutional programs . va provides or pays for eligible veterans to receive noninstitutional long - term care through 11 home or community - based programs , where most veterans receive long - term care . several of va's noninstitutional programs provide personal care assistance to help veterans with activities of daily living — eg , dressing , eating , bathing — that enable veterans to remain living at home , including the homemaker home health aide , community adult day health care , and respite care programs . vamcs evaluate veterans to determine the extent to which they can perform activities of daily living and to identify the available programs that would best meet their needs . in addition , va's noninstitutional programs include the community residential care program where caregivers — in settings such as medical foster homes where no more than three residents receive care — provide 24 hour care for veterans who cannot live alone because of medical or mental health conditions . several of va's long - term care programs serve veterans with special needs . for example , some of these programs , such as certain community nursing homes , adult day health care , and hospice and respite care programs , have specially trained staff to serve veterans with dementia . the spinal cord injury and disability home care program and certain va community living centers are equipped to serve veterans needing ventilator care . in addition , some programs offer specific services for younger veterans , such as certain adult day health care programs . all veterans enrolled in the va health care system are eligible for va's basic medical benefits package , which includes certain institutional and noninstitutional long - term care services . a veteran's eligibility for fully or partially covered nursing home care is determined by the veteran's priority for care , which is generally based on the veteran's service - connected disability status . specifically , va must cover the full cost of nursing home care for veterans who need this care for a service - connected disability and for veterans with service - connected disabilities rated at 70 percent or more . to the extent resources allow , va may cover this nursing home care for certain other veterans , such as former prisoners of war and those awarded the purple heart . for all other veterans , va may generally cover nursing home care to the extent resources and capacity allow and with the veteran's agreement to share certain costs . veterans' placement in any particular institutional or noninstitutional long - term care program may depend on their clinical needs , disability ratings , preferences , and the availability of va programs . when funds are limited , the agency may prioritize program placement based on veterans' service - connected disability ratings . decisions about which long - term care programs may be the best fit are made at the vamc level between va providers , veterans , and their families . according to va , the agency faces challenges meeting some specialty care needs for veterans in long - term care .