however , it has not finalized its policy . ( see figure 2. ) further , agencies have increased the amount of o&m spending relative to their overall it spending by 9 percent since 2010 . specifically , in fiscal year 2010 , o&m spending was 68 percent of the federal it budget , while in fiscal year 2017 , agencies plan to spend 77 percent of their it funds on o&m . the selected systems and investments range from 11 to approximately 56 years old , and serve a variety of purposes . of the 12 investments or systems , agencies had plans to replace or modernize 11 of these . however , the plans for 3 of those were general or tentative in that the agencies did not provide specificity on time frames , activities to be performed , or functions to be replaced or enhanced . further , there were no plans to replace or modernize 1 investment . further , legacy federal it investments are becoming obsolete and several aging investments are using unsupported components , many of which did not have specific plans for modernization or replacement . this o&m spending has steadily increased and as a result , key agencies are devoting a smaller amount of it spending to dme activities . to its credit , omb has developed a draft initiative that calls for agencies to analyze and review o&m investments . until it does so , the federal government runs the risk of continuing to maintain investments that have outlived their effectiveness and are consuming resources that outweigh their benefits . chairman chaffetz , ranking member cummings , and members of the committee , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . if you have any questions on matters discussed in this testimony , please contact david a. powner at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or at pownerd@gao.gov . other key contributors include gary mountjoy ( assistant director ) , kevin walsh ( assistant director ) , jessica waselkow ( analyst in charge ) , scott borre , rebecca eyler , and tina torabi . we determined that the data were reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives . the work upon which this testimony is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . a more detailed description of the scope and methodology of our work is provided in our report being issued today . over the last three decades , congress has enacted several laws to assist agencies and the federal government in managing it investments . for example , to assist agencies in managing their investments , congress enacted the clinger - cohen act of 1996 .