we do not agree . as we have previously reported , the department has designated the role of the deputy cmo as an advisor to the cmo , and it has not assigned the deputy cmo clear decision - making authority . further , the absence of clarity around the deputy cmo's role and responsibilities , which dod acknowledged in its comments , combined with this absence of clear decision - making authority , directly affects the nature of the deputy cmo's relationship with other senior leaders in the department , as relationships are a function of roles , responsibilities , and authorities . therefore , we stand by our recommendation . with regard to our second recommendation , to develop and implement plans for reconciling and validating the completeness and reliability of information in its ditpr and snap - it data repositories , and to include information on the status of these efforts in the department's fiscal year 2010 report in response to the act , dod stated that it partially agreed with the recommendation . in particular , it agreed with the need to reconcile information between the two repositories and stated that it has begun to take actions to address this . for example , it stated that policy and guidance now require the components to enter information in both ditpr and snap - it using what it described as a “one - to - one” relationship for all defense business systems , and that the dod cio is working with the components to facilitate implementation of this requirement . in addition , it stated that the dod cio and office of program analysis and evaluation are currently developing a plan to modify both ditpr and snap - it to eliminate duplicate data and integrate them . notwithstanding its actions aimed at reconciling ditpr and snap - it data , dod commented that it disagreed that the data in the two repositories are unreliable , stating that differences in the data between the two are due to differences in the purpose of each repository , and that the data in each are complete and accurate enough to support their purposes . in response , we recognize that the repositories are used for different purposes . however , dod guidance calls for business system information in the two repositories to be consistent and maintained at the same level of detail , which , as we state in our report , is not occurring . in particular , the number of business systems in ditpr and snap - it is not consistent , which means that one or both lack important information about dod business systems . as also stated in our report , system - specific information contained in ditpr is not accurate . for example , at least 900 systems showed life cycle phase start dates as the year 1900 or 1901 , and at least 960 systems show a life cycle phase end date of 2099 or later . in addition , during the course of our review , dod officials that we interviewed and who operate these repositories recognized these data limitations and agreed that more needed to be done to ensure data reliability .