doj is uncertain when the revised guidelines will be issued . second , the courts have issued varied rulings that interpret the meaning of the right to be “reasonably heard” at court proceedings , with , for example , one court ruling that the right to be heard gave victims the right to speak and another ruling that the right could be satisfied by a written statement , given the specific facts of the case . third , the courts have differing interpretations regarding which standard should be used to review victim appeals of district court decisions regarding cvra rights . typically , when a party appeals a district court decision to a court of appeals , the court of appeals reviews the district court decision using what may be called the ordinary appellate standard of review . ( 3 ) what are the key issues that have arisen as courts interpret and apply the cvra in cases ? ( 4 ) what are the perspectives of various participants in the federal criminal justice system regarding the effect and efficacy of cvra implementation ? our december 2008 report also includes a discussion of the methods doj uses to monitor performance regarding the provision of the cvra . to address these questions , we reviewed cvra guidance issued by doj and the federal judiciary , victim complaints submitted to doj , and federal court rulings . we also conducted surveys and interviews of crime victims and victim - witness professionals , and interviews with investigative agents , prosecutors , defense attorneys , and federal judges . we cannot generalize the results of the crime victim survey due to a low response rate , nor can we generalize the results of the interviews since we used a nonprobability sampling method to select the locations we visited to conduct these interviews . however , the survey results and interviews provided us with information on the perspectives of various participants in the criminal justice system about the cvra . we conducted our audit work from may 2007 to december 2008 . in september 2009 , for the purposes of this testimony , we obtained updates to certain data we included in our report , such as the number of victim complaints submitted to doj and the number of times cvra rights were asserted in federal court . appendix i of our december 2008 report contains a detailed description of our scope and methodology . we conducted our audit work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . since 1982 , the federal government has passed a number of laws that address the role of the crime victim in the criminal justice system , including the victim and witness protection act of 1982 , victims of crime act of 1984 , victims' rights and restitution act of 1990 , violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 , mandatory victims restitution act of 1996 , victim rights clarification act of 1997 , and crime victims' rights act of 2004 . several of these statutes provided crime victims with rights , but they also directed federal officials to provide victims with various services , such as notification of certain public court proceedings .