we disagree . separation of technology development from product development has been found to be essential to reducing overall development cycle times and delivering new products within estimated resources . the dod policy for other weapons acquisitions is quite clear on this as well . in successful programs , the technologies are matured , hybrid organizations and agreements between the technologists and the product developers are established , and preliminary designs are done , thus providing the basis for a match between the user's needs and the developer's resources - - all before the commitment to product development is made . by maturing technologies before committing significant time and money to product development and following an evolutionary approach , the product development cycle time is reduced , while opportunities for inserting new technologies are more frequent . dod asserted that satellite programs cannot be demonstrated in an operational environment ( trl 7 ) . we disagree . nasa , the creator of trls , tests some technologies to a trl 7 if they are mission critical . moreover , while we recognize the difficulties in attaining this level of maturity for space systems , the space policy does not even encourage programs to demonstrate technologies in a relevant environment before committing to a program . in fact , according to dod officials , under the space policy , technologies could enter product development with a trl 5 or even lower . the policy is silent on what the minimum threshold for maturity should be , leaving that decision to the milestone decision authority . dod stated that none of our prior best practices case studies included a commercial satellite producer , making the knowledge points irrelevant to space systems . this assertion is wrong . in the report that first promulgated the knowledge points ( gao / nsiad - 98-56 ) , one of the key case studies was hughes space and communications and its experience with the hs - 702 satellite . we deliberately included hughes because it was a low - volume , high technology producer . hughes insisted on having process control for all key processes and proved them either through use on other satellite production or through statistical process control techniques . hughes was also included as part of our best practice study on technology development ( gao / nsiad - 99-162 ) . dod asserted that moving decision points to an earlier point in the program reduces risks , rather than increases them as our report states . we disagree . the space policy proposes to make commitments to product development ( including point estimates on cost , schedule , and performance ) before sufficient knowledge has been achieved and requires decision makers to commit first to product development without having technology in hand and second to production of the first two products without production knowledge in hand . this is the traditional dod approach , which has consistently resulted in capability being delivered much later and much more expensively than planned . the commitment to product development ( and the requisite estimates ) can be done more confidently and the product development cycle time can be much shorter only if decisions are knowledge - based .