attorneys because the u.s . attorneys are responsible for prosecuting cases for these agencies , including cases that involve the use of informants . to address our first objective , we assessed the eight agencies' informant policies against provisions in the guidelines regarding vetting informants or overseeing informants' illegal activities . the agency's policy documents generally address each requirement in the provision . partially consistent . the agency's policy documents address some , but not all , requirements in the provision not consistent . the agency's policy documents address none of the requirements in the provision or are contradictory to the provision . we compared the two reviewers' assessments , and where the assessments differed , the reviewers discussed the requirements in the guidelines' provision and agency documentation to reach agreement on an assessment , and had an additional reviewer verify the assessment as appropriate . for any provisions that we assessed the agencies as partially consistent or not consistent with the guidelines , we provided our preliminary assessments and reasoning to the agencies for additional information or discussion . following these communications with agency officials , agency officials provided additional documentation that they said demonstrated the agency's consistency with the guidelines . to determine the extent to which selected doj and dhs component agencies have monitoring processes to ensure compliance with the guidelines , we analyzed monitoring processes at four component agencies — two from doj , and two from dhs . out of doj's total of four component agencies , we selected dea and the fbi for analysis because these agencies used the most confidential informants in fiscal year 2013 . likewise , out of dhs's total of four component agencies , we selected ice and usss for analysis for the same reason . we reviewed the fbi's , dea's , ice's , and usss's internal review mechanisms and processes related to compliance with their respective informant policies . we compared these mechanisms and processes with standards for internal control in the federal government , specifically standards that require agencies to develop an internal control monitoring system that allows agencies to ensure that ongoing monitoring occurs in the course of normal operations and separate evaluations are performed , as necessary , to assess the effectiveness of agency controls used for monitoring compliance with agency policies . internal control is an integral component of an organization's management that provides reasonable assurance that agency objectives are achieved . given this , we reviewed the elements of the fbi's , dea's , ice's , and usss's processes that monitor and ensure compliance with informant policies . we analyzed agencies' policies on monitoring and related documentation , including agency - wide forms used to document the use of informants and examples of inspection checklists , inspection reports , and corrective action reports . we compared the controls and processes described in these documents with those in standards for internal control in the federal government . in doing so , we reviewed internal controls related to identifying opportunities for ensuring compliance with informant policies ; we did not review all aspects of or conduct tests of these agencies' internal control systems .