, the performance accountability report ) . the district's performance report is to include a statement of the actual level of performance achieved compared to each of the goals stated in the performance accountability plan for the year , the title of the district of columbia management employee most directly responsible for the achievement of each goal and the title of the employee's immediate supervisor or superior , and a statement of the status of any court orders applicable to the government of the district of columbia during the year and the steps taken by the government to comply with such orders . in addition , the deputy mayor stated that three additional agencies ( the office of the secretary , the housing finance agency , and the national capital revitalization corporation ) would be included in the district's consensus budget to be submitted to the council of the district of columbia in june 2002 . with regard to the budget activities that were not included in the district's fiscal year 2001 performance report , the deputy mayor agreed that it would be appropriate to develop performance measures for six funds , such as settlements and judgments and administration of the disability compensation fund . we did not verify the accuracy or reliability of the performance data included in the district's report , including information on the court orders in effect for fiscal year 2001 . we provided a draft of this report to the mayor of the district of columbia for review and comment . the deputy mayor / city administrator provided oral and written comments that are summarized at the end of this report , along with our response . the written comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix iii . the fiscal year 2001 performance accountability report includes most of the district's significant activities , providing performance information for 66 district agencies that represent 83 percent of the district's total expenditures of $5.9 billion during that year . the district included 26 additional agencies in this year's report , compared with 40 in its prior report for fiscal year 2000 . appendix i lists the 66 agencies included in the district's 2001 performance accountability report , along with the 2001 actual expenditures for each of these agencies . however , the absence of goals and measures related to educational activities remains the most significant gap . the district reports that it is continuing its efforts to include performance information on its significant activities in its performance accountability reports . for example , the 2001 performance accountability report notes that the district of columbia public schools ( dcps ) did not include performance goals or measures because they were in the early stages of a long - term strategic planning process initiated by the newly installed school board . dcps accounted for about 14 percent of the district's fiscal year 2001 actual expenditures , and public charter schools , which also were not included , accounted for another 2 percent of the district's 2001 expenditures . the 2001 report states that in lieu of a formal performance accountability report for dcps , the district included a copy of the superintendent's testimony before the subcommittee on the district of columbia , committee on government reform , u.s. house of representatives .