the first issue involves state delivery systems . when state rural development offices were given the authority to develop their own program delivery systems as part of the 1994 reorganization , some states did not change , believing that they needed to maintain a county - based structure with a fixed local presence to deliver one - on - one services to potential homeowners . other states tried innovative , less costly approaches to delivering services , such as consolidating local offices to form district offices and using traveling loan originators for single - family programs . but while the farm finance functions from the old farmers home administration fit well into the new county - based farm service agency , the housing finance functions that moved to the new state rural development offices were never a natural fit in the centers . the decision to collocate rural development and farm service offices was based on the fact that rural development had a similar county - based field structure and the department needed to fill space in the new service centers . collocating rural development and farm service offices designed to serve farmers and ranchers makes less sense today , especially in states where rural development operations have been centralized . how to deal with the long - term needs of an aging portfolio is the overriding issue for section 515 properties . in the program's early years , it was expected that the original loans would be refinanced before major rehabilitation was needed . however , with prepayment and funding restricted , this original expectation has not been realized , and rhs does not know the full cost of the long - term rehabilitation needs of the properties it has financed . rhs field staffs perform annual and triennial property inspections that identify only current deficiencies rather than the long - term rehabilitation needs of the individual properties . as a result , rhs does not know whether reserve accounts will cover long - term rehabilitation needs . without a mechanism to prioritize the portfolio's rehabilitation needs , including a process for ensuring the adequacy of individual property reserve accounts , rhs cannot be sure it is spending its limited rehabilitation funds as effectively as possible and cannot tell congress how much funding it will need to cover the portfolio's long - term rehabilitation costs . rhs's state personnel annually inspect the exterior condition of each property financed under the section 515 program and conduct more detailed inspections every 3 years . however , according to rhs guidelines , the inspections are intended to identify current deficiencies , such as cracks in exterior walls or plumbing problems . our review of selected inspection documents in state offices we visited confirmed that the inspections are limited to current deficiencies . rhs headquarters and state officials confirmed that the inspection process is not designed to determine and quantify the long - term rehabilitation needs of the individual properties . rhs has not determined to what extent properties' reserve accounts will be adequate to meet long - term needs . according to rhs representatives , privately owned multifamily rental properties often turn over after just 7 to 12 years , and such a change in ownership usually results in rehabilitation by the new owner .