treasury did not provide comments . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the director of fhfa , and the secretary of the treasury . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or evansl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . this appendix discusses the legislative proposals that were introduced in the united states senate and the house of representatives between march 2013 and july 2016 that addressed the future structure of fannie mae and freddie mac and the secondary mortgage market . in addition to the contact named above , karen tremba ( assistant director ) , don brown ( analyst - in - charge ) , giselle cubillos - moraga , rachel demarcus , davis judson , risto laboski , marc molino , jennifer schwartz , mathew scirè ( retired ) , tyler spunaugle , and jessica walker made significant contributions to this report . loss mitigation and foreclosure prevention . in an effort to help borrowers avoid foreclosure , fhfa worked with the enterprises to align their servicing policies and develop loss mitigation tools that included loan modifications , streamlined refinance options , and foreclosure prevention actions including short sales and deeds - in - lieu of foreclosure . fhfa and the enterprises also made enhancements to requirements related to foreclosure alternatives , unemployment forbearance , and rate - reset notifications . for example , the enterprises announced in june 2014 that mortgage servicers could approve eligible borrowers for extended unemployment forbearance without obtaining prior written authorization from the enterprises . finally , the enterprises have used sales of nonperforming loans to transfer pools of severely delinquent loans to new buyers and servicers with the goal of providing more favorable outcomes for borrowers while also reducing losses to the enterprises and , therefore , to taxpayers . in addition , fhfa identified a number of new activities , some of which the enterprises have begun implementing , that serve to expand its efforts to maintain credit availability and foreclosure prevention as market conditions improve , including lowering the minimum down payment from 5 percent to 3 percent ; providing for principal forgiveness for an estimated 30,000 borrowers in default ; issuing proposed rules outlining the enterprises' duty to serve certain underserved segments of the market ; and transferring funds to a statutory housing trust fund that will be distributed through grants made to the states . fhfa also reframed the enterprises' actions in multifamily production to focus on maintaining credit availability rather than on reducing their market share . beginning in 2013 , fhfa imposed a production cap on the enterprises' multifamily business . however , since 2014 fhfa has allowed the enterprises to exclude from the caps affordable housing loans , loans to small multifamily properties , and loans to manufactured housing rental communities .