this report does not include values for classified defense exports . however , we determined that excluding classified data would not materially affect our high - level analysis because the values of classified exports are small relative to the overall export totals . as a result , a more detailed combined analysis of the types of military vehicles is not possible using existing category schemes . under the fms program , dod reports export values based on information used to bill foreign entities using a unique item categorization system that also is not directly comparable to the usml . for example , the usml has separate categories for explosives , bombs , training equipment , and guidance equipment ; dod's single category for “bomb” includes items in all of those usml categories . further , some of the articles and services exported through the fms program , such as fuel and construction , are not controlled under the usml . however , since dod bills foreign entities for these articles and services , they are included in dod's reports along with defense articles and services . dod officials noted that there is no requirement to report exports by usml categories . defense export data comparisons also are limited because dod , census , and state define some countries and international organizations differently . for example , dod's fms data and state export license authorizations include exports to international organizations such as the united nations . exports documented through aes are coded for the country of destination and not for international organizations that may be located within those countries . furthermore , each agency's system uses different codes for some countries , requiring manual analysis to enable combining and comparing of these data . for example , the code used for a country in one database may be used for a different country in another database , and some country names are different . these differences hamper efforts to make comparisons between the systems or to combine the databases to analyze like exports to countries and international organizations . another difference between state's and dod's section 655 reports is state's inclusion of u.s. government end users in its data . while all exports under fms are to foreign entities , state reports license authorization values for exports that are used by u.s. government agencies within the recipient country as well as articles exported for use by u.s. and allied forces operating on foreign soil . because the values reported for exports of defense articles include these u.s. government end users , the value of such articles exported to foreign entities is overstated . in addition , obtaining precise data on dcs exports is further limited for certain types of exports where permanent and temporary exports are grouped together . for example , both temporary and permanent exports of classified items are identified under a single export license type . for 2005 through 2009 , this license type included a total of about $7 billion in exports , which can include temporary exports . in addition , the itar provides for a license exemption for some defense articles exported to canada . however , the itar provides a single canadian exemption that includes both permanent and temporary exports .