qhps . regardless of the exchange type , cms has direct oversight responsibilities for the ppaca exchanges , as cms is responsible for certifying state exchanges for operation and directly operating the ffe . in addition , cms is responsible for establishing minimum qhp certification requirements that all qhps must meet in order to participate in an exchange . in the ffe states , cms oversees compliance with these requirements ; in the states with state - based exchanges , the states are responsible for ensuring the plans comply . federal regulations require that all exchanges have procedures to annually certify qhps to ensure they are in compliance with exchange requirements . officials from most of the selected states' chip agencies and departments of insurance reported monitoring issuers' compliance with state chip and qhp standards , but states' frequency of monitoring varied . cms officials told us that the agency monitors the oversight activities of states , which have primary responsibility for administering chip and for overseeing chip plan compliance with network adequacy standards , primarily by reviewing state contracts with plan issuers and requiring certain assurances from states and issuers . federal law requires states to establish standards for access to care under chip managed care plans to ensure that covered services are available within reasonable timeframes and in a manner that ensures both continuity of care and adequate primary care and specialized services capacity ; states must also provide assurances to cms that these standards are met . these standards may include , for example , provider - to - enrollee ratios , travel time or distance standards , and capacity or availability standards . cms monitors states' chip oversight activities in the following ways: reviews state contracts with issuers of chip plans . since july 1 , 2009 , cms has required states to submit for cms review all new , extended , renewed , or amended chip managed care contracts that states enter with managed care organizations to ensure these contracts comply with federal requirements , including those relating to access to care . requires states to develop and implement plans that include access standards . states must operate their chip programs in accordance with a cms - approved state chip plan that must include a description of the methods the states use to ensure the quality and appropriateness of care provided under the plan . each state that contracts with managed care organizations to provide chip benefits also must develop and implement a quality assessment and improvement strategy , which must include access to care standards that ensure covered services are available within reasonable timeframes and in a manner that ensures continuity of care and adequate primary care and specialized services capacity . cms is required to monitor the development and implementation of this plan . in addition , each contract that a state enters into with a managed care organizations to provide chip benefits must include a requirement for an annual external independent review to ensure the plan's quality and timeliness of , and access to , covered items and services under the contract .