gao - 13-566 . washington , d.c.: june 19 , 2013 . human capital: additional steps needed to help determine the right size and composition of dod's total workforce . gao - 13-470 . washington , d.c.: may 29 , 2013 . that represent costs to other federal agencies for deferred benefits . for contractor support , the cost of retirement and health care are included in the cost of the contract . see table 3 for a list of cost elements in the instruction related to retirement , health , and veteran benefits for military and civilian personnel . the “normal cost” is the actuarially determined cost of future benefits attributable to employee service during the fiscal year . the dod components we examined , for the most part , including commands , offices , and defense agencies , reported to us that they have incorporated the business rules identified in the dtm and instruction into their workforce mix decisions . still , implementation challenges exist . some of the dod components we examined used the business rules for estimating and comparing the full cost of dod personnel and contract support to inform workforce mix decisions , while others reported they have had limited opportunities to use the business rules . however , some military service officials said they did not know the extent to which officials at more local levels were aware of the dtm or used it , and therefore their reported instances of using the business rules may underestimate the actual number of instances . in addition , at the time when we met with these organizations , cape had not completed development of a dod - wide software tool for implementing the instruction and , in the meantime , the components we examined had developed their own cost tools to apply the business rules and develop cost estimates . further , the instruction that replaced dtm 09-007 directs users to data that may not contain the most accurate information for determining contractor support costs . while the dod components we examined generally reported to us that they have incorporated the business rules identified in the preceding dtm and current instruction to create cost estimates in support of workforce mix decisions , their opportunities to use the business rules have been limited . among the 13 dod components we included in our scope , 8 reported that they used the preceding dtm and provided documentation showing that cost was a factor in their decision making from january 2010 through june 2013 , 4 told us that they had not had the opportunity to use the dtm but were aware of it , and 1 , while it also had not had the opportunity to use the dtm , reported that it was not aware of it . according to the dtm and instruction , the policies and procedures established within it are applicable to all dod components . specifically , the dtm stated and the instruction states that , when developing national security policies and making program commitments , dod officials must be aware of the full costs of personnel and have a thorough understanding of the implications of those costs to dod and , on a broader scale , to the federal government .