( see app . ii for general description of controlled substances. ) under the act , the importation of controlled substances is prohibited unless the importer is registered with dea , and such registration is generally not available for importation for personal use . the act and implementing regulations permit an individual traveler under certain circumstances to carry a personal use quantity of a controlled substance ( except a substance in schedule i ) across the u.s. border , but they do not make a similar exception for importation by mail or private carrier . cbp inspects packages for prescription drugs on behalf of dea and fda . upon inspection , cbp is to seize illegally imported controlled substances on behalf of dea . cbp may take steps to destroy the seized and forfeited substance or turn the seized substance over to other federal law enforcement agencies for further investigation . cbp is to turn over packages suspected of containing prescription drugs that are not controlled substances to fda . fda investigators may inspect such packages and hold those that appear to be adulterated , misbranded , or unapproved , but must notify the addressee and allow that individual the opportunity to present evidence as to why the drug should be admitted into the united states . if the addressee does not provide evidence that overcomes the appearance of inadmissibility , then the item is refused admission . figure 1 illustrates the two acts that specifically govern the importation of prescription drugs into the united states . we judgmentally selected these facilities based on the overall number of packages processed at the facilities and their geographic dispersion . at these locations , we observed inspection and interdiction practices ; met with cbp and fda management , inspectors , and investigators to discuss issues related to inspection , manifest reviews , and pharmaceutical importation volume ; and reviewed relevant documents on inspection and interdiction procedures . at the imbs we also met with officials from the u.s . postal service regarding mail handling and processing procedures . we did the work reflected in this statement from march to july 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the drugs and drug products that come under the controlled substances act are divided into five schedules . a general description and examples of the substances in each schedule are outlined below in table 1 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . all international mail and packages entering the united states through the u.s . postal service and private carriers are subject to potential cbp inspection at the 13 international mail branches ( imbs ) located at u.s . postal service international mail facilities and 29 express consignment carrier facilities operated by private carriers located around the country . cbp inspectors can target certain packages for inspection or randomly select packages for inspection .