other recreation . in 2003 , the trust added van tours , snowshoeing , cross - county skiing , bird watching , and stargazing lectures . in 2004 , the trust implemented an equestrian program , so that riders could transport their own horses to the caldera for rides on designated trails . over 200 riders participated . also in 2004 , the trust added mountain biking , group tours and seminars , workshops , and overnight photo - and bird - watching excursions . the trust is using a science - based adaptive management framework for the caldera , which many believe to be a potentially effective approach to managing the land . under this approach , the trust will make land management decisions on the basis of scientific research and monitoring , taking into account the public's views and federal environmental requirements . the foundation of this management approach is inventorying natural resources , monitoring environmental changes that result from the trust's programs , conducting research that will primarily help manage the caldera's resources , and complying with federal environmental requirements . inventories . little information was available about the caldera's resources when the federal government acquired the caldera . as a result , in 2001 , the trust — using volunteers and employees detailed from other federal agencies — began to inventory the caldera's vegetation and forest , wildlife and fisheries , geology , and other resources . some of these baseline inventories have several components . for example , the wildlife inventory includes components by species , such as mammals , reptiles , and fish . some inventory components have been completed , while others are still ongoing and are scheduled to be completed during 2007 . figure 6 shows the current inventory and monitoring locations on the caldera . in addition , about 5 percent of the caldera has been surveyed for cultural resources . as a result of recent surveys , 25 previously unknown historic properties have been discovered . for example , scientists have identified prehistoric sites showing evidence of toolmaking using obsidian . the cultural inventory is ongoing , and its completion date has not been established because future construction plans are uncertain . according to the caldera's cultural program coordinator , planned surveys can be delayed because of the need to survey areas slated for construction , such as roads . monitoring . the monitoring program is intended to assess the impact that grazing , fishing , forest thinning , prescribed fire programs , and other activities have had on the caldera . for example , the trust is monitoring areas it has fenced along streambeds to prevent elk and cattle grazing in order to better understand the impacts of grazing on areas that are not fenced off . figure 7 shows a fenced riparian area on the caldera . the trust is also monitoring the effects of natural and nonprogrammatic factors , such as changes in climate and species populations , especially nonnative populations . for example , as part of this program , the trust established five weather stations to monitor rainfall , snowfall , wind , and temperature as well as five stations to monitor stream water quality . research .