both departments concurred with our recommendations . further , since that time , va has established a performance architecture program that has begun to define an approach for identifying outcome - oriented metrics focused on health outcomes in selected clinical areas , and it also has begun to establish baseline measurements . we intend to continue monitoring the department's efforts to determine how these metrics define and report on the results achieved by interoperability between the departments . following the termination of the iehr initiative , va moved forward with an effort to modernize vista separately from dod's planned acquisition of a commercially available electronic health record system . the department took this course of action even though it has many health care business needs in common with those of dod . for example , in may 2010 , va ( and dod ) issued a report on medical it to congressional committees that identified 10 areas — inpatient documentation , outpatient documentation , pharmacy , laboratory , order entry and management , scheduling , imaging and radiology , third - party billing , registration , and data sharing — in which the departments have common business needs . further , the results of a 2008 study pointed out that over 97 percent of inpatient requirements for electronic health record systems are common to both departments . we also issued several prior reports regarding the plans for separate systems , in which we noted that the departments did not substantiate their claims that va's vista modernization , together with dod's acquisition of a new system , would be achieved faster and at less cost than developing a single , joint system . moreover , we noted that the departments' plans to modernize their two separate systems were duplicative and stressed that their decisions should be justified by comparing the costs and schedules of alternate approaches . we recommended that va and dod develop cost and schedule estimates that would include all elements of their approach ( i.e. , modernizing both departments' health information systems and establishing interoperability between them ) and compare them with estimates of the cost and schedule for developing a single , integrated system . if the planned approach for separate systems was projected to cost more or take longer , we recommended that the departments provide a rationale for pursuing such an approach . va , as well as dod , agreed with our recommendations and stated that an initial comparison had indicated that the approach involving separate systems would be more cost effective . table 1 summarizes a number of these key initiatives . in addition to the initiatives mentioned in table 1 , va has worked in conjunction with dod to respond to provisions in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 , which required the departments to jointly develop and implement fully interoperable electronic health record systems or capabilities in 2009 . yet , even as the departments undertook numerous interoperability and modernization initiatives , they faced significant challenges and slow progress . for example , va's and dod's success in identifying and implementing joint it solutions has been hindered by an inability to articulate explicit plans , goals , and time frames for meeting their common health it needs .