we disagree . as our report states , iraq ended 2009 with at least $15.3 billion in financial deposits . when completed , imf - required reviews of iraq's outstanding advances and central government accounts will clarify total resources available to the government for spending in 2010 and beyond . the review of deposits in central government accounts was due to be completed by march 31 , 2010 , but , according to the imf , it was still under way as of august 2010 . the review of iraq's outstanding advances is to be completed by september 30 , 2010 . we cannot yet project iraq's fiscal position through the end of 2010 or 2011 . however , as we note in this report and as dod acknowledged in its comments to our draft , past data indicate that iraq's deficit in 2010 will be far less than is projected in its 2010 budget . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of state , the secretary of the treasury , the secretary of defense , the administrator of the u.s. agency for international development , and other interested parties . the organization manages korea's fms program valued at nearly $720 million in sales in fiscal year 2009 . under a cost - sharing agreement renewed in 2009 , south korea committed to provide approximately $690 million in cash and assistance - in - kind per year from 2009 to 2013 for labor , logistics , and construction costs for u.s. forces – korea . according to a state official familiar with the negotiation , this , contribution represents about 40 percent of nonpersonnel stationing costs . nder a long - standing military assistance agreement with the united states . 09 included thailand , a lower - middle income economy , contributes annual assistance - in - kind and cash payments to support the joint u.s. military advisory group u the security assistance organization's activities in fiscal year 20 managing thailand's foreign military financing grants , fms cases , an international military education and training program , which were valued at $1.6 million , almost $53.0 million , and almost $1.5 million , respectively . thailand provided cash payments of $285,000 for support such as drivers , vehicles , and utilities for the organization in 2009 . dod and state officials reported that thailand also provides the united states with the use of military grounds for the u.s. military to conduct live - fire exercises a training and the use of a thai airfield . according to state and dod officials , thailand is the only country that provides the united states with live - fir training grounds — a substantial benefit to the united states . the philippines , a lower - middle income economy , contributes cash payments and assistance - in - kind to the joint u.s. military assistance group . the security assistance organization administers u.s. security support programs , such as the $28.0 million foreign military financing and the $1.7 million international military education and training programs in fiscal year 2009 .