american growers paid its agents a commission . rma establishes the terms and conditions to be used by private insurance companies selling and servicing crop insurance policies to farmers through a contract made with the companies called the sra . the sra is a cooperative financial assistance agreement between rma , through fcic , and the private crop insurance companies to deliver federal crop insurance under the authority of the federal crop insurance act . under the sra , fcic reinsures or subsidizes a portion of the losses and pays the insurance companies an administrative fee or expense reimbursement — a preestablished percentage of premiums — to reimburse the companies for the administrative and operating expenses of selling and servicing crop insurance policies , including the expenses associated with adjusting claims . while the reimbursement rate is set at a level to cover the companies' costs of selling and servicing crop insurance policies , the companies have no obligation to spend their payment on expenses related to crop insurance , and they may spend more than they receive from fcic . the current reimbursement rates , set by statute , are based on recommendations in our 1997 report of the costs associated with selling and servicing crop insurance policies . however , rma does not have a process for regularly reviewing and updating these rates . rma is currently conducting a limited review of companies' expenses to validate the costs of selling and servicing federally reinsured crop insurance policies . rma , through fcic , is the reinsurer for a portion of all policies covered by the federal crop insurance program . reinsurance is sometimes referred to as insurance for insurance companies . it is a method of dividing the risk among several insurance companies through cooperative arrangements that specify ways in which the companies will share risks . reinsurance serves to limit liability on specific risks , increase the volume of insurance policies that may be written , and help companies stabilize their business in the face of wide market swings in the insurance industry . as the reinsurer , rma shares the risks associated with crop insurance policies with companies that sell federal crop insurance . however , if a crop insurance company is unable to fulfill its obligations to any federal crop insurance policyholder , rma , as the ultimate guarantor for losses , assumes all obligations for unpaid losses on these policies . reinsurance is also available through private reinsurance companies . crop insurance companies must maintain certain surplus levels to issue crop insurance policies . however , they may increase their capacity to write policies and may further reduce their risk of losses by purchasing reinsurance from private reinsurance companies on the risk not already covered by fcic . american growers was originally established in 1946 as old homestead hail insurance company . farming is an inherently risky enterprise . in conducting their operations , farmers are exposed to both production and price risks . crop insurance is one method farmers have of protecting themselves against these risks . over the years , the federal government has played an active role in helping to mitigate the effects of these risks on farm income by promoting the use of crop insurance .