( see app . ii for a description of these contracts. ) nasa relies heavily on cpaf contracts . this contract type accounted for 48 percent of obligated contract dollars and 7.7 percent of contract actions from fiscal years 2002 through 2004 . by comparison , between fiscal years 1999 and 2003 , award - fee contracts accounted for 13 percent of the contract dollars and 3.4 percent of contract actions at the department of defense ( dod ) . a cpaf contract includes an estimate of the total cost of what is being contracted for , may include a fee with a possible base amount fixed at the inception of the contract , and includes an award amount that is intended to motivate excellence in contract performance . the award fee is paid based upon the government's periodic judgmental evaluations of contractor performance . when developing evaluation plans , nasa's award - fee guide indicates that evaluation plans may include outcomes , outputs , inputs , or a combination of these elements . nasa's guide expresses a preference for outcome factors . it notes that while it is sometimes valuable to consider input and output factors when evaluating contractor performance , outcome factors are better indicators of success relative to the desired result . an outcome factor is an assessment of the results of an activity compared to its intended purpose . outcome - based factors are the least administratively burdensome type of performance evaluation factor , and should provide the best indicator of overall success . outcome - based factors should therefore be the first type of evaluation factor considered for use , and are often ideal for nonroutine efforts . an output factor is the tabulation , calculation , or recording of activity or effort and can be expressed in a quantitative or qualitative manner . output factors may be more desirable for routine efforts , but are administratively more burdensome than outcome factors due to the tabulation , calculation , or recording requirements . when output factors are used , care should be taken to ensure that there is a logical connection between the reported measures and the program's mission , goals , and objectives . input factors refer to intermediate processes , procedures , actions , or techniques that are key elements influencing successful contract performance . this information included the basic contract and statement of work , acquisition planning documents , award - fee modifications , performance evaluation plan documentation describing fee criteria for specific evaluation periods , contractor self - assessments , performance evaluation board reports , and fee determination documents . we used this information to corroborate and supplement the information provided by nasa officials in response to structured questionnaires we prepared and interviews we conducted . we e - mailed the questionnaires and received written responses for all 10 of the contracts . we conducted structured interviews with contracting and program officials concerning the development , implementation , and effectiveness of the award - fee structure for some of the contracts .