servicers . five nonbank entities serviced over 99 percent of the privately owned hecm portfolio as of the end of fiscal year 2018 . as previously noted , fha has a contractor ( also a nonbank entity ) that services fha - assigned hecms . a number of federal agencies have roles in overseeing the reverse mortgage market , including the following: fha . insures hecms and administers the hecm program , including issuing program regulations and enforcing program requirements . fha supplements regulations through additional policies , procedures , and other written communications for the hecm program . for example , fha officials said the agency utilizes its single family housing handbook , hecm handbook , and mortgagee letters to communicate changes about the hecm program . “retire on the house: the possible use of reverse mortgages to enhance retirement security.” the journal of retirement , vol . 3 ( 2018 ) : pp . in addition to the contact named above , steve westley ( assistant director ) , beth faraguna ( analyst in charge ) , steven campbell , william chatlos , holly hobbs , john karikari , matthew levie , risto laboski , marc molino , jennifer schwartz , tyler spunaugle , and khristi wilkins made key contributions to this report . in 2013 , congress enacted a law that allowed fha to make changes to hecm program requirements by notice or mortgagee letter in addition to regulation . since then , fha has made several policy changes to the hecm program through mortgagee letters . cfpb . supervises nonbank reverse mortgage lenders and servicers for compliance with , and enforces violations of , federal consumer financial protection laws . cfpb can also issue regulations under the federal consumer protection laws addressed specifically to protecting consumers considering reverse mortgages . additionally , cfpb examines entities for compliance with federal consumer financial laws to obtain information about an institution's compliance management systems and procedures and to detect and assess risks to consumers and markets . further , cfpb collects consumer complaints regarding consumer financial products or services ( including reverse mortgages ) and educates consumers about their rights under federal consumer financial protection laws . federal depository institution regulators . these regulators monitor compliance with relevant laws and regulations , such as provisions of the federal trade commission act and the truth in lending act , primarily through periodic examinations , for federally regulated lenders that originate hecms . several features and requirements of the hecm program provide consumer protections to borrowers . for example , borrowers must undergo preloan counseling , the program limits costs and fees lenders can charge , and lenders must provide certain disclosures . in addition , fha has made several changes to the hecm program in recent years to help borrowers who have defaulted due to unpaid property charges . as previously discussed , if a hecm borrower does not pay his or her property charges , fha regulations generally require the servicer to pay the property charges on the borrower's behalf to help avoid a tax foreclosure by the local authority and protect the investor's and fha's interest in the home . fha regulations also allow servicers to charge certain fees once a loan is called due and payable .