gao - 02-849 . washington , d.c.: september 16 , 2002 . ( see fig . in addition to los angeles county , other counties with a significant percentage of ssi residency overpayments include queens county , new york ( 5.2 percent ) ; new york county , new york ( 5.0 percent ) ; kings county , new york ( 4.8 percent ) ; san diego county , california ( 4.1 percent ) ; and bronx county , new york ( 3.5 percent ) . moreover , of approximately 3,000 counties in the united states , 50 accounted for 77 percent of all residency overpayments detected by ssa during this time . ssa's data also show that individuals born outside the united states accounted for at least 87 percent of all ssi residency overpayments between 1997 and 2001 . residency overpayments were most common among recipients who were born in latin america , the caribbean , and south / southeast asia , but included other areas as well , such as the middle east . ( see fig . recipients from the philippines accounted for the greatest amount of residency violations or $24 million of all ssi residency overpayments during this period . ssa data also show that recipients from just 14 countries and one united states territory accounted for about 73 percent of all residency overpayments during this period . in addition to the philippines ( 20.2 percent ) , these include the dominican republic ( 12.3 percent ) , mexico ( 7.6 percent ) , puerto rico ( 7.5 percent ) , india ( 7.1 percent ) , and iran ( 3.4 percent ) . moreover , a prior study by ssa's oig found that ssi residency violations are more prevalent among recipients born outside the united states than for native - born citizens . specifically , the oig found that more than 20 percent of the recipients born outside the united states had periods of ineligibility because of absences from the united states , compared with 0.2 percent for native - born recipients . ssa's ability to detect and deter residency violations is impeded by three kinds of weaknesses: dependence on self - reported information by clients , insufficient use of existing compliance tools , and a failure to pursue independent data sources for its verifications . first , the agency relies heavily on self - reported information from recipients to determine domestic residency , often without independently verifying such information . second , to detect and deter residency violations , ssa makes insufficient use of its existing tools for program integrity , such as its risk analysis system to screen for high - risk cases . to test the feasibility of using the agency's system to screen for residency violations , we developed and tested , with some success , a statistical model of factors that may be associated with such violations . ssa has also not made optimal use of redetermination reviews , home visits , monetary penalties , and administrative sanctions . finally , the agency has not employed the use of independent data sources from other federal agencies or private organizations to detect nonresidency of ssi recipients .