we are conducting additional investigations on this case . case number 2 involves an individual who used 15 different ssns — one of which was the individual's own — to submit at least 15 registrations over the telephone . the individual claimed a different damaged address on all 15 registrations , and used 3 different current addresses — including a post office box , where the individual received payments . the individual received 16 payments totaling over $41,000 on 15 of the registrations . in all , the individual received 13 expedited assistance payments , 2 temporary housing assistance payments , and another payment of $10,500 . as discussed previously , fema did not verify the identity of individuals and / or households who submitted disaster registrations over the telephone . this weakness occurred in the debit card program as well . typically a household can only receive one expedited assistance payment . this registrant withdrew most of the $9,554 deposited into the debit card account by obtaining atm cash withdrawals . based on a comparison of fema's ihp payments and the list of debit card recipients , we found that over 5,000 of the 11,000 debit card recipients received more than one $2,000 expedited assistance payment because they received a debit card and another form of payment ( check or eft ) . according to fema officials , they were aware that several individuals had already registered for ihp assistance and that some payments had already been made prior to issuance of a debit card . however , fema officials stated that individuals in the three shelters in texas would not have access to their home addresses or bank accounts and therefore needed immediate assistance in the form of debit cards . our review of fema data disproved fema's belief that only a few individuals who received debit cards also received other disaster assistance payments . in the course of our work , we made numerous written requests for key documents and sets of data related to the ihp , most dating back to october 2005 . while fema officials promptly satisfied one key part of our request — databases of ihp registrants and payments — the majority of what we requested has not been provided . on january 18 , 2006 , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) office of general counsel did provide us with well less than half of the documents that were requested . while the database and other data provided by fema enabled us to design procedures to test the effectiveness of fema's system of internal controls , it did not enable us to fully determine the root causes of weak or non - existent controls and formulate detailed recommendations . for example , as will be discussed later , fema and the dhs had not provided us documentation to enable us to conclusively determine the reason that fema submitted some registrations , and did not submit other registrations , to identity validation prior to issuing expedited assistance payments . we conducted our audit and investigations from october 2005 through january 2006 .