this report contains recommendations to you . the head of a federal agency is required by 31 u.s.c . ยง 720 to submit a written statement on the actions taken on the recommendations by the head of the agency . the statement must be submitted to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs and the house committee on oversight and government reform not later than 60 days from the date of this report . we are also sending copies of this report to interested congressional parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . we acknowledge and appreciate the cooperation and assistance provided by sec management and staff during our audit . if you have any questions about this report or need assistance in addressing these issues , please contact gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov or nabajyoti barkakati at ( 202 ) 512-4499 or barkakatin@gao.gov . gao staff who made significant contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . as part of our audit of the securities and exchange commission's ( sec ) fiscal years 2012 and 2013 financial statements , we assessed the commission's information security controls . the objective was to determine the effectiveness of sec's information security controls for ensuring the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of its key financial systems and information . to do this , we identified and reviewed sec information systems control policies and procedures , conducted tests of controls , and held interviews with key security representatives and management officials concerning whether information security controls were in place , adequately designed , and operating effectively . in its written comments ( reproduced in app . we assessed the effectiveness of both general and application controls by performing information system controls walkthroughs surrounding the observing technical controls implemented on selected systems ; initiation , authorization , processing , recording , and reporting of financial data ( via interviews , inquiries , observations , and inspections ) ; reviewing systems security assessment and authorization documents ; reviewing sec policies and procedures ; testing specific controls ; and scanning and manually assessing sec systems including general support systems and financial applications . users can be authenticated using mechanisms such as a password and user id combination . sec policy requires strong password controls for authentication , such as passwords that are at least 8 eight alphanumeric characters in length and that expire after a predetermined period of time . however , sec did not consistently implement strong password controls for identifying and authenticating users to certain servers , network devices , and databases in the key financial system's environment . for example , password length on a network management device and a server contained fewer characters than required . user account passwords on another server were configured to never expire . additionally , two databases had a user password that had the same name as the user account . as a result , sec is at increased risk that accounts could be compromised and used by unauthorized individuals to access sensitive information . authorization encompasses access privileges granted to a user , program , or process .