automation . we have expressed concerns about aedib , which could affect successful implementation of the commissioner's strategy . our recent work noted that ssa had begun its national rollout of this system based on limited pilot testing and without ensuring that all critical problems identified in its pilot testing had been resolved . further , ssa did not plan to conduct end - to - end testing to evaluate the performance of the system's interrelated components . ssa has maintained that its pilot tests will be sufficient for evaluating the system ; however , without ensuring that critical problems have been resolved and conducting end - to - end testing , ssa lacks assurance that the interrelated electronic disability system components will work together successfully . additionally , while ssa has established processes and procedures to guide its software development , the agency could not provide evidence that it was consistently applying these procedures to the aedib initiative . further , while ssa had identified aedib system and security risks , it had not finalized mitigation strategies . as a result , the agency may not be positioned to effectively prevent circumstances that could impede aedib's success . to help improve the potential for aedib's success , we have made a number of recommendations to ssa , including that the agency resolve all critical problems identified , conduct end - to - end testing , ensure user concurrence on software validation and systems certifications , and finalize aedib risk mitigation strategies . key human capital challenges . we have also expressed concerns about a number of issues surrounding human capital at the ddss that could adversely affect the commissioner's strategy . the more than 6,500 disability examiners in the ddss who help make initial decisions about eligibility for disability benefits are key to the accuracy and timeliness of its disability determinations . the critical role played by the dds examiners will likely be even more challenging in the future if the ddss are responsible for adjudicating only the more complex claims , as envisioned by the commissioner . yet , we recently found that the ddss face challenges in retaining examiners and enhancing their expertise . high examiner turnover . according to the results of our survey of 52 ddss , over half of all dds directors said that examiner turnover was too high . we also found that examiner turnover was about twice that of federal employees performing similar work . nearly two - thirds of all directors reported that turnover had decreased overall staff skill levels and increased examiner caseloads , and over one - half of all directors said that turnover had increased dds claims - processing times and backlogs . two - thirds of all dds directors cited stressful workloads and noncompetitive salaries as major factors that contributed to turnover . difficulties recruiting staff . more than three - quarters of all dds directors reported difficulties in recruiting and hiring enough people who could become successful examiners . of these directors , more than three - quarters reported that such difficulties contributed to decreased accuracy in disability decisions or to increases in job stress , claims - processing times , examiner caseload levels , backlogs , and turnover .