our study has some limitations . first , our study did not examine whether statistically significant differences in estimates of access to health care between respondents in expansion and non - expansion states were associated with the choice to expand medicaid . second , nhis data are based on respondent - reported data , which may be subject to potential biases and recall of participants' use of health services and may be less accurate than administrative data or clinical data . third , we could not report estimates of access to health care that did not meet nchs's standards of reliability or precision . we assessed the reliability of nhis data by reviewing nhis data documentation ; interviewing knowledgeable nchs officials and academic researchers ; and examining the data for logical errors , missing values , and values outside of expected ranges . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of these analyses . under the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) , states may opt to expand their medicaid programs' eligibility to cover certain low - income adults beginning january 2014 . as of december 2017 , 31 states and the district of columbia had expanded their medicaid programs as permitted under ppaca and 19 states had not . table 5 lists the states that expanded medicaid eligibility and those that did not . it also includes state population and other medicaid data , which is presented in the roll - over information in interactive figure 2 . this appendix provides additional 2016 national health interview survey ( nhis ) estimates we obtained from the national center for health statistics ( nchs ) . table 6 presents estimates of selected demographic characteristics for low - income adults who were uninsured at the time of the survey interview . the table provides estimates for these adults based on whether they resided in states that expanded medicaid eligibility as permitted under the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) ( referred to as expansion states ) or states that did not ( referred to as non - expansion states ) . we report statistically significant differences when comparing the responses of uninsured , low - income adults in expansion and non - expansion states . table 7 shows estimates of the reported health status of uninsured , low - income adults based on whether they resided in an expansion or non - expansion state . the table provides the number and percent of these adults who reported that at the time of the interview their health status was excellent or very good ; good ; or fair or poor . the table also shows the extent to which these adults reported whether their health status was different at the time of the interview compared to the previous year . we report statistically significant differences when comparing the responses of uninsured , low - income adults in expansion and non - expansion states .