this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions the chairmen or other members of the subcommittees may have . for further information about this testimony , please contact janet heinrich at ( 202 ) 512-7119 . jennifer major , terry saiki , stan stenersen , and kim yamane also made key contributions to this statement . infectious disease preparedness: federal challenges in responding to influenza outbreaks . gao - 04-1100t , washington , d.c.: september 28 , 2004 . sars outbreak: improvements to public health capacity are needed for responding to bioterrorism and emerging infectious diseases . gao - 03- 769t , washington , d.c.: may 7 , 2003 . infectious disease outbreaks: bioterrorism preparedness efforts have improved public health response capacity , but gaps remain . gao - 03- 654t , washington , d.c.: april 9 , 2003 . flu vaccine: steps are needed to better prepare for possible future shortages . gao - 01-786t , washington , d.c.: may 30 , 2001 . flu vaccine: supply problems heighten need to ensure access for high - risk people . gao - 01-624 , washington , d.c.: may 15 , 2001 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . they informed us they had no comments . it has become even more difficult because there are few manufacturers . as we are witnessing this year , problems at one or more manufacturers can significantly upset the traditional fall delivery of influenza vaccine . these problems , in turn , can create variability in who has ready access to the vaccine . matching flu vaccine supply and demand is a challenge because the available supply and demand for vaccine can vary from month to month and year to year , as the following examples illustrate . in 2000-2001 , when a substantial proportion of flu vaccine was distributed much later than usual due to manufacturing difficulties , temporary shortages during the prime period for vaccinations were followed by decreased demand as additional vaccine became available later in the year . despite efforts by cdc and others to encourage people to seek flu vaccinations later in the season , providers still reported a drop in demand in december . the light flu season in 2000-2001 , which had relatively low influenza mortality , probably also contributed to the lack of interest . as a result of the waning demand that year , manufacturers and distributors reported having more vaccine than they could sell . in addition , some physicians' offices , employee health clinics , and other organizations that administered flu vaccinations reported having unused doses in december and later . for the 2002-2003 flu season , according to cdc officials , vaccine manufacturers produced about 95 million doses of vaccine , of which about 83 million doses were used and about 12 million doses went unused .