ii ) . the way this revenue is recognized depends upon the likelihood that the loan commitment will be exercised . when this likelihood is remote , the bank will recognize the revenue in equal portions over the loan commitment period . however , if it is likely that the commitment will be exercised , the bank will defer recognizing all the fee revenue for this commitment until the loan is drawn . the fee revenue from the commitment is then recognized over the life of the loan . if this loan commitment remains unexercised , the income would be recognized in total when the commitment period expired . currently , commercial banks are not allowed to recognize changes in the fair value of loan commitments in their earnings . investment banks are generally required to follow the american institute of certified public accountants ( aicpa ) audit and accounting guide , brokers and dealers in securities , which directs them to record the fair value of loan commitments . when using the fair value model , investment banks must recognize , in income , gains or losses resulting from changes in the fair value of a financial instrument , such as a loan commitment , during the period the change occurs . although commercial and investment banks follow different models to account for loan commitments , both firms are subject to the same fair value footnote disclosure requirements in which they report the fair value of all loan commitments in their financial statement footnotes along with the method used to determine fair value . as a result , financial analysts and investors are presented with similar information about the commercial and investment banks' loan commitments in the financial statement footnotes . according to fas 107: disclosures about fair value of financial instruments , in the absence of a quoted market price , firms may estimate fair value based on , among other things , the value of ( 1 ) the quoted price of a financial instrument with similar characteristics , ( 2 ) option or matrix pricing models , or ( 3 ) the discounted value of future cash flows expected to be received . as we previously reported in our october 2003 report on bank tying , securities and exchange commission ( sec ) officials and the banking regulators told us the footnote disclosures included with financial statements were an integral part of communicating risk . they considered the statement of position and statement of operations alone to be incomplete instruments through which to convey the risk of loan commitments . they emphasized that to fully ascertain a firm's financial standing , footnotes must be read along with the financial statements . we found that the banks included in the scope of this review used similar methods to estimate the fair value of financial instruments and the level of detail in their financial statement disclosures varied . for example , all of the commercial bank footnotes we reviewed stated that fair values were based on quoted market prices , when available . if quoted market prices were not available , the banks used other methods such as internally developed models , or based their fair value estimates on the price of similar financial instruments .