dod has not identified a specific date for when this will occur . the new jcids process could complement any long - term investment approach developed for the new triad by providing additional analysis and discussions to support new triad investment and the development of a plan . in our past reporting on leading capital decision - making practices , we have determined that leading organizations have decision - making processes in place to help them assess where they should invest their resources for the greatest benefit over the long term . these processes help an organization determine whether its investments are the most cost effective , support its goals , and consider alternatives before making a final selection . appendix iii provides additional information on the results of our analysis . officials with program analysis and evaluation , policy , and acquisition , technology , and logistics in the office of the secretary of defense and the u.s. strategic command stated that the methodology we used for our notional analysis was reasonable . officials from the office of program analysis and evaluation and from u.s. strategic command told us that the program elements we identified were consistent with the capabilities defined for the new triad . officials from the office of program analysis and evaluation also said that our analysis used a more systematic approach in identifying new triad - related program elements included in the fydp than was followed in dod's analyses . the officials added that when they were compiling their own analysis of new triad - related program elements , many of the documents that gao used to identify relevant programs had not yet been published . therefore , while dod did not include many program elements that are not fully dedicated to the new triad in their analyses , the officials told us that it was not unreasonable to include those program elements in our analysis . as our notional analysis shows , including these program elements not only provides greater transparency of the projected spending for the new triad in the fydp but also identifies many additional program elements that provide capabilities necessary for carrying out new triad missions . while the fydp is a report that provides dod and congress with a tool for looking at future funding needs , the current fydp structure does not readily identify and aggregate new triad - related program elements to provide information on current and planned resource allocations – including spending changes , priorities , and trends – for the new triad . in conducting our analysis of fydp program elements , we observed that dod has not created any data fields in the fydp's structure that would expressly identify program elements as being relevant to the new triad . according to dod program analysis and evaluation officials , there is no plan to modify the data fields in the fydp structure to allow the ready identification of new triad program elements and associated spending because they have not received direction to do so .