this is shown in figure 2 . these data include rates through 2004 . according to freight railroad officials , shippers , and financial analysts , since 2004 rates have continued to increase as the demand for freight rail service has increased , rail capacity has become more limited , and as a result , freight railroad companies have gained increased pricing power . a number of factors may have contributed to recent rate increases . ongoing industry and economic changes have influenced how railroads have set their rates . since the staggers rail act was enacted , the railroad industry and the economic environment in which it operates have changed considerably . not only has the rail industry continued to consolidate , potentially increasing market power by the largest railroads , but after years of reducing the number of its employees and shedding track capacity , the industry is increasingly operating in a capacity - constrained environment where demand for their services exceeds their capacity . finally , stb adopted new regulations for rail mergers in 2001 . these new regulations require the applicant to demonstrate that the merger would enhance , not just preserve , competition . given the disagreement about the adequacy of competition in the industry and the fact that proxy measures can understate or overstate captivity , an assessment of competition and how changes in industry concentration might be resulting in the inappropriate exercise of market power would allow decisionmakers to identify areas where competition is lacking and to assess the need for and merits of targeted approaches to address it . the targeted approaches most frequently proposed by shipper groups and others include reciprocal switching arrangements , which allow one railroad to switch railcars of another railroad , and terminal access agreements , which permits one railroad to use another's terminals . we will discuss the potential costs and benefits of these approaches further in our final report . use of these approaches should be carefully considered to ensure that the approach achieves the important goals set out in the staggers rail act . for example , if these approaches expand competitive options and decrease the number of captive shippers , which could decrease the need for federal regulation and the need for a rate relief process . on the other hand these approaches could also reduce rail rates and thus railroad revenues and affect the ability of the railroads to earn adequate revenues and invest in its infrastructure . the principal vehicle through which shippers seek relief from unreasonable rates is the rate relief process . the staggers rail act recognized that some shippers may not have access to competitive alternatives and may therefore be subject to unreasonably high rates . for these shippers , the act gave icc , and later stb , the authority to establish a rate relief process so that shippers could obtain relief from unreasonably high rates , as well as more general powers to monitor the railroad industry . under the standard rate relief process , the board requires a shipper to demonstrate how much an optimally efficient railroad would need to charge that shipper . therefore , the shipper must construct a hypothetical , perfectly efficient railroad that would replace its current carrier .