iv ) . in addition , the deputy assistant secretary for agreements compliance and other commerce staff provided us with oral technical comments on the draft , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the u.s. trade representative , the secretary of agriculture , the secretary of commerce , and the secretary of state . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4347 . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix vii . in the short run when adjustment costs are present , liberalization is likely to create winners and losers . some were fairly pessimistic . for example , one ustr and wto secretariat veteran termed the progress to date not only pitiful but worrying . another expert said he did not believe the round was on track for achieving its ambitious liberalization and development objectives and expressed concern because the hardest issues still have not been tackled . as a result , this expert felt that the round would only conclude by december 2006 if work accelerates and political engagement increases . however , other experts said it is too early to give up on the round's success . one expert stressed that ups and downs — such as build - ups before deadlines and let downs after missing milestones — are typical in trade negotiations . another expert noted that failures can often be vital to achieving worthwhile agreements and suggested cancun was such an event . both he and another expert indicated that there is still time for the doha round to conclude with meaningful results in all key negotiating issues . however , they said there is no more time to spare if a balanced , ambitious package is to be attained because even past rounds have required at least a year and a half of very hard bargaining to conclude . that time is upon us , if one works backwards from the july 1 , 2007 , expiration of any renewed u.s. trade promotion authority . negotiating progress has varied markedly in the six issues designated as key work areas at the upcoming hong kong ministerial — ( 1 ) agriculture , ( 2 ) trade facilitation , ( 3 ) industrial ( nonagricultural ) market access , ( 4 ) services , ( 5 ) development issues , and ( 6 ) rules . some advances have been clear in two issues advocated by the united states , agriculture and trade facilitation , although negotiations in the latter have just begun . as detailed in appendixes iii and iv , very limited progress has occurred so far in two other issues being advocated by the united states — industrial market access and services .