training . officials from all nine districts said they encourage reporting by provided training on how to report incidents . generally , this information was incorporated into trainings on when to use restraint and seclusion and how to deescalate a student's behavior . does your district have dedicated spaces for seclusion rooms ? can you describe where they are generally located , eg , which types of schools or classrooms ? how do staff determine when an incident needs to be recorded as a restraint ? how do staff determine when an incident needs to be recorded as a seclusion ? we conducted this performance audit from november 2018 to april 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the civil rights data collection ( crdc ) is a longstanding and critical aspect of education's office for civil rights' overall enforcement and monitoring strategy . collecting accurate data through the crdc can help education in its mission to ensure equal access to education , promote educational excellence for all , and enforce various federal civil rights laws prohibiting discrimination on the basis of race , color , national origin , sex , and disability . however , the significant data quality problems that both education and we identified with the crdc data on restraint and seclusion , combined with the significant weaknesses we found in education's data quality control processes , cast serious doubt on the accuracy of these data . as a result , it is impossible to accurately determine the frequency and prevalence of restraint and seclusion among k - 12 public school students . the four recommendations in our june 2019 report urged education to take immediate steps to address the widespread potential misreporting of zeros for its 2017-18 crdc . education took some steps to address the issues we raised , but has not yet fully addressed them . moreover , those recommendations were intended as stop - gap measures to improve the quality of the 2017-18 data being collected in real time precisely because the crdc's business rules related to restraint and seclusion are inadequate . therefore , addressing our recommendations would not solve the issues that are the subject of this report . our work makes it clear that an overhaul of the quality control processes is needed to correct fundamental problems with federal restraint and seclusion data collected through the crdc . two of the crdc's key business rules meant to check data quality and flag potential errors in restraint and seclusion data are poorly designed and the thresholds that trigger these rules have no data - driven basis . further , education does not have business rules designed to flag outlier schools and school districts that report relatively low or high rates of restraint and seclusion , nor has it determined a range of rates that might warrant further exploration .