( see app . as you know , 31 u.s.c . 720 requires the head of a federal agency to submit a written statement of the actions taken on our recommendations to the senate committee on governmental affairs and to the house committee on government reform not later than 60 days from the date of this letter , and to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of this letter . to select a cleanup alternative , officials at the fernald , oak ridge and ineel sites weighed the various cleanup approaches and made tradeoffs according to the site's unique conditions and priorities . using cercla's five balancing criteria ( see table 6 ) , site officials compared the advantages and disadvantages of their on - site and off - site disposal alternatives . their analyses relied on site - specific information developed in their feasibility studies , and varied in depth according to the availability of data and the importance of each criterion at the site . each site issued a proposed plan that summarized the comparative analysis and designated on - site disposal as the preferred alternative for the cleanup approach . after considering public comments on the proposed plan , each of the three sites issued a record of decision selecting an on - site disposal approach . the following brief summaries describe each site's analysis of the primary tradeoffs that were considered between its on - site and off - site alternatives of similar cleanup scope . these limitations are likely to persist . in its october 2000 report on long - term stewardship , doe states: “given the limitations of available data , considerable uncertainty will be associated with any long - term stewardship cost estimates.” in another recent study , the national research council noted that long - term stewardship cost estimates have significant uncertainties due to controversies over such matters as discount rates and hidden costs . doe is in the process of developing standardized guidance for estimating long - term stewardship costs , and anticipates that sites will include such estimates in their fiscal year 2003 budget process . doe is also examining alternative financing approaches for long - term stewardship . however , these approaches may not adequately cover the potentially high costs associated with any disposal facility failure and the consequent release of contamination into the environment . furthermore , alternative financing may not be sufficient to cover all of the estimated post - closure costs . for example , according to site officials , the oak ridge site and the tennessee department of environment and conservation entered into an administrative agreement ( consent order ) to establish the tennessee perpetual care investment fund . the consent order requires doe to annually deposit $1 million into the fund for 14 years . the state will use fund income to cover costs of annual post - closure surveillance and maintenance of the disposal facility . site officials had previously estimated these annual costs would range from about $684,000 to about $922,000 in year 2000 dollars .