( see app . iii for a description of the recipient nations and the assistance they receive. ) in addition , at least seven island territories in the pacific ( including new caledonia ) receive direct government assistance from their associated governments and , in some cases , a small amount of development assistance from other donors . five of the small island nations — kiribati , samoa , the solomon islands , tuvalu , and vanuatu — are “least developed countries,” according to the united nations , meaning that they have special development needs . in 1986 , the united states entered into a compact of free association with the fsm and the rmi , both of which were part of the u.n. trust territory of the pacific islands administered by the united states . the united states agreed , in part , to provide economic assistance to these countries to help them in their efforts to become economically self - sufficient . on page 11 of this report , we recognize that many motivations , such as historical ties , guide the distribution of development assistance to the pacific island nations . in a previous report , we discussed these historical ties and the current obligation to provide assistance through the compact of free association through fiscal year 2001 , with the possibility of extended assistance . nevertheless , as we note on page 4 , the fsm , as a small , island nation in the pacific , shares similar development challenges with at least 13 other island nations that receive development assistance . also , beginning with footnote 3 and discussed throughout this report , we note that the major donors provided $11 billion in development assistance to 14 pacific island nations . we compiled these data from several sources — the oecd and annual financial audits of the fsm , the rmi , and palau . also on page 11 , we have replaced the statement , now on pages 11 and 12 , with other text to clarify our point that multiple objectives for the compact may have contributed to reduced expectations for accountability of the assistance . also on page 12 , we recognize that the compact economic assistance to the fsm and the rmi was part of an agreement that included political and defense elements . the previous report cited in the preceding response discusses these objectives . we agree that the fsm does not receive assistance from the eu and did not report that information . as we note in table 2 of this report , the eu , however , is one of the major multilateral donors to the pacific island nations and provided $900 million to islands in the region from 1987 to 1999 . in addition to the person named above , dennis richards , jennifer li wong , ron schwenn , and rona mendelsohn made key contributions to this report . a portion of the compact assistance to the rmi is also used for payments to landowners related to the u.s. military presence at the kwajalein atoll . the department of the interior has responsibility for administering economic assistance to the two countries .