these problems are discussed below . the air force used the fiscal year 2001 outlay rates provided by the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) to determine the allowable amount of carryover in the fiscal year 2004 budget . this was the appropriate outlay rate table to use for that budget . however , even though the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) provided updated outlay rates for the next fiscal year , the air force did not use the updated outlay rates when calculating its allowable carryover in the fiscal year 2005 budget . instead , the air force continued to use the fiscal year 2001 outlay rates . moreover , the air force continued to use the fiscal year 2001 outlay rates to calculate the allowable carryover in the fiscal year 2006 budget instead of using the updated outlay rates published by dod . the air force used all orders received ( both prior year and current year orders ) in calculating the allowable amount of carryover in the fiscal year 2004 , 2005 , and 2006 budgets . for example , in calculating the allowable carryover for fiscal year 2004 , the air force included about $1.8 billion of prior year orders in the calculation . dod carryover policy states that only current year orders should be used in determining the allowable carryover . the air force method of including all orders allowed too much carryover . the air force excluded orders received from the u.s. transportation command when calculating the amount of actual carryover in the fiscal year 2004 , 2005 , and 2006 budgets . dod financial management regulation 7000.14-r , volume 2b , chapter 9 , permits excluding some orders financed with non - dod funds , such as orders received from foreign countries , but does not permit excluding u.s. transportation command orders . for example , because the air force excluded about $214 million of u.s. transportation command orders when calculating its actual carryover for fiscal year 2004 , its carryover was understated . the air force's fiscal year 2006 budget to congress expressed carryover in equivalent months of work ( this is the old method of reporting carryover ) rather than in terms of the allowable and actual carryover dollar amounts as required by dod financial management regulation 7000.14-r , volume 2b , chapter 9 . the problems cited above had a significant impact on the amount of allowable carryover and actual carryover and whether the actual carryover exceeded the allowable amount , as shown in table 4 . in discussing the carryover calculations with air force officials , they agreed that they were not calculating either the allowable amount of carryover or the actual amount of carryover correctly in the fiscal year 2004 , 2005 , and 2006 budgets . they informed us that in preparing the carryover information contained in the fiscal year 2004 budget , dod budget analysts who review the budget information , including the carryover information , did not raise questions with the air force carryover calculations . accordingly , they continued to use the same methodology for calculating the allowable carryover and actual carryover that was included in the fiscal year 2005 and 2006 budgets to congress .