in some areas , nnsa can be viewed as a success . several factors contributed to this situation . first , doe and nnsa did not have a useful model to follow for establishing a separately organized agency in doe . the president's foreign intelligence advisory board's june 1999 report suggested several federal agencies , such as the national oceanic and atmospheric administration in the department of commerce , which could be used as a model for nnsa . however , as we reported in january 2007 , none of the agency officials we interviewed considered their agency to be separately organized or believed that their agency's operational methods were transferable to nnsa . second , doe's january 2000 implementation plan , which was required by the nnsa act , did not define how nnsa would operate as a separately organized agency within doe . instead , reflecting the opposition of the then doe senior leadership to the creation of nnsa , the implementation plan “dual - hatted” virtually every significant statutory position in nnsa with doe officials ( i.e. , having doe officials contemporaneously serve in nnsa and doe positions ) , including the director of nnsa's office of defense nuclear counterintelligence and general counsel . as we testified in april 2001 , this practice caused considerable concern about nnsa's ability to function with the independence envisioned in the nnsa act . dual - hatting was subsequently forbidden by an amendment to the nnsa act . a lack of formal agreement between doe and nnsa in a number of key areas — budgeting , procurement , information technology , management and administration , and safeguards and security — resulted in organizational conflicts that inhibited effective operations . even where formal procedures were developed , interpersonal disagreements hindered effective cooperation . for example , our january 2007 report described the conflict between nnsa and doe counterintelligence offices . specifically , nnsa and doe counterintelligence officials disagreed over ( 1 ) the scope and direction of the counterintelligence program , ( 2 ) their ability to jointly direct staff in the headquarters counterintelligence program offices , ( 3 ) the allocation of counterintelligence resources , ( 4 ) counterintelligence policy making and ( 5 ) their roles and responsibilities in handling specific counterintelligence matters . subsequently , congress amended the nnsa act to consolidate the counterintelligence programs of doe and nnsa under the department of energy . the defense science board provides the department of defense with independent advice and recommendations on matters relating to the department's scientific and technical enterprise see defense science board task force , nuclear capabilities ( washington , d.c.: december 2006 ) . organized status , maintains a costly set of distinctly separate overhead and indirect cost operations that often duplicate existing doe functions . for example , nnsa retains separate functions in areas such as , among others , congressional affairs , general counsel , human resources , procurement and acquisition , and public affairs . according to this november 2011 report , these redundant operations are costly and can complicate communications and program execution . there have been continuing calls for removing nnsa from doe and establishing it as a separate agency .