officials did not provide a timeframe for completing such a project plan . according to tsa planning documents and discussions with officials , tsa lacks a risk management plan that specifies strategies for mitigating known risks which could limit tsa's ability to manage these risks . for instance , tsa documents identified failure to sustain the support of external stakeholders , such as labor unions for port workers , as a program risk and indicated a mitigation strategy was needed to address this risk . but , tsa has not developed such a strategy to address this specific risk . tsa documents also indicated that involving stakeholders in decision making could help mitigate program risks associated with defining the eligibility requirements for the card . however , tsa has not planned for stakeholder involvement in decision - making . several stakeholders at ports and port facilities told us that while tsa solicited their input on some issues , tsa did not respond to their input or involve them in making decisions regarding eligibility requirements for the card . two key components of these practices are missing . the first is a comprehensive plan that identifies work to be completed , milestones for completing this work , and project budgets for the project's remaining life . the second is detailed plans for specific and important components of the project — particularly mitigating risks and assessing alternative approaches — that would support the overall project plan . failure to develop these plans holds significant potential to adversely affect the card program , putting it at higher risk of cost overruns , missed deadlines , and underperformance . over the years , we have analyzed information technology systems across a broad range of federal programs and agencies , and these analyses have repeatedly shown that without adequate planning , the risks increase for cost overruns , schedule slippages , and systems that are not effective or usable . according to industry best practices for managing information technology projects like the maritime worker identification card , program managers should develop a comprehensive project plan that governs and defines all aspects of the project , tying them together in a logical manner . a documented comprehensive project plan is necessary to achieve the mutual understanding , commitment , and performance of individuals , groups , and organizations that must execute or support the plans . a comprehensive project plan identifies work to be completed , milestones for completing this work , and project budgets as well as identifying other specific , detailed plans that are to be completed to support the comprehensive project plan . the comprehensive plan , in turn , needs to be supplemented by specific , detailed plans that support the plan where necessary . such plans might be needed to address such matters as the program's budget and schedule , data to be analyzed , risk management and mitigation , staffing . for example , a risk mitigation plan would be important in situations where potential problems exist . one purpose of risk management is to identify potential problems before they occur ; a risk mitigation plan specifies risk mitigation strategies and when they should be invoked to mitigate adverse outcomes .