alaska division of spill prevention and response . this division was established in 1991 , although an official from the alaska division of spill prevention and response told us that the state has had an oil pollution control program , which included research , since the 1970s . according to the agency's web site , alaska appropriated a total of $2.5 million in the wake of the exxon valdez oil spill to enhance the ability of the state and industry to respond to oil spills . the funds were to be used for research programs directed toward the prevention , containment , cleanup , and amelioration of oil spills in alaska . to date , more than 30 research and development projects have been completed . california office of spill prevention and response . this office was created in 1990 and has a variety of responsibilities related to spill prevention and response , including oil spill contingency planning . the office's research program operated from 2004 through 2010 and supported a total of 38 research projects with a budget of $430,000 annually during this 6-year period . louisiana applied and educational oil spill research and development program . louisiana's program was established after the exxon valdez oil spill . the state created the louisiana oil spill coordinator's office , which , with louisiana state university , formed the oil spill research and development program . the program's mission was to provide the state of louisiana with tools related to oil spill prevention , detection , response , and cleanup . according to a program official , from 1993 through 2007 , the program provided more than $500,000 per year to public colleges and universities to support a range of research . texas general land office oil spill prevention and response program . according to a state official , the texas general land office's oil spill prevention and response program has spent $1.25 million per year for oil spill research since 1991 . its research is funded by a fee on oil loaded or unloaded in texas . oil spill recovery institute ( osri ) . opa established osri for research , education , and demonstration projects to respond to and understand the effects of oil spills in the arctic and sub - arctic marine environments , amongst other purposes . osri is administered through and housed at the prince william sound science center , a nonprofit research and education organization in cordova , alaska . funding for osri comes from interest on $22.5 million in the oil spill liability trust fund . osri received more than $1 million from the fund in 2009 and $225,000 in 2010 and expects to receive between $560,000 and $1.3 million in 2011 , according to an agency official . in addition , the national response team ( nrt ) coordinates some oil pollution research . nrt is an interagency organization responsible for , among other things , coordinating emergency preparedness and response to oil and hazardous substance pollution incidents . epa and the coast guard serve as its chair and vice chair , respectively .