very few states reported that the change will have a positive impact . the states reported that the tri changes will have a negative impact on such tri aspects as information available to the public and efforts to protect the environment . specifically , 23 states — including california , maryland , new york , and oklahoma — responded that the changes will negatively impact information available to the public , 14 states — including louisiana , ohio , and wyoming — reported no impact , and one state , virginia , reported a generally positive impact . similarly , 22 states responded that the change will negatively impact efforts to protect the environment , 11 reported no impact , and 5 said it will have a positive impact . states also responded that raising the eligibility threshold will have no impact on tri aspects such as emergency planning and preparedness efforts and the cost to facilities for tri reporting . nas reported that certain levels of exposure may not adversely affect healthy adults but recommended that more studies be conducted on the effects of perchlorate exposure in children and pregnant women . nas also recommended a perchlorate reference dose , which is an estimated daily exposure level from all sources that is expected not to cause adverse effects in humans , including the most sensitive populations . the reference dose of 0.0007 milligrams per kilogram of body weight is equivalent to a drinking water exposure level of 24.5 parts per billion , if all exposure comes from drinking water . in january 2006 , epa issued guidance stating that this exposure level is a preliminary cleanup goal for environmental cleanups involving perchlorate . adverse effects of perchlorate on the adult thyroid are difficult to evaluate because they may happen over longer time periods than can be observed in a research study . however , adverse effects of perchlorate on fetal or child development can be studied and measured within study time frames . we also found some studies considered the same perchlorate dose amount but identified different effects . the precise cause of the differences remains unresolved but may be attributed to an individual study's design type or the physical condition of the subjects , such as their age . such unresolved questions are one of the bases for the differing conclusions among epa , dod , and academic studies on perchlorate dose amounts and effects . in january 2005 , nas issued its report on the potential health effects of perchlorate . the nas report evaluated many of the same health risk studies included in our review . we concluded that epa needed more reliable information on the extent of sites contaminated with perchlorate and the status of cleanup efforts , and recommended that epa work with the department of defense , other federal agencies and the states to establish a formal structure for better tracking perchlorate information . in december 2006 , epa reiterated its disagreement with the recommendation stating that perchlorate information already exists from a variety of other sources .