no demand items . osd , the services , and dla have begun reviewing their inventories for items that have not had any orders for 5 or more years to reevaluate the justification for retaining these items , even if the items are within the approved acquisition objective . for example , the army has been reviewing no demand items since 2006 and has been successful at reducing storage space and storage costs associated with these items . inventory categorization . osd , the services , and dla have reviewed existing categories of inventory ( i.e. , the approved acquisition objective , economic retention stock , contingency retention stock , and potential reutilization stock ) and developed tentative sub - categories that provide further clarification as to the make - up of each category . dod's plan includes steps to incorporate this information into its guidance on inventory management , specifically a revision of dod 4140.64-m secondary item stratification manual ( august 24 , 2009 ) . after 18 months , dod's implementation of its plan is generally on schedule , having slipped 1 month , although a number of actions and milestones have experienced delays . each of the nine sub - plans includes actions , which are each supported by a number of milestones . osd , the services , and dla have begun implementing all 29 actions in the plan and completed 3 of these actions , as of january 1 , 2012 . our analysis shows that about half of the remaining actions are on schedule , while half are delayed . our analysis also shows that of the 82 milestones that support the actions , osd , the services , and dla have completed 28 , started 39 , and have not yet started 15 . about a third of the milestones are delayed . implementation of all actions and milestones are scheduled to be complete the first month of fiscal year 2015 , rather than the end fiscal year 2014 as originally scheduled . tables 2 and 3 provide the status , by sub - plan , of actions and milestones , respectively . additionally , see appendix iv through xii , for detailed information on the status of individual actions and milestones for each sub - plan . osd , the services , and dla regularly review the status of the actions and milestones and make adjustments as needed , and we found the reasons for delays in completing the plan's actions and milestones are varied and do not appear to involve a systemic problem . several milestones across several sub - plans are delayed pending the issuance of revised inventory management guidance , which according to osd officials is now scheduled for the end of fiscal year 2012 . other milestones have been delayed due to funding and contract issues . for example , one milestone was postponed due to delays in awarding a contract to evaluate improved demand forecasting methods and techniques for spare parts by taking into consideration the life cycle — initial provisioning , sustainment , and end - of - life — of a weapon system .