ii. ) the comments described actions planned that respond to our recommendations: for example , developing and implementing an it career management program that includes a knowledge and skills inventory for office of information and technology employees , and fully implementing the it governance plan by october 2007 . in addition , the comments provided further information on the department's actions taken since receiving our draft report , such as the establishment of the business needs and investment board that is a key component of the it governance process ; establishment of offices responsible for ensuring compliance with it policies , directives and core it processes ; and filling a senior executive position in the office of information and technology . if the actions that the department has planned to undertake are properly implemented , they should help ensure that the it realignment is successfully accomplished . although the department concurred with all our recommendations , it provided an alternative approach to dedicating an implementation team responsible for change management processes throughout the transformation to a centralized it structure . its written comments indicated that change management would be the responsibility of two organizations in the new structure . however , in our view , having a dedicated implementation team , responsible for day - to - day management of major change initiatives , is crucial to va's ability to ensure that the it realignment is fully and successfully implemented in a coherent , integrated , and coordinated manner . the approach articulated in the department's comments does not make clear how progress will be monitored , schedule slippages or shortfalls identified , and solutions to problems developed and implemented . without having a dedicated implementation team , as we recommend , the department may increase the risk to the success of the realignment . we are sending copies of this report to the chairman and ranking member of the committee on veterans' affairs , house of representatives . we are also sending copies to the secretary of veterans affairs and appropriate congressional committees . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report is available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you and your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6304 or melvinv@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . to determine whether the department of veterans affairs ( va ) realignment plan includes critical factors for successful implementation of a centralized management approach , we obtained and analyzed realignment documents from va , its realignment contractor , and the independent verification and validation ( iv&v ) contractor . these documents included the realignment contract request for quotes and memorandums signed by the secretary and deputy secretary relating to approval of the permanent assignment of operations and maintenance and development staff to the office of information and technology . the documents also included the establishment of the va single information technology ( it ) leadership authority .