iv. ) the director of epa's office of pesticide programs said that epa appreciated our efforts to highlight this issue , and that promoting ipm is an important component of epa's approach toward reducing risks posed by pesticides . the director also acknowledged that as efforts to promote ipm continue , epa / usda cooperation will become even more vital . ( see app . v. ) we conducted our review from september 2000 through june 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . see appendix i for our scope and methodology . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from the date of this letter . several usda agencies are involved in the ipm initiative . usda's office of pest management policy ( opmp ) is the department's lead office on pest management policy , with responsibility for coordinating usda's ipm activities . usda's agricultural research service conducts research on pests that have a major national impact on agriculture and tests biological ipm techniques over large land areas . usda's cooperative state research , education , and extension service provides research grants to state and land - grant universities to enhance understanding of ipm - related topics such as life cycles of pests and beneficial organisms , pest resistance to chemical control , and the development of pest - resistant crop varieties . the extension service also helps to provide ipm information to growers through education , outreach , and training programs . usda's natural resources conservation service helps to support grower implementation of ipm practices through education , outreach , and limited financial incentives . usda's forest service also conducts ipm - related research , such as studying ipm methods for controlling invasive weeds . in addition , usda's national agricultural statistics service and usda's economic research service gather and analyze information about ipm . usda estimates that in fiscal year 2000 , the department spent about $170 million on activities in support of ipm adoption . in addition , epa awarded grants totaling about $500,000 in fiscal year 2000 for research and outreach to support ipm implementation . based on a sample of growers , usda estimates that some level of ipm had been implemented on about 70 percent of the nation's crop acreage as of the end of crop year 2000 , an implementation rate close to usda's 75-percent goal . however , this implementation rate is not a good indicator of progress toward an originally intended purpose of ipm — reducing chemical pesticide use . in estimating the ipm implementation rate , usda counts a wide variety of farming practices without distinguishing between those practices that tend to reduce chemical pesticide use and those that may not . in fact , our analysis of usda's data shows that the subset of ipm practices that tend to reduce reliance on chemical pesticides , often referred to as biologically - based practices , has been far more sparsely implemented than the overall ipm rates indicate .