conf . findings , including the extent to which funds were withheld from contractors . to determine the costs dcaa questioned or identified as unsupported , we analyzed information provided to us by dcaa on iraq - related audit reports issued between february 2003 and february 2006 . to identify actions taken by dod to address audit findings and funds withheld , we selected 18 audit reports comprised of ( 1 ) the 10 reports with the highest dollar amounts of questioned and unsupported costs , and ( 2 ) 8 other audit reports with questioned and unsupported costs above $5 million . the questioned and unsupported costs for the 18 selected reports totaled $1.8 billion , or approximately 50 percent of all questioned and unsupported costs identified through dcaa's data on iraq contracts . the selected audit reports represent work performed by four contractors . for each audit report , we obtained key documentation from dcaa and dod , and interviewed dcaa auditors and dod contracting officials . appendix i provides details on our scope and methodology . we conducted our work from march 2006 through september 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the united states , along with its coalition partners and various international organizations and donors , has embarked on a significant effort to rebuild iraq . the united states is spending billions of dollars to reconstruct iraq while combating an insurgency that has targeted military and contractor personnel and the iraqi people . the united states has relied heavily on private - sector contractors to provide the goods and services needed to support both the military and reconstruction efforts in iraq . dcaa is responsible for providing contract audits for dod , along with general accounting and financial advice to dod acquisition officials negotiating government contracts . dcaa performs many types of audits for dod , including audits of contractor proposals , audits of estimating and accounting systems , and incurred cost audits . generally , the results of a dcaa audit are intended to assist contracting officials in negotiating reasonable contract prices . normally , dcaa audits contractors' proposals and provides contracting officials advice on the reasonableness of contractor costs prior to negotiations . dcaa also conducts audits of cost - type contracts after they are negotiated to ensure costs incurred on these contracts are acceptable . relying on cost information provided by the contractor and assessing whether the costs comply with government regulations , dcaa may identify certain costs as questioned or unsupported . dcaa defines questioned costs as costs considered to be not acceptable for negotiating a reasonable contract price , and unsupported costs as costs that lack sufficient supporting documentation . dcaa reports its findings to contracting officers for consideration in negotiating reasonable contract prices . dcaa audit reports represent one way dcaa can assist contracting officials as they negotiate government contracts . also , contracting officials may invite dcaa to participate in contract negotiations to explain audit findings and recommendations , and may factor dcaa audit findings into evaluations of contract proposals . the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) acknowledges that dcaa's role is advisory , and assigns the contracting officer responsibility for ensuring that the contractor's proposed price is fair and reasonable .