ii ) . similarly , states can target upl payments to certain hospitals . we and the hhs office of the inspector general have reported that some states concentrated these payments to a small number of providers . our work has highlighted a number of concerns about the use of non - dsh payments from various perspectives , highlighting the need for transparent reporting , ensuring expenditures meet medicaid purposes , and concerns regarding arrangements that shift costs from the states to the federal government . for example , in november 2012 , we recommended that congress consider requiring cms to improve the transparency of and accountability for non - dsh payments by requiring facility - specific payment reporting and annual audits . the proportion of total dsh hospital uncompensated care costs covered by total dsh payments in 2014 also varied considerably by state . the report noted that the annual dsh reports and audits that states began submitting in 2010 were important steps toward improving transparency and accountability for medicaid dsh payments ; however , similar information is lacking for non - dsh payments . moreover , the report stated that the limited information available on non - dsh payments shows that a large share of these payments are paid to a small number of hospitals ; when these payments are combined with medicaid base payments , hundreds of hospitals may be receiving medicaid payments well in excess of their actual costs of providing medicaid services . ( see table 5. ) as of march 2019 , congress has not taken any action , but cms announced in fall 2018 that it was planning a proposed rule on supplemental payments that , if finalized , would improve transparency by requiring states to provide cms with certain information on medicaid supplemental payments . the agency plans to release the proposed rule for comment by fall 2019 . in 2014 , we recommended that cms develop a data collection strategy ensuring states report accurate and complete data on all sources of funds used to finance the nonfederal share of medicaid payments . kaiser family foundation and health management associates . medicaid in an era of health & delivery system reform: results from a 50-state medicaid budget survey for state fiscal years 2014 and 2015 . washington , d.c.: kaiser family foundation , and national association of medicaid directors , october 2014 . such data are needed to ( 1 ) track trends in financing the nonfederal share , and ( 2 ) oversee compliance with current limits on sources of financing the nonfederal share . cms did not concur with our recommendation , but did acknowledge the agency does not have sufficient data to oversee compliance with the 60 percent limit on local government contributions to a state's nonfederal share . among hospitals receiving dsh payments in 2014 , total uncompensated care costs varied by state , ranging from $5.9 million in north dakota to $6.2 billion in new york . in the hospitals , most uncompensated care costs were related to costs to care for uninsured patients , rather than the medicaid shortfall .