secrecy is counterproductive . committed leadership , effective implementation , and well - planned workforce transition strategies are key to any reform effort . privatization - in - place was used effectively at indianapolis naval air warfare center to avert a traditional base realignment and closure action . the city of indianapolis provided certain technical and financial assistance to help workers successfully compete for the work . certain technology upgrades in monterey , california , via a public – private partnership led to efficiencies and increased effectiveness . measuring performance is critical . a - 76 is only one of many efficiency tools available to federal managers . other tools include bid to goal , which helps units become efficient and thus avoid a - 76 , transitional benefit corporation , a concept that promotes the transfer of government assets to the private sector and provides transition strategies for employees , and esop , under which employees own a piece of the organization that employs them . esops have been established in a few federal organizations . san antonio , texas , august 15 , 2001 “a - 76: what's working and what's not” a - 76 process is too long and too costly . cost of studies can greatly reduce government savings . cost to industry in both dollars and uncertainty . demoralized workers quit . but successful contractors need these workers . larger a - 76 studies can yield greater savings , but these studies become much more complex . lack of impetus for savings without competition . one - step bidding process should be used . meo and contractors should compete together in one procurement action , be evaluated against the same solicitation requirements using the same be awarded contracts based on best value . provide more training for meo and a - 76 officials . meos should have legal status to protest and appeal awards and obtain bid information . a - 76 rules should be more clear and applied consistently through a centralized management structure . for bid and monitoring purposes , government costs should be collected and allocated consistent with industry ( eg , activity - based costing ) . need to eliminate any suggestion of conflicts of interest . need incentives for agencies and workers ( eg , share - in - savings ) . provide soft landings for workers . allow workers to form public - sector organizations for bidding . based on public input , a review of previous studies and other relevant literature , and many hours of deliberation , the panel developed and unanimously adopted a set of principles that it believes should guide sourcing policy for the federal government . while each principle is important , no single principle stands alone . as such , the panel adopted the principles as a package . the panel believes that federal sourcing policy should: 1 . support agency missions , goals , and objectives . commentary: this principle highlights the need for a link between the missions , goals , and objectives of federal agencies and related sourcing policies . be consistent with human capital practices designed to attract , motivate , retain , and reward a high - performing federal workforce .