gao - 15-288 . washington d.c.: february 10 , 2015 . therefore , we did not assess these requirements . table 2 provides our assessment of the extent to which the committee , through its actions and issued strategy , complied with each of the 17 section 1107 requirements we could assess . we believe that this characterization misconstrues our recommendations . as our report shows , opm's role with regard to the section 1107 interagency rotation program includes responsibilities specific to opm , but also responsibilities to act in collaboration with other departments and agencies based on its roles as a member of the committee on national security personnel and as the chair of the nspd executive steering committee . to that end , both of our recommendations were not directed solely to opm , but rather to opm in collaboration with the committee on national security personnel , as a joint effort . as specified in section 1107 , the committee is comprised of multiple departments and agencies , including opm , omb , and dod , among others . moreover , our second recommendation also includes working with the departments and agencies when identifying and taking action on next steps for the program's implementation . opm is not the sole recipient or target of our recommendations , but opm and the committee on national security personnel are both focal points because of their responsibilities . opm also stated that table 1 of our report oversimplifies the committee's delegation of responsibilities to the various departments and agencies . we find this table an appropriate portrayal of the roles and responsibilities specifically outlined in the strategy as the table describes only the major roles and responsibilities , which was our intent . in addition , in its response to our draft report , opm criticized our methodology for not including interviews with the executive office of the president in our review . as we stated in our report , we made multiple attempts to meet with the executive office of the president through the national security council , but they were unable to meet with us during the statutory timeframes required by our review . however , when provided the opportunity to comment on our draft report , the national security council responded that it did not have any comments on our report . as a result , we worked with opm , as well as the other departments and agencies , to obtain necessary clarification on the roles and responsibilities , the distinction between the work carried out by the two committees , and the status of the program's implementation , among other things . regarding our first recommendation to establish a clear leadership and oversight structure to guide future implementation efforts , opm partially concurred . opm stated that it agrees that a more formal system of reporting to the nspd executive steering committee and more frequent executive steering committee review of performance metrics would improve the program's accountability .