urban areas were outside the scope of the aoa . hence , it is unclear how dhs made decisions for proposed technology deployments in such areas . further , the first aoa did not examine as an alternative the use of only existing border patrol equipment and agents without the addition of any new technology approaches . the aoa should have assessed the technology approaches based on the incremental effectiveness provided above the baseline technology assets in the geographic areas evaluated . according to study officials , the omission of a baseline alternative was corrected in the second aoa and did not change the conclusions of the first aoa . a more robust aoa could result in conclusions that differ not just in the border patrol sectors yet to be evaluated in future aoas , but also in the tucson and yuma sectors considered in the first aoa . while the primary purpose of the second phase of the aoa was to expand the analysis to three additional border patrol sectors ( san diego , el paso , and rio grande valley ) , being able to conduct the analysis over several months allowed the study team more time to consider additional measures of effectiveness and technology options . dhs plans to conduct another aoa that would cover the remainder of the southwest border . according to study officials , while the potential for different results existed , the results from the second aoa did not significantly affect the findings from the first aoa . further , we have questions about how the aoa analyses and conclusions were factored into planning and budget decisions regarding the optimal mix of technology deployments in arizona . specifically , according to otia and border patrol officials , the aoa was used to develop the arizona technology deployment plan and related procurement plans and to provide cost data to be used for the border patrol's operational assessment and the fiscal year 2012 budget request for integrated fixed tower systems . however , because aoa results were somewhat inconclusive , it is not yet clear to us the basis for including three of the four alternatives in the manner prescribed in the budget request ( the unmanned aerial vehicle alternative was not ) . for a program of this importance and cost , the process used to assess and select technology needs to be transparent . the uncertainties noted above raise questions about the decisions that informed the budget formulation process . we have not yet examined the border patrol's operational assessment to determine how the results of the aoa were considered in developing technology deployment planning in arizona and , in turn , the fiscal year 2012 budget request . the army test and evaluation command ( atec ) was to independently test sbinet's block 1 capability and evaluate the results to determine its operational effectiveness and suitability ( i.e. , the extent to which the system fits it its operational environment and is useful to border patrol to meet the agency's mission ) . because the integrated fixed tower system could be similar to the sensor towers and cop used in sbinet block 1 , the atec could inform dhs's decision about moving forward with technology deployments .