communicating change to all stakeholders . the department has partially addressed this success factor . the department began publishing a bimonthly newsletter in june to better communicate with all staff about office of information and technology activities , including the realignment . however , the department has not yet fully staffed the business relationship management office or identified its leadership . however , the executive director of the organizational management office has recently resigned his position , leaving one of the two responsible offices without leadership . in our view , having a dedicated implementation team to manage major change initiatives is crucial to successful implementation of the realignment . an implementation team can assist in tracking implementation goals and identifying performance shortfalls or schedule slippages . as the foundation for its realignment , va plans to implement 36 management processes in five key areas: enterprise management , business management , business application management , infrastructure , and service support . these processes , which address all aspects of it management , were recommended by the department's realignment contractor and are based on industry best practices . according to the contractor , they are a key component of the realignment effort as the office of information and technology moves to a process - based organization . additionally , the contractor noted that with a system of defined processes , the office of information and technology could quickly and accurately change the way it supports the department . the department had planned to begin implementing the 36 management processes in march 2007 ; however , as of early may 2007 , it had only begun pilot testing two of these processes . the deputy director of the quality and performance office reported that the initial implementation of the first two processes will begin in the second quarter of 2008 . dedicating an implementation team to manage change . the department has not addressed this success factor . a dedicated implementation team that is responsible for the day - to - day management of a major change initiative is critical to ensure that the project receives the focused , full - time attention needed to be sustained and successful . va has not identified such an implementation team to manage the realignment . rather , the department is currently managing the realignment through two organizations: the process improvement office under the quality and performance office ( which will lead process improvements ) and the organizational management office ( which will advise and assist the cio during the final transformation to a centralized structure ) . the team could also provide continuity and consistency in the face of any uncertainty that could potentially result from the secretary's resignation . accordingly , in our recent report we recommended that the department dedicate an implementation team to be responsible for change management throughout the transformation and that it establish a schedule for the implementation of the management processes . the principal deputy assistant secretary for information and technology acknowledged that the department is behind schedule for implementing the processes , but it has prioritized the processes and plans to implement them in three groups , in order of priority ( see attachment 1 for a description of the processes and their implementation priority ) .