phase i — requirements . during this phase , an ordered listing of tasks is developed describing the armed force's ability to perform activities or processes that combatant commanders require to execute their assigned missions . this listing is referred to as the universal joint task list and it provides a common language to describe warfighting requirements for combatant commanders . from this list , the most essential mission capability tasks — mission - essential tasks — are identified by the combatant commander . using the commander's criteria , mission - essential tasks are prioritized to form the joint / agency mission - essential task list . in addition to combatant commanders' priority , key documents pertinent to u.s. national strategy , such as the unified command plan , guidance for employment of the force , and other joint doctrine , are analyzed to determine the most essential mission capability requirements for the combatant command . the joint / agency mission - essential task list provides the foundation for deriving joint training requirements used to develop joint training plans and training and exercise inputs to theater campaign plans . training requirements are derived from training proficiency assessments , mission training assessments , and lessons learned that result from the phase iv ( assessment ) of the joint training system . phase ii — plans . the plans phase is initiated by conducting an assessment of current capability against the joint mission - essential task list and relevant lessons learned to identify gaps in training . to address those gaps , the joint training plan is established and identifies who is to be trained ; what they will be trained in ; what the training objectives are ; and when , where , and how the training will occur . joint training plans , along with training and exercise inputs into theater campaign plans , are developed , coordinated , and published in the joint training information management system ( jtims ) to identify a commander's training guidance , audiences , objectives , events , and support resources , and to identify the coordination needed to attain the required levels of training proficiency . phase iii — execution . during this phase , events planned in the joint training plan are conducted and the training audience's performance objectives are observed and evaluated . joint training events are developed and executed using the five - stage joint event life cycle methodology captured and reviewed in jtims . task performance observations — which identify whether the training audience achieved the stated level of performance to the standards specified in the training objectives — and the training proficiency evaluations for each training objective associated with the training event are also captured in jtims . further , facilitated after - action reports are developed to highlight potential issues or best practices to support the assessments in phase iv ( assessment ) . validated observations from the training event are exported into jtims . phase iv — assessment . during this phase , leadership within the combatant command determines which organizations within the command are able to perform at the level required to meet the task standards and which missions the command is trained to accomplish . assessments are a commander's responsibility .