they said they believed that usaid does not require them to do so . they also noted that they believed that professional reference checks and internet research provide them with enough insight into a candidate's character and conduct . various forms of background checks are important because they provide recruiters with additional information that the candidate may not have reported , or is not publicly available , and because these checks are a means to verify information that the candidate provided . as a result , partners that do not run the background checks may risk fielding volunteers who could harm the program's reputation and goals . we found that implementing partners do not have a systematic means of reporting or obtaining information from assessments of repeat volunteer candidates . as a result , partners can be unaware of assessments indicating that another partner would not recommend the volunteer for another assignment . see appendix i for more details on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from may 2014 to april 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . congress first authorized the f2f program in the 1985 farm bill to provide for the transfer of knowledge and expertise of u.s. agricultural producers and businesses to middle - income countries and emerging democracies on a voluntary basis . most recently , congress reauthorized the program in the 2014 farm bill . congress has authorized the f2f program to provide a broad range of u.s. agricultural expertise using u.s volunteers . the 2- to 4-week volunteer assignments are designed , among other things , to improve farm and agribusiness operations and agricultural systems , field crop cultivation , fruit and vegetable growing , livestock operations , marketing , and the strengthening of cooperatives and other farmer organizations ( see fig . usaid promotes a secondary goal not specifically noted in the authorizing legislation: to increase the american public's understanding of international development issues and programs and international understanding of the united states and u.s. development programs . the volunteer nature of the program's activities provides the opportunity for people - to - people cultural and technical exchange . usaid and its implementing partners give volunteers guidance about their responsibility for conducting public awareness activities about their experiences to promote better understanding of international development issues and objectives upon their return home . for the program's first 6 years , annual amounts provided to f2f were below $2 million . however , with the dissolution of the soviet union , usaid initiated f2f program activities in the newly independent countries , including conducting a substantial number of volunteer assignments in russia . the additional funding for these countries significantly increased the size of the f2f program . in the 2008 farm bill , congress required that a minimum of $10 million be used to carry out the f2f program for each of the fiscal years 2009 through 2013 .