these owners are more likely to opt out . physical reac inspection scores reflect as - is condition with negative adjustments for certain health and safety issues . figure 7 shows that 94 percent of the properties received passing scores , with 50 percent of the properties receiving superior scores of over 89 and 44 percent receiving satisfactory scores ( 60-89 ) . also , as shown in figure 7 , the percentage of opt - outs for properties with substandard or severe scores was substantially higher than the percentages of opt - outs for properties with satisfactory or superior scores . our analysis of hud data shows that the percentage of opt - outs varies slightly by region . certain parts of the country had more opt - outs than other regions ( fig . several southern states and new england experienced the smallest percentage of opt - outs . appendix iii and iv contain analyses of the number of opt - outs by state and the 3 regions with the highest number of opt - outs , by metropolitan areas . figure 9 shows the national average for opt - outs and states we visited that experienced a higher percentage of opt - outs compared with the national average . appendix i provides additional details on our scope and methodology . the housing and community development act of 1974 , a major overhaul of housing laws , created the tenant - based and project - based section 8 rental assistance programs for low - income households . the tenant - based program ( now called housing choice vouchers ) provides rental assistance to eligible households to rent houses or apartments in the private market from landlords who are willing to accept the vouchers . under the project - based rental assistance program , hud enters into contracts with property owners to provide rental assistance for a fixed period of time . the project - based section 8 program has multiple subprograms , including section 8 new construction and substantial rehabilitation , loan management set - asides , preservation , and property disposition . rental assistance under these project - based section 8 subprograms has been generally used in conjunction with other public funding . for example , a section 8 new construction / substantial rehabilitation property could have been financed by a federal housing administration ( fha ) insured loan , a section 202 direct loan , a u.s. department of agriculture section 515 direct loan , or state housing finance agency bonds . some of these programs provided financing for the construction or rehabilitation of affordable rental housing prior to the 1974 act . ( see table 1 ) . project - based section 8 assistance may be provided only for tenants with incomes no greater than 80 percent of an area's median income . tenants generally pay rent equal to 30 percent of adjusted household income . as part of the section 8 contract , property owners and managers are responsible for ensuring that households meet program eligibility requirements and calculating households' payments . hud pays rent subsidies directly to the property owners but does not pay them a separate administrative fee . the owners' include their administrative costs in their hud - approved rents .