ii ) . one of the major difficulties in studying the effect of the family cap is that major welfare policy changes at the state and federal levels have occurred over the past decade . we did not identify any studies that evaluated the impact of the family cap on poverty . while hhs' research efforts cover a broad range of issues , including some related to reducing out - of - wedlock pregnancies , most of the studies have focused on tanf's employment - related goal . since the enactment of prowra , hhs has used its research authority and resources to encourage and support evaluations of various welfare program approaches and features . as described in its third annual report to the congress on the tanf program , august 2000 , hhs' research agenda has two main goals: ( 1 ) to increase the probability of success of welfare reform by providing timely , reliable data to inform policy and program design , especially at the state and local level where decision making has devolved ; and ( 2 ) to inform the nation of policies chosen and their effects on children , families , communities and social well - being . within this research agenda , as shown in table 4 , in fiscal year 2000 , hhs spent about $26 million on research and technical assistance projects . mach , traci . measuring the impact of family caps on childbearing decisions . albany , n.y.: university at albany - suny working paper 00-04 ( cited mar . moffitt , robert a . the effect of pre - prwora waivers on afdc caseloads and female earnings , income and labor force behavior . baltimore , md . : johns hopkins university , 1999 . stapleton , david , gina livermore and adam tucker ( the lewin group ) . determinants of afdc caseload growth . washington , d.c.: the department of health and human services , the office of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation , july 1997 . turturro , carolyn , brent benda , and howard turney . arkansas welfare waiver demonstration project: final report . little rock , ark . : the university of arkansas , 1997 . welfare reform: moving hard - to - employ recipients into the workforce ( gao - 01-368 , mar . welfare reform: progress in meeting work - focused tanf goals ( gao - 01-522t , mar . welfare reform: data available to assess tanf's progress ( gao - 01-298 , feb. 28 , 2001 ) . welfare reform: work - site - based activities can play an important role in tanf programs ( gao / hehs - 00-122 , july 28 , 2000 ) . welfare reform: improving state automated systems requires coordinated federal effort ( gao / hehs - 00-48 , apr . welfare reform: state sanction policies and number of families affected ( gao / hehs - 00-44 , mar . welfare reform: assessing the effectiveness of various welfare - to - work approaches ( gao / hehs - 99-179 , sep. 7 , 1999 ) . welfare reform: information on former recipients' status ( gao / hehs - 99-48 , apr .