cal . state bar rules and regs , art . i , ยง 1 registration of members ; passport is acceptable document to establish identity . cal . bus . & prof. code ยง 21628 in order to satisfy tangible personal property reporting requirements , a secondhand dealer or coin dealer may use a passport from a foreign country in addition to another item of identification bearing an address . ( 3 ) what are the positions and policies of key federal agencies regarding the usage and acceptance of cid cards in the united states ? in addition , we reviewed other aspects of domestic and international cid card usage and related security issues , including ( 1 ) the status of new legislation under consideration by european union members to establish standards for other types of secure identification documents and ( 2 ) federal and state laws in selected states that refer to passports or cid cards . this information is contained in appendixes ii and iii , respectively . to determine the purpose of cid cards and how mexican and guatemalan cid cards are being used in the united states , we reviewed provisions of the vienna convention on consular relations ( vccr ) , which , among other things , governs consular services . we contacted the embassies of eight countries ( bolivia , el salvador , guatemala , honduras , mexico , nicaragua , peru , and poland ) to learn their plans for issuing cid cards , which enabled us to determine that of these countries only mexico and guatemala were issuing cid cards in the united states . we selected the countries listed because they were cited by federal , state , or local officials as countries that were considering or planning to issue cid cards or currently issuing cid cards in the united states . we interviewed officials in the mexican and guatemalan embassies , selected police departments , and selected elected officials to obtain their views on cid card acceptance and reviewed the positions of u.s. - based financial institutions and nonprofit advocacy and research organizations . to determine steps mexico and guatemala have taken to verify the identities of cid card applicants and to incorporate security features in cid cards , we interviewed officials from the mexican and guatemalan embassies and consulates , analyzed related documentation , observed the mexican consulate's issuance of cid cards at an offsite facility , and interviewed the representatives of the company that manufactures the guatemalan cid card . we did not perform an evaluation of the mexican and guatemalan cid card programs or security features . to determine the positions and policies of key federal agencies regarding the usage and acceptance of cid cards , we interviewed officials from the departments of the treasury , homeland security ( dhs ) , justice , and state , and reviewed congressional testimony by the latter three agencies . we also reviewed regulations proposed and adopted by the department of the treasury . we conducted our review from july 2003 to june 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is contained in appendix i . the vccr is an agreement that governs consular relations among approximately 165 nations .