this report contains recommendations to the secretary of the treasury . the head of a federal agency is required by 31 u.s.c . treasury categorizes and allocates costs in the snc by agency . a written statement must also be sent to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of the report . we are sending copies of this report to the chairman and ranking member of the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs and its subcommittee on federal financial management , government information , federal services , and international security and the chairman and ranking member of the house committee on oversight and government reform and its subcommittee on government management , organization , and procurement . in addition , we are sending copies to the fiscal assistant secretary of the treasury , the director of omb , the deputy director for management of omb , and the acting controller of omb's office of federal financial management . this report is also available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . we acknowledge and appreciate the cooperation and assistance provided by treasury and omb during our audit . if you or your staff have any questions or wish to discuss this report , please contact me ( 202 ) 512-3406 or engelg@gao.gov . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . this appendix includes the status of recommendations from the following six reports that were open at the beginning of our fiscal year 2008 audit: financial audit: process for preparing the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government needs improvement , gao - 04-45 ( washington , d.c.: oct. 30 , 2003 ) ; financial audit: process for preparing the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government needs further improvement , gao - 04-866 ( washington , d.c.: sept. 10 , 2004 ) ; financial audit: process for preparing the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government continues to need improvement , gao - 05-407 ( washington , d.c.: may 4 , 2005 ) ; financial audit: significant internal control weaknesses remain in preparing the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government , gao - 06-415 ( washington , d.c.: apr . 21 , 2006 ) ; financial audit: significant internal control weaknesses remain in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government , gao - 07-805 ( washington , d.c.: july 23 , 2007 ) ; and financial audit: material weaknesses in internal control over the processes used to prepare the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government , gao - 08-748 ( washington , d.c.: june 17 , 2008 ) . recommendations from these reports that were closed in prior years are not included in this appendix . this appendix includes the status of the 56 remaining open recommendations , according to the department of the treasury ( treasury ) and the office of management and budget ( omb ) , as well as our own assessments . explanations are included in the status of recommendations per gao when treasury and omb disagreed with our recommendation or our assessment of the status of a recommendation .