no completion date . revise the criteria for review of industry topical reports to allow for nrc staff review of safety - significant reports that have generic implications but have not been formally submitted for nrc review in accordance with the existing criteria . recommendation rejected by nrc management . no completion date . the following are gao's comments on the nuclear regulatory commission's letter dated may 5 , 2004 . we agree with nrc that 10 c.f.r . § 50.9 requires that information provided to nrc by a licensee be complete and accurate in all material respects , and we have added this information to the report . nrc also states that in carrying out its oversight responsibilities , nrc must “rely heavily” on licensees providing accurate information . however , we believe that nrc's oversight program should not place undue reliance on applicants providing complete and accurate information . nrc also recognizes that it cannot rely solely on information from licensees , as evidenced by its inspection program and process for determining the significance of licensee violations . under this process , nrc considers whether there are any willful aspects associated with the violation — including the deliberate intent to violate a license requirement or regulation or falsify information . we believe that management controls , including inspection and enforcement , should be implemented by nrc so as to verify whether licensee - submitted information considered to be important for ensuring safety is complete and accurate as required by the regulation . in this regard , as stated in nrc's enforcement policy guidance , nrc is authorized to conduct inspections and investigations ( atomic energy act § 161 ) ; revoke licenses for , among other things , a licensee's making material false statements or failing to build or operate a facility in accordance with the terms of the license ( atomic energy act § 186 ) ; and impose civil penalties for a licensee's knowing failure to provide certain safety information to nrc ( energy reorganization act § 206 ) . with regard to the draft report conveying the expectation that nrc should have known about the thick layer of boron on the reactor vessel head , we note in the draft report that since at least 1998 , nrc was aware that ( 1 ) firstenergy's boric acid corrosion control program was inadequate , ( 2 ) radiation monitors within the containment area were continuously being clogged by boric acid deposits , ( 3 ) the containment air cooling system had to be cleaned repeatedly because of boric acid buildup , ( 4 ) corrosion was occurring within containment as evidenced by rust particles being found , and ( 5 ) the unidentified leakage rate had increased above the level that historically had been found at the plant . nrc was also aware of the repeated but ineffective attempts by firstenergy to correct many of these recurring problems — evidence that the licensee's programs to identify and correct problems were not effective . given these indications at davis - besse , nrc could have taken more aggressive follow - up action to determine the underlying causes .