this report contains recommendations to you . as you know , 31 u.s.c . sec does not have a program to handle security incidents . the commission has drafted an incident response program plan that provides general guidance on handling security incidents ; however , it lacks a comprehensive program to collect , document , and analyze incident information to determine if trends exist that could be mitigated through user awareness , training , or the addition of technical security controls . as previously reported , sec has acknowledged the importance of security incident reporting and analysis , however , it does not perform trend analysis of its security incidents . until sec formalizes its process for handling security incidents , it remains at risk of not being able to detect or respond quickly to them . continuity of operations controls should be designed to ensure that , when unexpected events occur , key operations continue without interruption or are promptly resumed , and critical and sensitive data are protected . maintain a continuity of operations program that includes fully tested plans for restoring operations . these controls include environmental controls and procedures designed to protect information resources and minimize the risk of unplanned interruptions , along with a well - tested plan to recover critical operations should interruptions occur . its local and wide area networks interconnect these systems . to support the commission's financial management functions , it relies on several financial systems to process and track financial transactions such as filing fees paid by corporations and penalties from enforcement activities . according to fisma , the chairman of sec has responsibility for , among other things , ( 1 ) providing information security protections commensurate with the risk and magnitude of the harm resulting from unauthorized access , use , disclosure , disruption , modification , or destruction of the agency's information systems and information ; ( 2 ) ensuring that senior agency officials provide information security for the information and information systems that support the operations and assets under their control ; and ( 3 ) delegating to the agency cio the authority to ensure compliance with the requirements imposed on the agency under fisma . sec's cio is responsible for developing and maintaining a departmentwide information security program and for developing and maintaining information security policies , procedures , and control techniques that address all applicable requirements . the objectives of our review were to assess ( 1 ) the status of sec's actions to correct or mitigate previously reported information security and ( 2 ) the effectiveness of the commission's information system controls for ensuring the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of its information systems and information . our evaluation was based on our federal information system controls audit manual , which contains guidance for reviewing information system controls that affect the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of computerized data . however , sec successfully tested the recovery of only 12 of 20 of its major applications . despite sec's accomplishments in the disaster recovery area , sec must test its service continuity plans to ensure its ability to continue and / or recover operations in the event of a disaster .