cost of maintaining an ois . ssa has not yet made design decisions on the ois that will ultimately define the overall cost of producing , implementing , and maintaining the ois system . for example , ssa officials told us that they were not sure how many occupations they would include in the ois , although they believe the total number will be somewhere between the number of occupations in the o*net and the dot , or between approximately 1,000 and 12,000 occupations . a 2010 study conducted by the national academy of sciences reviewing labor's o*net cited the three major cost drivers of an occupational information system as ( 1 ) size of sample , ( 2 ) number of occupations , and ( 3 ) frequency of updates . this study noted that as the agency increases any one of these cost drivers , it does so at the expense of the others or of the overall cost . for example , if ssa chooses to frequently update the entire ois , the agency may need to make tradeoffs with the number of occupations or sample size it chooses if it wishes to contain costs . managing large , multiyear projects . in the past , ssa has experienced difficulties managing complex , multiyear efforts . in prior work , we reported that ssa has cancelled numerous demonstration projects due to limitations or weaknesses in design or implementation and lacked sufficient controls to ensure effective management of its demonstration projects . we have also reported on challenges that ssa faced managing two separate redesigns of its disability decision - making process . while the ois project alone represents a complex effort , stakeholders have emphasized the importance of this project progressing in close concert with other ongoing research managed by another part of ssa , placing greater emphasis on broad and effective project planning . in light of past experiences and as ssa faces a potential change in leadership in 2013 , the management shortcomings we identified increase the vulnerability of this complex project . given the range of challenges and potential risks they pose to the success of the ois project , it is important to identify and carefully explore feasible alternatives that may mitigate these risks . examples of potential alternatives suggested by experts and other observers in the disability field include: leveraging o*net . in a report issued in 2010 , ssa's advisory panel found that it did not believe that o*net would meet ssa's needs , in part , because it is not detailed enough . however , the national academy of sciences also issued a report in 2010 and concluded that o*net could be altered to better meet ssa's needs for disability adjudication . ssa officials have told us that modifying o*net would not result in savings for the agency , but they have not conducted any analysis to determine this .