disabilities . the americans with disabilities act of 1990 prohibits discrimination against individuals with disabilities in several areas , including employment , state and local government activities , and public accommodations . act of 1973 , as amended , prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability under any program or activity that receives federal financial assistance . colleges , universities , other postsecondary institutions , and public institutions of higher education are subject to these requirements . in addition , section 504 of the rehabilitation sex discrimination . title ix of the education amendments of 1972 prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in any federally funded education program or activity . title ix applies , with a few specific exceptions , to all aspects of education programs or activities that receive federal financial assistance , including athletics . byrd amendment: educational institutions that receive federal funds must hold an annual educational program on the u.s. constitution . different agencies administer different aspects of the americans with disabilities act , including the equal employment opportunity commission and the department of justice . internal revenue service form 990: schools that have tax - exempt status generally must annually file irs form 990 . the form requires a range of information on the organization's exempt and other activities , finances , governance , compliance with certain federal tax requirements , and compensation paid to certain persons . we have added information accordingly . education also recommended the report distinguish between reporting and disclosure requirements , and we have provided definitions in the background in response . education expressed concern that the report did not sufficiently consider the benefits of federal requirements . we agree that federal requirements generally have a purpose and associated benefits — such as benefits associated with program oversight and consumer awareness — which we acknowledge in our report . analyzing the costs and benefits associated with individual requirements was beyond the scope of this report , as our primary objective was to obtain stakeholder views on burdens . education also suggested we report more on its efforts to balance burden and benefits when designing information collections . we acknowledged these efforts in our report and incorporated additional information that education subsequently provided . education also provided technical comments that were incorporated , as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of education , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and the secretary of education . in addition , the report is available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 617 ) 788-0534 or emreyarrasm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .