process . business cases may ultimately be included in the budget request . the fiscal year 2014 budget request for irs shows proposed savings and efficiencies in its base budget in several areas totaling over $217 million as shown in table 2 . some of irs's expected fiscal year 2014 savings are anticipated to be achieved through operational changes , such as shifting funds to automate processes and streamlining or consolidating operations and functions to make them more cost - effective . irs's 2014 fiscal year budget includes the following savings and efficiencies: realizing personnel savings: personnel savings are mainly the result of staff attrition and hiring restrictions . reducing it infrastructure: examples of it infrastructure changes include providing improved data storage capacity , updating computer servers to be more efficient , adopting common technology platforms and a more efficient telecommunications infrastructure , and changing it contracting practices . for example , irs is in the process of implementing virtual computer servers for data storage . also , the irs is implementing new technologies for sharing computer services across the agency . capturing savings from space optimization: irs has reduced ( or plans to reduce ) its office inventory , having selected 123 of its 648 offices to be closed , consolidated , or reduced . these rental savings are the result of attrition , hiring restrictions , and changes in working environments ( such as increased telework and development of workspace standards that decrease individual office size ) . space optimization savings require a one - time investment of $37.5 million to build out new and consolidated space and relocate employees , resulting in expected future rent savings of $76.7 million annually ( $39.2 million net ) . funding bsm: bsm savings represent differences in projected costs of it operations from one year to the next , including implementation costs related to the current customer account data engine 2 ; modernized e - file ; core infrastructure ; and architecture , integration , and management . implementing human capital efficiencies: administrative efficiency efforts include the consolidation of employment activities and modifications to training programs . for example , irs reduced the number of employment hiring centers from 9 to 3 . irs also streamlined processing of requests for personnel - related changes , such as salary increases , transfers , or leaves of absence . in addition , the employment operations unit automated its hiring process to enable electronic completion of pre - hire forms . some training programs are being modified from classroom training to webinars , reducing travel costs and allowing more employees to attend . achieving e - file savings: these savings result from labor reductions related to increased use of electronic filing of tax returns and corresponding decrease in paper returns . in its fiscal year 2014 congressional justification , irs included projected roi for 10 enforcement initiatives , including two initiatives that used new approaches in estimating potential roi: revenue protection and revenue enhancement . according to agency budget officials , irs developed the new roi methodologies because it did not have enough historical data on these initiatives to use the same methodology used for other initiatives .