gao - 09-773t . washington , d.c.: june 9 , 2009 . its importance has increased over time . epa , state and local environmental programs , international regulatory bodies , academia , industry , and others now rely heavily on the iris database to support risk - based decision making to protect public health and the environment . a typical iris assessment contains a qualitative description of the hazard posed by a chemical and a quantitative assessment of the relationship between exposure and the likelihood and severity of adverse health effects . the focus of iris toxicity assessments is on the potential health effects of long - term ( chronic ) exposure to chemicals . according to the office of management and budget ( omb ) , epa is the only federal agency that develops qualitative and quantitative assessments of both cancer and noncancer risks of exposure to chemicals , and epa does so largely under the iris program . the quantitative estimates of potency that epa provides are particularly important , as they are required to conduct quantitative risk assessments . epa uses risk assessments developed with iris toxicity data to determine whether the identified health risks warrant regulatory or other actions . examples of subsequent decisions that could stem from a determination that action is necessary to protect public health include how much of a chemical a company may discharge into a river , which substances may be stored at a hazardous waste facility , the extent to which a hazardous waste site must be cleaned up , levels for air emissions , and allowable levels of contamination in drinking water . epa lacks adequate scientific information on the toxicity of many chemicals that are or may be found in the environment . for existing chemicals , tsca generally places the burden of obtaining data on epa , rather than on the companies that produce the chemicals . this approach requires that epa demonstrate certain health or environmental risks before it can require companies to further test their chemicals . as a result , epa has only limited information on the health and environmental risks posed by these chemicals . furthermore , while tsca authorizes epa to review existing chemicals , it generally provides no specific requirement , time frame , or methodology for doing so . significantly , chemical companies are not required to develop and submit toxicity information to epa on existing chemicals unless the agency finds that a chemical may present an unreasonable risk of injury to human health or the environment or is or will be produced in substantial quantities and that either ( a ) there is or may be significant or substantial human exposure to the chemical or ( b ) the chemical enters the environment in substantial quantities . epa must also determine there are insufficient data on a chemical to reasonably determine its effects on health or the environment and that testing is necessary to develop such data before the agency can require a company to test its chemicals for harmful effects . this structure places the burden on epa to demonstrate a need for data on a chemical's toxicity rather than on a company to demonstrate that a chemical is safe .