, and stores that information . hacked by chinese ! ”this message enabled system administrators to easily identify when their servers had been infected . crv2a and crv2b modified the functionality so it would no longer deface web pages , forcing system administrators to be proactive in determining infection . descriptions of the variants are listed below . crv1: web site defacement and “random” target selection for additional attacks . crv2a: no web defacement and modified random target selection crv2b: no web defacement and better target selection by optimizing the random number generation process , i.e. , better target addresses are generated . due to the target optimization , systems infected with version 2b are able to infect new systems at a faster rate than version 2a . between day 20 and day 27 of any month is code red's attack phase . once code red determines the date to be within this designated attack date range , each infected server participates in a ddos attack by sending massive amounts of data to its intended target , the numeric internet address of the white house web site . since all infected servers are set to attack the same target on the same set of dates , the large amount of internet traffic is expected to flood the internet with data and bombard a numeric address used by www.whitehouse.gov with more data than it can handle . this flooding of data would cause the web server to stop responding to all web server requests , including legitimate users surfing the white house web site . from day 28 to the end of the month , the code red worm lays dormant , going into an infinite sleep phase . although the worm remains in the computer's memory until the system is rebooted , code red will not propagate or initiate any attacks once it enters dormancy . according to testing performed by internet security systems , carnegie mellon's cert coordination center ( cert / cc ) , and the federal bureau of investigation's ( fbi ) national infrastructure protection center ( nipc ) , the dormant worm cannot be awakened to restart the process . answer code red ii is also a worm that makes use of a buffer overflow vulnerability in microsoft's iis web server software . except for using the buffer overflow injection mechanism , the worm is very different than the original code red and its variants . in fact , it is more dangerous because it opens backdoors on infected servers that allow any follow - on remote attackers to execute arbitrary commands . there is no ddos attack function in code red ii . code red ii was reported on august 4 , 2001 , by industry analysts . like code red , the worm scans the internet , identifies vulnerable systems , and infects these systems by installing itself . each newly installed worm joins all the others causing the rate of scanning to grow . code red ii , however , mostly selects internet addresses in the same range as the infected computer to increase the likelihood of finding susceptible victims . users with microsoft iis web server software ( versions 4.0 and 5.0 ) installed with windows 2000 .