108-18 as the baseline . opm's p.l . 108-18 pro - rata approach requires that the postal service fund ( 1 ) all csrs military service benefits of employees hired into a civilian position after june 30 , 1971 , and ( 2 ) a pro - rata share of these benefits for employees hired before july 1 , 1971 . opm estimated this pro - rata share of benefits by first allocating an employee's total creditable military service based on the ratio of pre - 1971 civilian service to the total civilian service which the employee accrued both before and after the effective date of the postal reorganization act . opm's methodology also assumed that the postal service should be responsible for ( 1 ) the effect of post - 1971 general pay increases and increasing benefit accrual rates on the final amount of military service benefits at retirement , including those military service credits allocated to the federal government , and ( 2 ) a proportional amount of post - 1971 annuitant cost - of - living adjustments . these aspects of opm's methodology apply to the second , third , and fourth funding alternatives presented in the opm and treasury proposal . the other two alternatives – treasury pays the entire cost of military service or postal service pays the entire cost after september 30 , 2002 – have the responsible agency funding all csrs benefits attributable to military service , including all annuitant colas . appendix b of the opm and treasury proposal provides examples of how an example retiree's benefit payment would be allocated into civilian and military service portions and how the federal government's share of those amounts would be determined for each of the funding alternatives . the total estimated additional cost to the treasury for each funding alternative is equal to the difference between the projected funded status – or “supplemental liability” – of the current law pro - rata approach with that of each alternative . appendix c of the opm and treasury proposal provides the net asset , present value of future benefits , and present value of future contributions components of the “supplemental liability” for each funding alternative . “because military service only becomes creditable at the time when an employee actually retires , it would not be unreasonable to charge postal service for the entire amount of military service for all employees who retired from the postal service after june 30 , 1971 . it was only because these employees retired from the postal service that they received credit for their military service.” ”civil service rules required that to receive a regular retirement benefit the employees must have at least five years of civilian service and then attain additional age and service requirements.” the rules governing the crediting of military service are established in law and regulation . generally , military service can be used in the computation of any annuity after having completed 5 years of civilian service and if the following three conditions are met: ( 1 ) the military service was active and terminated under honorable conditions , ( 2 ) the military service was performed before separating from a civilian position covered by csrs , and ( 3 ) the employee makes any required deposits .