we have not finalized our analysis . to identify some of the challenges confronting the department in making dts the department's standard travel system , we discussed with pmo - dts officials their implementation strategy and reviewed past gao reports and testimonies related to the department's efforts to improve the accuracy and reliability of the information in its business systems . we briefed dod officials on the contents of this testimony . we assessed the reliability of the dod data we used for our preliminary evaluation by ( 1 ) performing electronic testing of required data elements , ( 2 ) reviewing existing information about the data and the system that produced them , and ( 3 ) interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of this testimony . will dts correct the internal control weaknesses and improper payments previously identified ? what challenges remain in ensuring that dts achieves its goal as dod's standard travel system ? in addition , for the hearing today , you asked us for a description of dod's property rights in dts . we address this issue in appendix i . to address the first key question , we reviewed two key dts flight - related requirements and the related testing to determine if the desired functionality was effectively implemented . to address the second key question , we analyzed ( 1 ) our prior reports and testimonies , ( 2 ) selected defense finance and accounting service ( dfas ) reports , and ( 3 ) dod congressional testimonies to identify the specific problems that dts was intended to resolve . we also randomly selected for detailed review travel vouchers and transactions drawn from the first quarter of fiscal year 2005 ( october - december 2004 ) to determine if dts calculation problems identified by dfas had been resolved . to address the third key question , we discussed with the pmo - dts the deployment of dts as it relates to the transmission of data such as finance and accounting information , between dts and the other systems belonging to dod , as well as the private sector . we also analyzed dod data related to the utilization of dts throughout dod . we determined that the dod data we used as the basis for the preliminary evaluation in the testimony were sufficiently reliable by ( 1 ) performing electronic testing of required data elements , ( 2 ) reviewing existing information about the data and the system that produced them , and ( 3 ) interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data . we performed our work from october 2004 through september 2005 in accordance with u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards . details of our scope and methodology are included in appendix ii . twelve years ago , in september 1993 , the national performance review called for an overhaul of dod's temporary duty ( tdy ) travel system . in response , dod created the dod task force to reengineer travel to examine the process . in january 1995 , the task force issued the report of the department of defense task force to reengineer travel .