( see fig . federal research efforts for gulf war illnesses have been guided by questions established by the interagency research working group ( rwg ) , which was initially established under the persian gulf veterans coordinating board ( pgvcb ) to coordinate federal research efforts . between 1995 and 1996 , the rwg identified 19 major research questions related to illnesses in gulf war veterans . in 1996 , the group added 2 more questions regarding cancer risk and mortality rates to create a set of 21 key research questions that have served as an overarching strategy in guiding federal research for gulf war illnesses . with regard to exposure , the research questions cover leishmania tropica ( a type of parasite ) , petroleum , petroleum combustion products , specific occupational / environmental hazards ( such as vaccines and chemical agents , pyridostigmine bromide ( given to troops as a defense against nerve agents ) , and psychophysiological stressors ( such as exposure to extremes of human suffering ) . ( see app . ( see fig . from 1994 to 2003 , va , dod , and hhs collectively spent a total of $247 million on gulf war illnesses research . dod has provided the most funding for gulf war illnesses research , funding about 74 percent of all federal gulf war illnesses research within this time frame . figure 3 shows the comparative percentage of funding by these agencies for each fiscal year since 1994 . after fiscal year 2000 , overall funding for gulf war illnesses research decreased . ( see fig . fiscal year 2003 research funding was about $20 million less than funding provided in fiscal year 2000 . this overall decrease in federal funding was paralleled by a change in federal research priorities , which expanded to include all hazardous deployments and shifted away from a specific focus on gulf war illnesses . va officials said that although gulf war illnesses research continues , the agency is expanding the scope of its research to include the potential long - term health effects in troops who served in hazardous deployments other than the gulf war . in october 2002 , va announced plans to commit up to $20 million for research into gulf war illnesses and the health effects of other military deployments . also in october 2002 , va issued a program announcement for research on the long - term health effects in veterans who served in the gulf war or in other hazardous deployments , such as afghanistan and bosnia / kosovo . as of april 2004 , one new gulf war illnesses research project , for $450,000 , was funded under this program announcement . although dod has historically provided the majority of funding for gulf war illnesses research , dod officials stated that their agency currently has no plans to continue funding new gulf war illnesses research projects . correspondingly , dod has not funded any new gulf war illnesses research in fiscal year 2004 , except as reflected in modest supplements to complete existing projects and a new award pending for research using funding from a specific appropriation . dod also did not include gulf war illnesses research funding in its budget proposals for fiscal years 2005 and 2006 .