, research conducted by federal agencies in their own facilities ) . the work on which this testimony is based was conducted from march 2018 to april 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . our findings are not generalizable to all agencies but provide illustrative examples of these agencies' scientific integrity policies and their actions to implement those policies . the agencies we selected are the agricultural research service ( ars ) in the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) ; environmental protection agency ( epa ) , an independent agency ; federal aviation administration ( faa ) in the department of transportation ( dot ) ; office of fossil energy ( fe ) in the department of energy ( doe ) ; national institutes of health ( nih ) in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) ; nasa , an independent agency ; national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) in the department of commerce ( commerce ) ; national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) in u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) in the department of the interior . for example , when addressing the components of foundations of scientific integrity in government , noaa's scientific integrity policy states that the agency will ensure the free flow of scientific information online and in other formats , consistent with privacy and classification standards , and in keeping with other commerce and noaa policies . in another example , nasa's scientific integrity policy states that nasa facilitates the free flow of scientific and technological information among scientists and engineers , between nasa staff and the scientific and technical community , and between nasa employees and the public . the policy goes on to cite additional nasa policies on dissemination of information and public access to data . similarly , we found that all nine selected agencies addressed all of the components of the principle professional development of government scientists and engineers . for example , epa's policy states that the agency encourages publication and presentation of research findings in peer - reviewed , professional , or scholarly journals and at professional meetings . nist's scientific integrity policy states that the agency supports scientists' full participation in professional or scholarly societies , committees , task forces , and other specialized bodies of professional societies , with proper legal review and approval . specifically , fe and nist have not provided scientific integrity training for staff , according to officials , or taken other actions to promote their scientific integrity policies with staff . under the 2007 america competes act , civilian agencies that conduct scientific research are , among other things , required to widely communicate and readily make accessible to all employees their scientific integrity policies and procedures . according to fe and nist officials , the agencies made their policies available to staff on their websites and believed no additional actions were needed .