information reporting . gao / ggd - 93-55r . washington , d.c.: july 22 , 1993 . tax administration: information returns can improve reporting of forgiven debts . gao / ggd - 93-42 . washington , d.c.: february 17 , 1993 . options reporting to irs . gao / ggd - 95-145r . washington , d.c.: may 5 , 1995 . tax gap: many actions taken , but a cohesive compliance strategy needed . gao / ggd - 94-123 . washington , d.c.: may 11 , 1994 . tax administration: computer matching could identify overstated business deductions . gao / ggd - 93-133 . washington , d.c.: august 13 , 1993 . tax administration: overstated real estate tax deductions need to be reduced . gao / ggd - 93-43 . washington , d.c.: january 19 , 1993 . there are various ways to mitigate each challenge . tables 7 and 8 list some major challenges for brokers and irs , respectively , as well as some ways to start mitigating the challenges . discussion after the tables covers some issues to consider when evaluating these mitigation strategies . although not all inclusive , the strategies discussed above could help mitigate many of the challenges facing brokers and irs if information reporting were expanded to include cost basis . however , the strategies also involve a number of trade - offs that would need to be considered in terms of the costs and burdens associated with basis reporting for taxpayers , irs , and brokers , and the impact on reducing the capital gains tax gap for securities . representatives from the securities industry we interviewed said that brokers would incur additional costs to develop and maintain systems to track and report basis , although they did not provide precise costs . however , we were also told that almost all of the largest brokers directly provide basis information to a significant portion of their clients , and many smaller brokers provide basis to a significant portion of their clients through outsourcing . also , representatives of the mutual fund industry estimated that 80 to 90 percent of mutual funds provide average cost basis information to their shareholders . likewise , from a societal perspective , the cost that brokers would incur in reporting basis information would be offset to some extent by the reduced costs to taxpayers in researching , calculating , and reporting basis , or paying a return preparer to perform such services . however , some brokers may pass on the costs of reporting basis information to their customers . further , decisions about the scope and details of basis reporting , as further discussed below , could constrain how much brokers' costs would increase . also , representatives from the securities industry told us that their ability to provide taxpayers and irs with accurate basis information would be challenged when taxpayers move their securities holdings from one broker to another . some brokers use a system to transfer basis among one another , but the system is not used by all brokers . in addition , brokers do not always track and transfer basis in a consistent manner ; that is , some track original cost basis while others track adjusted cost basis .