the board reports to the administrator . it will review issues , provide independent advice on epa's major programs , and will perform special assignments as requested by the agency and as required by the erddaa of 1978 and the caa amendments of 1977.” in response to the erddaa amendments , epa changed the charter in 1981 to reflect that certain congressional committees could also request advice . additional changes to the charter over the years regarding to whom the sab is to provide advice are reflected in the table below . in addition to the individual named above , vincent price and janet frisch , assistant directors ; ulana bihun ; antoinette capaccio ; greg carroll ; and john delicath made key contributions to this report . casac also has subcommittees and panels . the epa administrator appoints members to the sab ( and its standing committees ) and casac , and the sab staff director appoints consultants to the sab ad hoc committees , panels , and workgroups and casac subcommittees and panels . the sab staff office , among other things , oversees the selection and formation of sab and casac panels and work groups and processes epa requests for scientific and technical advice.administrator . the sab , its staff office , and casac report directly to the epa recent interactions between the house committee on science , space , and technology and the sab related to specific sab reviews on hydraulic fracturing and water body connectivity have raised questions with the committee regarding whether the sab is fulfilling its statutory obligations to provide scientific advice to the designated congressional committees.in addition , recent testimony received by the committee has raised questions regarding whether casac is carrying out its statutory obligations to advise epa of any adverse public health , welfare , social , economic , or energy effects that may result from various strategies for attainment and maintenance of naaqs . you asked us to review how the sab and casac are fulfilling their statutory obligations in providing scientific advice . this report examines ( 1 ) the extent to which epa procedures for processing congressional committees' requests for scientific advice from the sab ensure compliance with erddaa ; ( 2 ) the extent to which casac has provided advice related to naaqs ; and ( 3 ) policies , if any , epa has to ensure the sab and casac maintain their independence from the agency when performing their work . to examine the extent to which epa procedures for processing congressional committees' requests for scientific advice from the sab ensure compliance with erddaa , we reviewed erddaa and its legislative history , the sab's charters , legal cases involving the sab , and epa documents to determine how requests to the sab from congressional committees were addressed . we also interviewed officials from the sab staff office , epa's office of general counsel , and epa's office of congressional and intergovernmental relations ( ocir ) . to examine the extent to which casac has provided advice related to naaqs , we reviewed the clean air act , its legislative history , and legal cases involving the act . we also interviewed sab staff office and epa office of general counsel officials .