mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . it is not certain what impact the new policy will have on visa issuance . however , education , business , and government officials have expressed concern that it was already taking too long to issue visas and that without a commensurate increase in resources to accommodate the heavier workload that may result from the new requirement , there could be serious delays for those seeking to visit the united states . in march 2003 , the house committee on science held a hearing on “dealing with foreign students and scholars in the age of terrorism: visa backlogs and tracking systems.” in june 2003 , the house committee on small business held a hearing on “the visa approval backlog and its impact on american small business . “ in both hearings , higher education and business leaders and agency officials testified on the negative impacts of delays in issuing visas . the testimonies also highlighted the difficulties of balancing national security interests with the desire to facilitate travel . at the request of the house committee on science , we are currently examining the amount of time taken to adjudicate visa applications from foreign science students and scholars . as part of this work , we will be looking at how the new interview policy will affect the process . before i conclude my statement , i would like to raise some questions that the subcommittee may want to consider in its oversight role: have the departments of state , homeland security , and justice reached agreement on how best to communicate information on individuals who should not be issued visas and on individuals whose visas have been revoked ? have the departments of state , homeland security , and justice agreed on the level of evidence needed to deny and revoke visas ? does the department of state have adequate number of trained staff for visa processing , especially if the number of visa applicants or security checks increase ? the department of homeland security also remarked that it was working to better standardize its procedures . the second report provides examples of how weaknesses in policy and interagency coordination are affecting border security . the department of state has recently issued guidance to its posts about using the visa process as an antiterrorism tool . in may 2003 , the secretary of state announced that , by august 1 , 2003 , with a few exceptions , all foreign individuals seeking to visit the united states would be interviewed prior to receiving a visa . the purpose of this guidance is to tighten the visa process to protect u.s. security and to prepare for the eventual fingerprinting of applicants that state must undertake to meet the legislated mandate to include a biometric identifier with issued visas . ins investigators said they did not open cases on these individuals with revoked visas who had entered the united states because their unit had not been notified that state had revoked visas because of terrorism concerns and that these persons had entered the country . they added that , in the 10 cases that were referred to them , they conducted a full investigation of possible immigration violations .