reg . ยง 229.407 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( vi ) . however , fhlbanks are not subject to this rule because they are exempt from the requirements to file proxy statements . sec did not define diversity in this rule and , in adopting this rule , clarified that companies should be allowed to define the term in ways that they consider appropriate . fhfa has taken some steps to demonstrate the importance of diversity on fhlbank boards . in rules issued in 2009 and 2010 , fhfa urged fhlbanks to consider the importance of board diversity . in the 2009 rule , fhfa encouraged the boards to consider the diversity of their boards both when requesting nominees for member directors and nominating candidates as independent directors . in the 2010 rule , fhfa stated that fhlbanks' policies and procedures should encourage the consideration of diversity . fhfa created an omwi in january 2011 to promote diversity and the inclusion of women and minorities in all fhlbank activities , including the promotion of diversity on fhlbank boards . omwi staff conducted a listening tour in 2013 that included visits to each of the 12 fhlbanks to discuss the omwi's role and learn more about fhlbanks' diversity practices . omwi staff also asked for suggestions on how to evaluate diversity metrics . figure 5 outlines the timeline of events from the enactment of hera through the creation of omwi and subsequent activities related to fhlbank board diversity . in june 2014 , fhfa proposed a rule that would require fhlbanks to report the demographic profiles of board directors and a description of their related diversity outreach activities . fhfa finalized the rule in may 2015 . the rule requires fhlbanks to report to fhfa their board directors' voluntarily self - reported demographic information , something fhlbank management and employees are already required to do . the purpose of the proposal was to allow fhfa and the fhlbanks to obtain access to data about board diversity , particularly numbers of women and minority directors , in order to better assess current levels of diversity and the impact of their outreach efforts ( including those practices discussed earlier ) . the final rule states that current fhfa regulations require fhlbanks to implement policies that encourage the consideration of diversity in the nomination or selection of nominees for board directors . the rule states the fhlbanks are required to report on board diversity data and outreach efforts in their annual reports to omwi , beginning september 30 , 2015 . fhfa officials also told us that although fhlbanks could interpret diversity broadly and might seek other types of diversity on their boards , the omwi focuses on the representation of women and minorities , and omwi expected fhlbanks to have diversity outreach programs that targeted these two groups . our prior work and that of a global research institute have cited the practice of collecting diversity data as a way to better measure and assess the effectiveness of diversity programs on increasing diversity . for example , our 2011 report on governance practices at the federal reserve banks found that each bank submitted demographic information that directors provided voluntarily .