gao - 16-148 . washington , d.c.: jan. 12 , 2016 . littoral combat ship: navy complied with regulations in accepting two lead ships , but quality problems persisted after delivery . gao - 14-827 . washington , d.c.: sept. 25 , 2014 . their reasons could have merit . however , the navy has no data on the full costs of correcting shipbuilder - responsible defects after delivery . therefore , it is not positioned to know whether or not warranties would increase the price of its ships . because the navy has not historically used or considered warranties for its ships , it may be prematurely discounting their use as a mechanism to improve ship quality and cost . in this regard , there may be benefit in examining the practices of others , such as the coast guard , which has adopted a warranty approach for the frc and plans to do so for its upcoming offshore patrol cutter . to improve the use of warranties and guarantees in navy shipbuilding , we recommend that the secretary of the defense direct the secretary of the navy to take the following three actions: 1 . in arrangements where the shipbuilder is paid to correct defects , structure contract terms such that shipbuilders do not earn profit for correcting construction deficiencies following delivery that are determined to be their responsibility . establish and document a clear objective for using a guaranty , and then create guidance for contracting officers that illustrates how to implement a guaranty that meets this objective . this guidance should describe how contracting officers should use aspects of the guaranty , including determining an appropriate limitation of liability , to achieve the objective and include considerations as to when a guaranty should be a separate contract line item . for future ship construction contracts , determine whether or not a warranty as provided in the far , provides value and document the costs , benefits , and other factors used to make this decision . to inform this determination , the navy should begin differentiating the government's and shipbuilder's responsibility for defects and track the costs to correct all defects after ship delivery . we provided a draft of our report to the departments of defense and homeland security for review and comment . in its written comments , which are reprinted in appendix ii of this report , dod partially concurred with all three of our recommendations , and stated the issues will be addressed in a study to be completed by september 2016 . the department of homeland security had no comments . with regard to the first recommendation , dod agreed that guaranty terms should be reviewed , but disagreed that shipbuilding contracts always result in the shipbuilder earning profit to correct defects determined to be the shipbuilder's responsibility . the latter point is not in contention , as our report found that the extent to which the shipbuilder earns profit for shipbuilder - responsible defects depends upon the type and terms of each ship construction contract . nevertheless , as noted in the report , we found that for the four fixed - price incentive contracts in our review , the government paid for almost all shipbuilder - responsible deficiencies found after delivery .