referrals for investigation . according to the six plan sponsors we interviewed , the referrals can be made to nbi medic or to the plan sponsor's own internal investigative unit , if they have one . after investigating a particular case , if a plan sponsor or nbi medic determines that a beneficiary is suspected of diverting opioids , they may refer the case to the hhs - oig , or a law enforcement agency , according to cms , nbi medic , and one plan sponsor . pharmacy lock - ins . beginning in 2019 , medicare part d plan sponsors will be able to restrict certain beneficiaries identified as at - risk for prescription drug abuse to a single pharmacy for all their opioid prescriptions , known as a pharmacy “lock in.” some plan sponsors explained that they use pharmacy lock - ins for their commercial and medicaid lines of business , and generally found them to be a useful tool for controlling opioid use . based on cms's use of the oms and the actions taken by plan sponsors , cms reported a decrease in the number of beneficiaries meeting the oms criteria of high - risk — which agency officials consider an indication of success toward its goal of decreasing opioid use disorder . from calendar years 2011 through 2016 , there was a 61 percent decrease in the number of beneficiaries meeting the oms criteria . ( see table 1. ) in addition to using the oms as a monitoring tool to oversee plan sponsors' compliance with their dur system requirements , cms relies on patient safety measures to assess how well part d plan sponsors are monitoring beneficiaries and taking appropriate actions . specifically , cms tracks data on plan sponsors' performance for 15 measures related to part d patient safety that are developed and maintained by the pharmacy quality alliance , and cms communicates with plan sponsors about their performance . in 2016 , cms started tracking plan sponsors' performance on three pharmacy quality alliance - approved patient safety measures that are directly related to opioids , which were 1 . the proportion of beneficiaries that use opioids at high dosages ( more than 120 mg med for 90 days or longer ) in persons without cancer or not in hospice care . the proportion of beneficiaries that use opioids from multiple providers ( four or more providers and four or more pharmacies ) in persons without cancer or not in hospice care . the proportion of beneficiaries that use opioids at high dosage and from multiple providers in persons without cancer or not in hospice care , and that meet both of the other measures . the three measures are similar to the oms criteria in that they identify beneficiaries with high dosages of opioids ( 120 mg med ) from multiple providers and pharmacies ( four or more of each ) . however , there are a number of differences between these measures and the oms . for example , the oms counts actual beneficiaries , while the patient safety measures report member - years , which are adjusted to account for beneficiaries who are enrolled in a plan for only part of a year .