munitions list and not to those on the ccl . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretaries of commerce , defense , state , and the treasury ; and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9601 or at melitot@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix viii . in this review , we ( 1 ) examined how u.s. agencies use compliance activities to address the risk of illicit transshipment and ( 2 ) analyzed the extent to which u.s. agencies assessed the impact of the export control reform on the resource needs of compliance activities . commerce provided us with transshipment - related information that it controls as being “for official use only.” we have not included that sensitive information in this report but have instead incorporated it into a “for official use only” report that is not publicly available . to examine how u.s. agencies use compliance activities to address the risk of illicit transshipment , we reviewed documents from the departments of commerce , state , the treasury , and defense , including guidance , staffing information , and congressional budget justifications . we also interviewed officials at each agency . we then identified examples of cases for each compliance activity where agency documents or officials indicated that they implemented the compliance activity to address illicit transshipment risk . we also analyzed available data , including licensing statistics , numbers of end - use checks for 13 transshipment countries , numbers of designations on various lists for entities from the 13 gao - designated transshipment countries , numbers of 13 transshipment countries that are partner countries for export control and related border security program training , department of commerce correspondence to validated end - user designees , and agency outreach materials for companies . we also reviewed relevant laws and regulations , interviewed u.s. and host country officials , and analyzed end - use monitoring and licensing data . to identify 13 transshipment countries , we examined prior gao work on transshipment and external diversion ; congressional testimony ; countries with a commerce export control officer in place ; input from the departments of state , commerce , justice , and homeland security ; countries with entities on either the entity list or unverified list ; and a listing of the world's busiest transshipment ports . we interviewed host government officials in hong kong and singapore to obtain information on joint efforts with the u.s. government to mitigate illicit transshipment risks . in examining the end - use monitoring compliance activity , we reviewed departments of state and commerce end - use monitoring activities through reviewing relevant program guidance , including state's blue lantern guidebook , and cables associated with selected end - use checks .