irs provides a service . irs's mission , to help taxpayers understand and meet their tax responsibilities and to apply the tax law with integrity and fairness , requires irs to provide a variety of services ranging from collecting taxes to taxpayer education . irs , like other service providers , could measure output in terms of its results — its impact on taxpayers — or in terms of activities . the results of irs's service are the impacts on the condition or behavior of taxpayers . these taxpayer conditions or behaviors include their compliance with the tax laws , their compliance burden ( the time and money cost of complying with tax laws ) , and their perception of how fairly taxpayers are treated . irs's activities are what irs does to achieve those results . these activities include phone calls answered , notices sent to taxpayers , and exams conducted . generally , information about results is preferred , but measuring such results is often difficult . in the case of the public sector , this preference is reflected in gpra , which requires that federal agencies measure performance , whenever possible , in terms of results or outcomes for people receiving the agencies' services . however , results such as compliance and fairness have intangible characteristics that are difficult to measure . in addition , results are produced in complicated and interrelated ways . for example , a transaction or activity may affect a number of results: irs's exams may affect taxpayers' compliance , compliance burden , and perceptions of the fairness of the tax system . measuring productivity in services is difficult . unlike manufacturing , which lends itself to objective measurement because output can be measured in terms of units produced , services , which involve changes in the condition of people receiving the service , often have intangible characteristics . thus , the output of an assembly line is easier to measure than the output of a teacher , doctor , or lawyer . services may also be complex bundles of individual services , making it difficult to specify the different elements of the service . for example , financial services provide a range of individual services , such as financial advice , accounts management and processing , and facilitating financial transactions . the data on examinations cover individual returns across irs and irs's lmsb division . for both individuals and lmsb , the complexity and quality of exams can vary over time . for example , the proportion of exams that are correspondence versus field , business versus nonbusiness , and eic versus non - eic can vary over time . as already discussed , failing to take account of such variation can give a misleading picture of productivity change . while these examples do not encompass all the methods , data , and adjustments that may be used , they illustrate the benefits of the additional analysis that irs can perform using current data . in addition , as we pointed out in our 2004 report , irs can improve its productivity measurement by investing in better data , taking into account the costs and benefits of doing so .