iii ) . of the adult kidneys , 4 percent were transplanted into children . of the pediatric kidneys , 93 percent were transplanted into adults . figure 4 shows the distribution of pediatric kidneys by age of donor and recipient . during that period , 32 percent of the kidneys given to pediatric recipients came from children , and 68 percent came from adults . kidneys from pediatric donors are most often transplanted into adults because children make up only a small portion of the kidney waiting listand because of the importance of antigen matching as a ranking factor for this organ . also , the matching criteria for kidneys generally do not include the size ( weight and height ) of the donor and recipient . when kidneys from small children are given to adults , they are typically transplanted en bloc , meaning that both kidneys are transplanted into the recipient . transplant center representatives told us that adult kidneys are often preferred for children because of the larger kidney mass . if complications occur , the larger kidney is more apt to continue functioning than a small , pediatric kidney . for liver transplants , the sizes of the donor and the recipient are factors that are considered to obtain an organ of compatible size . from 1994 through 1999 , adult donors provided 78 percent of the livers procured and pediatric donors provided 22 percent ( see table 5 in app . iii ) . of the adult livers , 4 percent were transplanted into children . of the pediatric livers , 63 percent were transplanted into adults , but this varied greatly by age of the donor . most livers ( 81 percent ) from donors aged 5 years or younger went to recipients in the same age group , and 4 percent went to adults . for the 6- to 10-year - old donors , 47 percent of the livers went to adult recipients , and for the 11- to 17-year - old donors , 89 percent of the livers went to adult recipients . another revision gives priority to pediatric heart transplant candidates , within each medical urgency category , for hearts recovered from 11- to 17-year - old donors . children constitute a small proportion of patients in need of an organ transplant , but organ allocation policies have been designed to provide this vulnerable population with some special protections . our examination of transplantation patterns across age groups and recent data on waiting times and death and survival rates indicates that pediatric patients do not appear to be at a disadvantage in the competition for scarce organs . these data show comparable or better outcomes for pediatric patients even before the most recent policy changes , such as the change to prioritize pediatric livers for pediatric recipients . we provided hhs with the opportunity to comment on a draft of this report . hhs provided technical comments , which we have incorporated where appropriate . we also provided a draft of the report to unos , and it provided technical comments , which we have incorporated where appropriate .