gao - 12-905t . washington , d.c.: july 18 , 2012 . develop cost estimates for each project . ensure documentation for projects are complete , including specifying the performance metrics that will be the basis for determining that each of the projects has completed its work and identifying skills needed to inform the selection and assignment of appropriate staff to each research project . the acting secretary of commerce provided written comments on a draft of this report on october 22 , 2012 . how can the bureau leverage administrative records ( including commercial files ) to significantly reduce decennial census cost while maintaining quality ? the objective of one of these projects is to acquire , process , and analyze administrative records from federal , state , and commercial sources to assess their utility for the 2020 census . the other project will research and test methods to enhance nrfu operations with administrative records , such as replacing phone or in - person collected data with administrative data . bureau officials are aware that the changes they want to make to the decennial census come with many risks . the bureau has identified and prioritized from high to low both program - level and project - level risks . according to the bureau , program - level risks span the entire 2020 research and testing phase and if not managed properly could jeopardize the phase's goals and objectives . in contrast , project - level risks pertain to the successful completion of projects . in accordance with best risk management practices , the bureau has identified and drafted mitigation plans for all of the 14 program - level risks it has identified . in may 2012 the bureau designated two of the 14 program - level risks as high risk: timely research and testing results: the 2020 research and testing strategy involves “many small field tests to research design alternatives with an accelerated , agile , and informed decision - making process for incorporating changes to the 2020 census design.” according to the bureau , if the research and testing results are late , then decisions will not be made on time and the program may not be ready to move out of the research and testing phase on schedule . according to the bureau's 2020 census risk management mitigation plans , officials have begun implementing a mitigation strategy for this risk , including documenting clear roles and responsibilities and communicating them to staff ; establishing a schedule that contains decision milestones and tracking interdependencies of research results and testing projects ; and reviewing ongoing project status including updates on dependencies , risks , and metrics . significant budget cuts: the bureau reported that if its funding for 2020 census planning is significantly reduced for fiscal year 2013 , key projects will have to be delayed and as a result the bureau could have major technical and operational difficulties making preliminary design decisions . according to bureau documents , to mitigate this risk , bureau officials have briefed staff from house of representatives subcommittee for commerce , justice , science and related agencies , committee on appropriations , and the office of management and budget on the implications of reduced funding and plan to brief oversight committee staff .