gao - 16-90t . washington , d.c.: october 22 , 2015 . these projects will then be analyzed by fema officials . according to the standard operating procedure , if duplication is suspected within a particular geographic area , further collaborative reviews should be conducted in coordination with the office of chief counsel to determine appropriate remedies . using an interim approach to collect more specific project - level data during the grant application process and utilizing the new software visualization tool should help fema strengthen the administration and oversight of its grant programs until fema implements its long - term solution for the agency's grants management information system . in the area of performance assessment , we reported in june 2013 on limitations in fema's ability to validate the performance data it collects . specifically , we found that two of fema's preparedness grant programs — emergency management performance grants ( empg ) and assistance to firefighters grants ( afg ) programs — collect performance information through a variety of reporting mechanisms but face challenges in identifying verifiable program outcomes . these reporting mechanisms collect performance data used by fema regional offices and headquarters for different purposes . for example , headquarters focuses on the development of future program priorities and on reporting progress toward the national preparedness goal , while regions use program information to monitor primary grant recipients for compliance . dhs developed agency priority goals that reflect agency - wide , near - term priorities . according to fema officials , the empg and afg programs have an indirect link to a dhs agency priority goal , as well as the national preparedness goal , because they support states' level of preparedness for disasters . according to fema officials , neither program has a standardized tool with which to validate the performance data that are self - reported by recipients ; additionally , the regions are inconsistent in their approaches to verifying program performance data . we concluded that the absence of a formal established validation and verification procedure , as directed by the office of management and budget's circular no . a - 11 , could lead to the collection of erroneous performance data . in our june 2013 report , we recommended that fema ensure that there are consistent procedures in place at the headquarters' office and regional level to ensure verification and validation of grant performance data that allow the agency to attest to the reliability of empg and afg grant data used for reporting progress toward goals . dhs concurred with our recommendation and stated that fema would explore effective and affordable ways to verify and validate empg and afg grant performance data . in april 2015 , fema officials reported that fema was in the process of developing the data verification and validation checks of empg grantee performance reporting . for example , according to fema officials , they have revised reporting templates and uniform table definitions to make it easier for grantees to submit accurate , complete , and consistent information on programmatic activities such as the completion of training and exercise requirements . however , these processes have not yet been fully implemented , and fema officials have not yet provided similar tools and checklists for the afg program .