( app . the estimated disposition by va's regional offices of the 100,000 claims ( in boxes 1 and 2 ) is based on data for claims involving disability ratings for fiscal years 1997 to 2000 . during those years , veterans submitted notices of disagreement in about 9 percent of the regional office decisions and went on to file appeals with the board in about 40 percent of the cases in which they had submitted such notices . on the basis of board data for fiscal years 1999 and 2000 , in its initial decisions on appealed compensation cases , the board: ( 1 ) granted at least one of the requested benefits in about 24 percent of the cases , ( 2 ) denied all requested benefits in about 40 percent of the cases , and ( 3 ) remanded about 36 percent of the cases to regional offices for rework . after obtaining the additional evidence required by the board for remanded cases , the regional offices granted requested benefits in about 22 percent of the remanded cases and denied requested benefits in 64 percent of the cases . after regional offices resubmitted denied cases to the board for a final decision , the board granted at least one of the requested benefits in about 26 percent of the cases , denied all benefits in about 49 percent , and remanded about 25 percent once again to regional offices for further rework . for this illustration , we assumed that the board did not remand a case more than two times . the estimate of 307 cases appealed to the u.s. court of appeals for veterans claims ( in box 9 ) , the court's estimated disposition of these 307 cases ( in boxes 10 , 11 , 12 ) , and the estimated number of decisions appealed to the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit ( in box 13 ) are based on fiscal years 1999 and 2000 data from the court's annual reports . appendix ii: board of veterans' appeals illustrations of difficult judgments resulting in decision - making variations examples of difficult judgments to be granted benefits for post - traumatic stress disorder , a veteran's claim must have credible evidence that a stressor occurred during military service . assume the record shows a claimant served in vietnam as a supply specialist , and he identified mortar attacks as a stressor . reports prepared by his military unit in vietnam indicate a single enemy mortar attack occurred where the claimant was stationed . the claimant's testimony was vague about the number and the time of the attacks . one adjudicator may rely on the unit's reports and conclude the claimant engaged in combat and is entitled to have his lay statements accepted without further corroboration as satisfactory evidence of the in - service stressor . another adjudicator may conclude that the claimant is not credible as to exposure to enemy fire and require other credible supporting evidence that the in - service stressor actually occurred .