financing . sba assists small businesses with export financing through its office of international trade . of the states we visited , florida is the only state that offers export financing ; state trade offices generally refer interested clients to sba and the export - import bank for export financing help . while commerce is not involved in export financing , its commercial officers at useacs often refer interested clients to sba and the export - import bank . like the state trade offices in the five states we visited , most of the 28 state trade offices that responded to a 2013 sido survey also provide export promotion outreach , counseling and training , and trade leads . while not all states provide all services , the survey results showed that state trade offices provide a range of services such as outreach , which can include providing marketing materials ; counseling and training , which can include export counseling and export readiness training ; and trade leads , which may result from participation in or coordination of trade shows . in our fieldwork , we found that the depth and breadth of services state trade offices provide vary depending on the availability of resources such as funding , staff , and overseas capacity . for example , the state of florida's program provides export counseling , educational events , and international trade leads , including international trade missions and trade shows . similarly , the minnesota trade office offers organization of trade missions , export counseling , training programs on the export process , including creating an export plan , mitigating risk , and understanding trade regulations . virginia also offers a number of export promotion services including counseling ; training ; trade missions ; an array of services such as in - country market research provided by an extensive network of international consultants ; and a 2-year business acceleration program for selected companies whose goal is to increase their export sales . while commerce charges fees for certain services , including those that provide trade leads , some states provide their services for free , subsidize businesses' participation in trade missions and trade shows , or both . for example , the philadelphia useac operated by commerce provides export counseling , market research , and trade events for a fee . however , the pennsylvania state trade office provides those same services , in addition to market - entry strategy development and technical support , at no cost to businesses ; moreover , the state trade office awards some grants to businesses to pay for or partially subsidize some export - related activities . because commerce charges fees , businesses in some states sometimes opt to seek the same or similar services from the state trade office rather than from commerce , according to one state trade office official . both commerce and a state official from one of the states that we visited noted that perceived quality of service also influences businesses' decisions in selecting a service provider for export promotion services . in addition to providing similar services , the federal agencies offering export promotion services at the state level — commerce and sba — and most state trade offices primarily serve small businesses .