grant recipients . at the country level , the principal grant recipient is responsible for receiving and implementing the grant . during implementation , the principal recipient is responsible for monitoring and evaluating the grant's effectiveness in accordance with grant objectives and making sure that funds are properly accounted for . the principal recipient is also responsible for overseeing the activities of any subrecipients implementing grant activities . local fund agents . the global fund currently contracts with lfa headquarters central teams at six organizations to oversee grants in 120 countries and multicountry programs . in the majority of cases , the central team establishes interfirm agreements with its affiliated offices within each country to perform lfa services . the lfa assesses recipient capacity prior to grant signing and performs verification and oversight duties throughout the life of the grant . the lfa central teams typically contract with external specialists for work outside the expertise of their organization , especially during the initial assessments of recipient capacity . for example , during the initial assessments , some organizations contract with a procurement expert to review recipients' capacity for procurement and supply chain management . the global fund budgeted approximately $22 million — 26 percent of the secretariat's operating budget — to support the lfa structure for 2006 and spent about an additional $320,000 on lfa - related functions , including personnel costs related to lfa management , studies of the lfa model , and travel to meet with lfas . the global fund's performance - based funding process involves an initial assessment of recipients' capacity to manage and implement grants , periodic disbursement decisions based largely on reports by the grant recipient and the lfa , and a phase 2 grant renewal review after about 2 years . assessment of grant recipients' capacity . prior to funding a grant , the global fund considers , among other things , a grant recipient's ability to ( 1 ) manage , evaluate , and report on grant - funded activities ; ( 2 ) manage and account for funds ; and ( 3 ) procure goods and services . lfas assess prospective recipients' capacity to perform these activities . funding is conditioned on recipients' meeting performance targets mutually agreed with global fund technical experts . periodic disbursements . after the initial screening and approval process , the grant recipient must produce quarterly or semi - annual reports describing financial and program progress as well as a funding request for the next disbursement period . the grant recipient sends these reports to the lfa , which prepares a report verifying the accuracy of the information , identifying potential grant problems , rating grant performance , and recommending a disbursement amount . the lfa then forwards the grant recipient's report and its own report to the designated global fund portfolio manager . the fund portfolio manager compares the financial information and data on program progress with the grant's performance targets , taking into account information such as the status of procurements and political or economic constraints . the fund portfolio manager's team leader makes a funding decision if the disbursement is less than $2 million . figure 4 illustrates the global fund's periodic disbursement decision process . grant renewal process .