omb circular no . a - 133 currently has sanctions that apply to an auditee ( i.e. , the entity being audited ) for not having a properly conducted audit and requires cognizant agencies to refer auditors to licensing agencies and professional bodies in the case of major inadequacies and repetitive substandard work . the report noted that other federal laws and regulations do currently provide for suspension and debarment processes that can be applied to auditors of single audits . for information about this statement , please contact jeanette franzel , director , financial management and assurance , at ( 202 ) 512-9471 or franzelj@gao.gov . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include marcia buchanan ( assistant director ) , robert dacey , abe dymond , heather keister , jason kirwan , david merrill , and sabrina springfield ( assistant director ) . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . in addition to the findings and recommendations of the pcie report , we believe there are two other critical factors that need to be considered in determining actions that should be taken to improving audit quality: ( 1 ) the distribution of unacceptable audits and audits of limited reliability across the different dollar amounts of federal expenditures by grantee , as found in the pcie study ; and ( 2 ) the distribution of single audits by size in the universe of single audits . these factors are critical in effectively evaluating the potential dollar implications and efficiency and effectiveness of proposed actions . the pcie study found that rates of unacceptable audits and audits of limited reliability were much higher for audits of entities in stratum 2 ( those expending less than $50 million in federal awards ) than those in stratum 1 ( those expending $50 million or more ) . table 1 presented earlier in this testimony shows the data from the sample universe of single audits used by the pcie . analysis of the data shows that 97.8 percent of the total number of audits ( 37,671 of the 38,523 total ) covered approximately 16 percent ( $143.1 billion of the $880.2 billion ) of the total reported value of federal award expenditures , indicating significant differences in distributions of audits by dollar amount of federal expenditures . at the same time , the rates of unacceptable audits and audits of limited reliability were relatively higher in these smaller audits . we believe that there may be opportunities for considering size characteristics when implementing future actions to improve the effectiveness and quality of single audits . for instance , there may be merit to conducting a more refined analysis of the distribution of audits to determine whether less - complex approaches could be used for achieving accountability through the single audit process for a category of the smallest single audits . such an approach may provide sufficient accountability for these smaller programs .