data completeness . incomplete data in dhs systems contribute to investigations resulting in departure findings when ice field agents uncover evidence that the subject of a ctceu investigation departed even though dhs systems contain no record of their departure . ctceu agents in four of the six offices we visited cited missing departure data as a cause of cases resulting in a departure finding . for example , if the suspected overstay under investigation exited the united states through a land poe and did not submit an i - 94 / i - 94w form to record his or her departure , there will be no indication in dhs systems that the suspected overstay has left the country , and ctceu may open an investigation of the individual . through ensuing investigative efforts , such as attempting to contact the suspected overstay by telephone or electronic mail , or asking canadian authorities to review their records to determine if the suspected overstay entered canada , ctceu field agents may secure evidence that the suspected overstay has departed the united states and close the investigation accordingly . in addition to ctceu investigative efforts , other ice programs within ero may take enforcement action against overstays , though none of these programs solely or directly focus on overstay enforcement . for example , if the ero criminal alien program identifies a criminal alien who poses a threat to public safety and is also an overstay , the program may detain and remove that criminal alien from the united states . further , ero's national fugitive operations program may undertake efforts to locate a nonimmigrant who was ordered removed based on various immigration violations , including an overstay violation , but did not surrender for removal . ero cannot reliably quantify the results of its in - country overstay enforcement efforts because in its case management system , ero does not separately track overstay cases . rather , ero's cases are coded by the section of law that the subject violated , and these sections apply to violations that are broader than exclusively overstay violations . for example , 8 u.s.c . ยง 1227 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( c ) ( i ) makes any alien who has failed to maintain or comply with the conditions of his or her nonimmigrant status deportable . in addition to overstay violations , this could include remaining in the united states while no longer working as a foreign diplomat , religious worker , or temporary agricultural worker , among other possible violations . ero officials told us that ero plans to develop metrics for tracking the results of its in - country overstay enforcement efforts , pending the outcome of an ongoing internal ice review of whether to shift more overstay enforcement responsibilities to ero in the future . ice has reported allocating a small percentage of its resources in terms of investigative work hours to overstay investigations since fiscal year 2006 , but the agency has expressed an intention to augment the resources it dedicates to overstay enforcement efforts moving forward . according to dhs , ice received approximately $1.7 billion in funding and about 8,000 full time equivalent positions in fiscal year 2010 for domestic investigations , which include overstay investigations .