stuxnet . in july 2010 , a sophisticated computer attack known as stuxnet was discovered . it targeted control systems used to operate industrial processes in the energy , nuclear , and other critical sectors . it is designed to exploit a combination of vulnerabilities to gain access to its target and modify code to change the process . browns ferry power plant . in august 2006 , two circulation pumps at unit 3 of the browns ferry , alabama , nuclear power plant failed , forcing the unit to be shut down manually . the failure of the pumps was traced to excessive traffic on the control system network , possibly caused by the failure of another control system device . northeast power blackout . in august 2003 , failure of the alarm processor in the control system of firstenergy , an ohio - based electric utility , prevented control room operators from having adequate situational awareness of critical operational changes to the electrical grid . when several key transmission lines in northern ohio tripped due to contact with trees , they initiated a cascading failure of 508 generating units at 265 power plants across eight states and a canadian province . davis - besse power plant . the nuclear regulatory commission confirmed that in january 2003 , the microsoft sql server worm known as slammer infected a private computer network at the idled davis - besse nuclear power plant in oak harbor , ohio , disabling a safety monitoring system for nearly 5 hours . in addition , the plant's process computer failed , and it took about 6 hours for it to become available again . multiple entities have taken steps to help secure the electricity grid , including nerc , nist , ferc , and the departments of homeland security and energy . nerc has performed several activities that are intended to secure the grid . it has developed eight critical infrastructure standards for protecting electric utility - critical and cyber - critical assets . the standards established requirements for the following key cybersecurity - related controls: critical cyber asset identification , security management controls , personnel and training , electronic “security perimeters,” physical security of critical cyber assets , systems security management , incident reporting and response planning , and recovery plans for critical cyber assets . in december 2011 , we reported that nerc's eight cyber security standards , along with supplementary documents , were substantially similar to nist guidance applicable to federal agencies . nerc also has published security guidelines for companies to consider for protecting electric infrastructure systems , although such guidelines are voluntary and typically not checked for compliance . for example , nerc's june 2010 security guideline for the electricity sector: identifying critical cyber assets is intended to assist entities in identifying and developing a list of critical cyber assets as described in the mandatory standards . nerc also has enforced compliance with mandatory cybersecurity standards through its compliance monitoring and enforcement program , subject to ferc review . nerc has assessed monetary penalties for violations of its cyber security standards .