( see fig . religious tensions among lebanon's maronite christians , sunni muslims , and shiite muslims , among others , along with an influx of palestinian refugees into lebanon , have fueled lebanon's internal strife and conflicts with its neighbors . according to a bureau of counterterrorism official , the bureau will consider the antiterrorism assistance program in lebanon for the next tranche of evaluations beginning in fiscal year 2014 . state's bureau of international security and nonproliferation , which implements the exbs program , submitted its bureau evaluation plan on april 10 , 2012 . the plan , which covers fiscal years 2012 through 2015 , does not include an evaluation of the exbs program . the bureau does periodically assess the legal , regulatory , and institutional components of a country's strategic trade control systems using a 419-point assessment methodology . during the civil war between 1975 and 1990 , both syrian and israeli forces occupied the country . bureau officials stated that the bureau has adopted many of the report's recommendations , including the transition of one course to full isf control in july 2012 , the creation of a training coordination process for inl and other donors to maximize synergies and avoid duplication of effort , and the creation of a strategic planning cell within the isf to coordinate directly with the bureau and other donors . although the section 1206 program in lebanon has not been evaluated , dod — under the direction of the under secretary of defense for policy — is implementing a new assessment process for the section 1206 program . the objectives of the assessment process are to measure implementation of section 1206 programs to build partner assess quality and timeliness of program implementation , measure the impact of programs , and estimate return on investment . dod is implementing this new process in part to respond to our 2010 recommendation that dod develop and implement specific plans to monitor , evaluate , and report routinely on section 1206 project outcomes and their impact on u.s. strategic objectives . dod conducted a pilot test of its assessment process of counterterrorism - oriented section 1206 programs in the philippines and stability operations - oriented section 1206 programs in georgia in 2012 . dod also assessed section 1206 programs in djibouti , tunisia , and poland from march through june 2012 . dod officials stated in december 2012 that they were not able to assess the program in lebanon because of the security situation , but they plan to include lebanon as soon as the security situation permits . although dod has not evaluated the effectiveness of the 1206 program or any other security assistance programs in lebanon in which it participates , it conducts various types of assessments of the laf . for example , since 2010 , the u.s. central command and the laf have participated in reviews — known as joint capabilities reviews — to assess the progress of the laf based on eight broad critical capabilities .