however , such a strategy was not developed . icrc is an international organization that works to ensure humanitarian protection and assistance to victims of war and other situations of violence worldwide . icrc has a permanent mandate founded under international law to take impartial action for persons affected by conflict . icrc provides relief assistance to idps and other vulnerable groups inside iraq . it also has assessed the detention and treatment conditions of detainees , provided medical supplies to hospitals , and rehabilitated existing water and sanitation infrastructure , among other things . international and national ngos conduct significant efforts in iraq for the benefit of idps , returnees , and all vulnerable iraqis . a number of irai government ministries are relevant to modm's efforts , such as the ministries of finance , planning and development cooperation , trade , health , education , interior , and defense , among others . the un country team , which includes unhcr , ocha , and iom , works to coordinate un efforts and to provide assistance in myriad areas in ira that may directly or indirectly address irai displacement . other un country team members include the economic and social commission for western asia ; food and agriculture organization ; international labour organization ; office of the un high commissioner for human rights ; un development programme ; un environment programme ; un education , science and cultural organization ; un population fund ; un centre for human settlements ; un children's fund ; un industrial development organization ; un fund for advancement of women ; un office for project services ; the world food program ; and the world health organization . iom and the world bank are affiliated bodies of the un country team , not un organizations . appendix iii: u.s. funds obligated and expended for iraq - related humanitarian assistance projects , and intended beneficiaries , fiscal years 2003-2009 , as of september 30 , 2009 state / population , refugees , and migration bureau ( prm ) usaid / office of u.s. foreign disaster assistance ( ofda ) in region: government of jordan to meet the needs of iraqi refugees and host country population in iraq: idps and vulnerable populations may include other irais at risk ; irais who have returned from other countries ; refugees in ira from other countries , such as palestinians ; and other conflict victims . the senior coordinator , a senior foreign service officer stationed at the u.s. embassy in baghdad , is responsible for coordinating u.s. government efforts in iraq that address iraqi displacement . the senior coordinator is also responsible for representing the united states in its dealings with the iraqi government , the international community , and nongovernmental organizations ( ngo ) on displacement issues . the program is expected to end in january 2011 . tatweer works with 10 ministries , including modm , and 7 executive offices . unhcr protection and assistance centers: as of march 2010 , unhcr had established and continued to operate 15 protection and assistance centers and 40 associated mobile teams that provide services to displaced , returning , and vulnerable iraqis and others in all 18 governorates in iraq .