in 1996 , the agency was merged into usgs . according to an interior official , the cultural and emotional aspects of the move caused a lot of hardship and mistrust among employees within both the former national biological service and usgs . according to this official , the transition into usgs took 4 to 5 years , and more than a decade afterward , some employees still question the move . we previously reported that it can take at least 5 to 7 years to fully implement initiatives to merge or transform organizations and sustainably transform their organizational cultures . significant large - scale challenges to federal land management , such as climate change , energy production , dwindling water supplies , wildland fire , and constrained budgets , suggest the need to approach these problems innovatively . if a move were undertaken , adequate time and attention would need to be devoted to planning for and implementing key merger and transformation practices to manage potential disruption and other transition costs . in particular , any legislation authorizing a move would need to provide the departments ample time to plan the move — in light of cultural , organizational , and legal factors — and incorporate these key practices . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . a number of officials said that the forest service has a fair degree of independence within usda . for example , some agency officials said that the forest service budget does not receive as much attention or scrutiny as other usda agency budgets . because of cultural differences , many officials and experts believed that moving the forest service into interior could lead to decreased morale and productivity . some experts and officials indicated that forest service employees may feel a loss of identity and independence in leaving usda and would fear and resist a move , while a move may leave interior employees feeling threatened , worrying that because of its size , the forest service would dominate interior ; they too may resist a move . according to many officials and experts , the agencies may also see an increase in the number of retirements and resignations after a move , which may facilitate cultural change but also decrease productivity because of the loss of experienced staff . the consolidation of interior's national biological service into the united states geological survey ( usgs ) offers one illustration of possible cultural implications of moving the forest service into interior . the national biological service was created in 1993 to gather , analyze , and disseminate biological information necessary for the sound stewardship of the nation's natural resources . organizational factors could also complicate a transition , including the organizational structures of the agencies ; effects on interior functions , such as its office of inspector general ; the need to integrate the forest service into interior's information technology and other business systems ; effects on usda functions , such as its relationship with other usda agencies ; and human capital practices .