this example is summarized in figure 3 . air force officials were unaware of this situation until our review identified the problem . in another case , involving the restricted 1377 federal supply class , a country ordered a restricted battery power supply for the f - 16 aircraft using national stock number 6130013123511 . because supply class 6130 ( nonrotating electrical converters ) was not restricted and the security assistance management information system did not verify the entire 13- digit national stock number , the requisition was approved . the air force shipped the restricted battery power supply to the country . neither the air force nor the center had written policies or procedures in place for recovering the items erroneously shipped . without these types of policies and procedures , the air force cannot be assured that appropriate steps will be taken to recover the parts . air force security assistance center officials agreed that the supply class restrictions alone were ineffective and could be bypassed by use of inaccurate supply class information . the air force has not validated modifications to the security assistance management information system that restrict parts that countries can requisition , and has not tested the system's logic for restricting requisitions since 1998 to ensure that it is working properly . as a result , modifications that were not properly made went undetected , and foreign countries were able to requisition and obtain controlled spare parts that the air force was trying to restrict . for example , the air force instructed programmers to modify a table of restrictions in the security assistance management information system to prevent certain countries from using blanket orders to requisition controlled bushings in the 5365 supply class . although air force security assistance center officials subsequently told us that the bushings had been improperly restricted , we found that , for 18 of the 123 requisitions we reviewed , countries had ordered and received the bushings , because the security assistance management information system was incorrectly programmed and did not identify the requisitions as requiring a review by command country managers . after we brought the transactions to the attention of air force security assistance center officials , they investigated and found that programmers had entered the restrictions in the wrong area of the system . because the air force had not validated that system modifications were properly made , the system had approved the requisitions . although the air force later determined that the bushings should not have been restricted , this example nevertheless demonstrates the need to validate system changes . the air force does not periodically test the security assistance management information system to ensure that it accurately reviews requisitions for compliance with restrictions . for example , when the system is working correctly , it will identify restrictions relating to parts , such as ammunition or nuclear spare parts , and will disapprove requisitions from countries that are ineligible to order these parts . air force security assistance command officials said that the system had not been tested since 1998 to ensure that it accurately reviews requisitions for compliance with restrictions .