we defined these by population . very large: areas where the central city of a metropolitan area had a population of more than 1 million residents ; large: areas where the central city of a metropolitan area had a population between 500,000 and 1 million residents ; medium: areas where the central city of a metropolitan area had a population between 250,000 and 500,000 residents . the metropolitan areas selected for inclusion in the study were boston , chicago , denver , fort worth , miami , new york , oakland , and st. louis . inner city and suburban schools in miami were dropped from the study because the district did not provide the necessary data . ( see table 4 for the selected metropolitan areas. ) for this study , in consultation with experts , we defined “inner city” as a contiguous geographic area that ( 1 ) had a poverty rate of 40 percent or higher , ( 2 ) was located within the “central core” of a city with a population of at least 250,000 persons , and ( 3 ) the city is the central city of a metropolitan with a population of at least 1 million persons . we defined suburb as the geographic area that is ( 1 ) outside the boundaries of a central city with a population of at least 250,000 persons , ( 2 ) inside the boundaries of the metropolitan statistical area ( smsa ) of the central city , as defined by the office of management and budget and used by the census , and ( 3 ) the metropolitan area has a population of at least 1 million persons . in total , we collected spending data on 42 schools , 21 inner city and 21 suburban public elementary schools in seven metropolitan areas , and gathered information on ( 1 ) school - level per - pupil spending and federal revenues , and ( 2 ) school , teacher , other staff , and student characteristics for the 2000-01 school year . in addition , we conducted site visits at 24 of the selected schools . these schools were located in the new york , st. louis , fort worth , and oakland metropolitan areas . we visited them in order to obtain supplementary information on characteristics that might affect student achievement , such as facilities , educational materials , and types of parental involvement . the study was designed to compare “typical” inner city and “typical” suburban schools , rather than those schools with extreme poverty or wealth . we consulted with experts about our design . we used the factors described below to select typical schools . our goal was to make comparisons that would reflect likely differences , if any , between the inner city and suburban schools in a given metropolitan area .