evaluating the impact of the system . high - performing organizations continually review and revise their human capital management systems based on data - driven lessons learned and changing needs in the environment . dhs indicates that it is committed to an ongoing comprehensive evaluation of the effectiveness of the human capital system , including the establishment of human capital metrics and the use of employee surveys . collecting and analyzing data is the fundamental building block for measuring the effectiveness of these approaches in support of the mission and goals of the agency . dhs should consider doing evaluations that are broadly modeled on the evaluation requirements of the opm demonstration projects . under the demonstration project authority , agencies must evaluate and periodically report on results , implementation of the demonstration project , cost and benefits , impacts on veterans and other equal employment opportunity groups , adherence to merit system principles , and the extent to which the lessons from the project can be applied governmentwide . a set of balanced measures addressing a range of results , customer , employee , and external partner issues may also prove beneficial . an evaluation such as this would facilitate congressional oversight ; allow for any midcourse corrections ; assist dhs in benchmarking its progress with other efforts ; and provide for documenting best practices and sharing lessons learned with employees , stakeholders , other federal agencies , and the public . building a dhs - wide workforce plan . dhs has recently begun drafting a departmental workforce plan , using the draft strategic plan as a starting point . workforce plans of different levels of sophistication are used in the five legacy agencies we studied . despite their efforts , dhs headquarters has not yet been systematic or consistent in gathering relevant data on the successes or shortcomings of legacy human capital approaches or current and future workforce challenges — a deficiency that will make workforce planning more difficult . the strategic workforce plan can be used , among other things , as a tool for identifying core competencies for staff for attracting , developing , and rewarding contributions to mission accomplishment . involving employees and other stakeholders in designing the details of the system . we reported last fall that dhs's and opm's effort to design a new human capital system were collaborative and facilitated participation of employees from all levels of the department . we recommended that the secretary of dhs build on the progress that has been made and ensure that the communication strategy used to support the human capital system maximize opportunities for employee involvement through the completion of the design process , the release of the system options , and implementation , with special emphasis on seeking the feedback and buy - in of frontline employees . moving forward , employee perspectives can provide insights on areas that deserve particular attention while implementing the new performance management system .