gao - 05-33 . washington , d.c.: january 14 , 2005 . homeland security: further actions needed to coordinate federal agencies' facility protection efforts and promote key practices . gao - 05-49 . washington , d.c.: november 30 , 2004 . a glossary is included at the end of this appendix . although the homeland security act and subsequent strategies advocate the use of risk management to protect the nation's critical infrastructure and key resources , they did not define how this was to be accomplished . homeland security presidential directive 7 ( hspd - 7 ) directed the secretary of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to establish uniform policies , approaches , guidelines , and methodologies integrating federal infrastructure protection and risk management activities . however , no further direction or guidance as to the course of action has been forthcoming . the ability to anticipate future happenings and to choose among alternatives lies at the heart of risk management and provides us with a guide , based on good management practices and supported by established internal controls that can enhance decision making . although risk management has long been used for assessing risk in some sectors , such as environmental issues , health care , finance , and the insurance industry , the application of risk management principles to the homeland security area is relatively new . the many areas and activities under homeland security provide untested and difficult challenges because the source of the risk is an intelligent adversary with whom there exists little domestic experience . as a result , the probabilities and consequences of a terrorist attack are difficult to predict . in spite of this high degree of uncertainty and the knowledge that not all risk can be eliminated , enhancing protection from known or potential threats can help prevent or mitigate adverse events . given that there is no established universally agreed upon set of requirements or processes for a risk management framework specifically related to homeland security and combating terrorism , we developed a framework that would be applicable by reviewing , analyzing , and synthesizing several sources of information . we began by reviewing current risk literature and previous gao reports and testimonies . we consulted the government performance and results act ( gpra ) of 1993 ; the government auditing standards , 2003 revision , gao's standards for internal control in the federal government ( november 1999 ) ; guidance from the office of management and budget ( omb ) ; the work of the president's commission on risk management ; consulting papers ; and the enterprise risk management approach of the committee of sponsoring organizations ( coso ) of the treadway commission . in addition , we consulted with experts in the fields of risk management , risk modeling , and terrorism . we reviewed numerous frameworks from industry , government , and academic sources . we synthesized information from these numerous government , industry , and academic sources in developing our risk management framework . the framework was field - tested on several gao reviews . the draft framework was then reviewed by three academic experts in risk management . no substantial changes to the draft framework were recommended .