dhs declined to provide comments . each agency's comments are discussed in more detail below: in comments provided via e - mail , staff from omb's office of e - government and information technology generally concurred with our findings and recommendations and stated that omb and the agencies are currently taking appropriate steps to meet the recommendations . we have work under way to evaluate this information . gao , information technology dashboard: opportunities exist to improve transparency and oversight of investment risk at select agencies , gao - 13-98 ( washington , d.c.: oct. 16 , 2012 ) . omb and the four selected agencies have held multiple techstats on it investments that varied in terms of function , significance , amount spent to date , and risk level . specifically , from january 2010 through april 2013 , omb reported leading 79 techstat sessions , which focused on 55 it investments at 23 federal agencies . these investments covered 21 functional areas ( such as information and technology management , law enforcement , and health ) , and consist of 45 major , 8 non - major , and 2 unrated investments . for the 45 major investments that omb reviewed , almost 70 percent had a cio rating of medium to high risk at the time of the techstat review . the four agencies selected for our review — agriculture , commerce , dhs , and hhs — held a total of 37 techstat sessions covering 28 investments from january 2011 through march 2013 . most of the investments underwent a techstat session at the agency level , but 8 underwent a techstat review at the bureau level , and 2 underwent techstat reviews at both . the agency - led techstats covered 14 functional areas , and consist of 21 major and 7 non - major investments . for the 21 major investments , about 76 percent of the agency - led techstats were on investments that had a cio rating of medium - to high - risk . while both omb and agencies have made progress in holding techstat sessions , there is more that could be done . specifically , the number of techstats held to date is relatively small compared to the total number of medium - and high - risk it investments . further , there are multiple high - risk it investments spending millions of dollars that have not yet been assessed . two of the selected agencies — agriculture and commerce — had reviewed all of their high - risk investments , and dhs has plans to review its remaining high - risk investments . however , hhs has not yet established plans to review all of its high - risk investments . also , omb does not have plans or schedules for assessing the other high - risk it investments . until omb and agencies intervene to turn around these at - risk projects , the government will continue to spend limited it investment dollars on underperforming projects . as of april 2013 , omb reported conducting 79 techstat reviews , with 59 reviews occurring in 2010 , 8 in 2011 , 11 in 2012 , and 1 so far in 2013 .