million . over this period , freddie mac purchased or guaranteed more than 9,000 loans with unpaid principal balances of $129 billion . the enterprises also have entered into risk - sharing agreements with rhs , but to a lesser extent than with fha . under the enterprises' risk - sharing agreement with the rhs loan guarantee program ( known as 538 loans ) , rhs will guarantee up to 90 percent of the loan . according to rhs , the only risk to the enterprises would be due to nonperformance by the lender . from 2004 through 2011 , fannie mae purchased and securitized four loans under the rhs program , with unpaid principal balances of more than $7 million . from 2001 through 2011 , freddie mac purchased and securitized three loans or bonds with rhs , with unpaid principal balances of $6 million as of the end of 2011 . as noted previously , the enterprises also have supported state and local hfas by providing credit enhancements to tax - exempt bonds used to finance affordable multifamily housing . we interviewed selected state and local hfas and in general , they viewed the enterprises as important players in providing liquidity for affordable multifamily properties . for example , officials from a large local hfa told us that the enterprises have played a critical role in providing liquidity and long - term credit enhancement to affordable and market - rate developments . according to an official from a small state hfa , before 2008 fannie mae was an active and highly valued buyer of their small tax - exempt private activity bonds . the official added that the ability to sell bonds under $5 million on a direct placement basis to fannie mae was extremely helpful and has been missed . allowing fannie mae and freddie mac to reenter the bond market with private placements would be a significant benefit , and would allow the hfa to provide reliable and dependable financing options to their multifamily affordable housing projects , according to this hfa official . the enterprises have also participated in two temporary treasury hfa initiatives: ( 1 ) the temporary credit and liquidity facilities ( tclf ) program and ( 2 ) the new issue bond program ( nibp ) . tclf , which provides replacement credit enhancement and liquidity support to outstanding hfa variable - rate demand bonds , is set to expire in 2015 . reg . performance that include loan - level data , as well as an annual report at the end of each year . fhfa uses these data to determine official goal performance . if an enterprise fails to attain a goal , the fhfa director may require submission of a housing plan describing the specific action that the enterprise will take to achieve the goal for the next year . the enterprises generally have met their affordable housing goals . according to hud documents , the enterprises generally exceeded their affordable housing goals from 1993 through 2000 , with their performance generally increasing during that time period .