we disagree . the report provides several examples of the benefits of the rotations . however , a number of officials raised the issue of increased supervisory requirements as a concern . state commented that it is already addressing the first part of our recommendation that it maintain data on its efforts to recruit speakers of hard - to - learn languages . as we noted in the report , state has not used the data to determine whether its outreach efforts for increasing the number of hard - language speakers are effective or have helped decrease the gap in certain languages . in addition to the persons named above , kaya taylor , julia roberts , martin de alteriis , monica wolford , and janey cohen made key contributions to this report . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . you can print these documents in their entirety , including charts and other graphics . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . the list contains links to the full - text document files . to have gao e - mail this list to you every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to e - mail alerts” under the “order gao products” heading . ( see fig . direction and program goals . state has done this by implementing a strategic plan , which contains 12 strategic goals and 44 performance goals . overseas posts participate in the planning process by developing mission program plans that link their resource ( including staffing ) requests to the strategic goals . the overseas posts submit their plans to the regional bureaus in washington , d.c. after review and prioritization , the regional bureaus incorporate elements from the mission plans into bureau performance plans , based on policy priorities and initiatives that are relevant to the strategic and performance goals . state has developed an overseas staffing model , which it uses to determine staffing requirements and allocate personnel resources worldwide . the model is linked to state's strategic goals through the mission program planning process . in 2001 , state analyzed its workforce to identify staffing and skill gaps in the foreign service .