prevention: pdmps . cms guidance to physicians has encouraged prescribers to check their states' pdmp prior to prescribing certain drugs ; however , variations in state practices regarding access to pdmps means that not all prescribers may be able to conduct checks , according to cms officials . prevention: limit the supply of abused drugs . cms officials told us that the agency does not conduct activities to limit the supply of abused drugs because this practice is beyond the scope of part d program integrity efforts . for example , cms does not operate “take back” days where beneficiaries can dispose of any unneeded prescription drugs , since , until recently , dea required a law enforcement presence at such events , which cms cannot provide.cms also does not address the supply of abuse - resistant drugs , officials said , since that is the responsibility of the food and drug administration and pharmaceutical manufacturers . detection and monitoring: lock - ins . cms does not monitor medicare beneficiaries through a “lock - in” or restricted recipient program . we previously recommended that cms consider a restricted recipient program for medicare part d that would limit certain beneficiaries to one prescriber , one pharmacy , or both for receiving prescriptions , and that the agency should seek congressional authority , as appropriate , to do so . cms , in responding to our recommendation , stated that it did not agree that a restricted recipient program was necessarily the appropriate control for the part d program , and raised concerns about restricting beneficiaries' access to services.2014 , oig recommended that cms restrict certain beneficiaries to a limited number of pharmacies and prescribers , and cms concurred however , in august with the recommendation , but stated the agency needs — and is receptive to — legislative authority to “lock in” beneficiaries in part d. currently , the agency requires plan sponsors to review data to identify beneficiaries potentially at risk for overutilization of certain drugs , including opioids , and to monitor those beneficiaries . monitoring may include notifying their prescribers of the overutilization , case management , and point - of - sale edits , which are beneficiary - specific edits that can vary based on the situation . for example , the edits may prevent a beneficiary from receiving certain types of prescription drugs or an excessive amount of a particular drug . see appendix i for the status of all 23 program integrity practices we identified and whether cms and its contractors have implemented , planned to implement , or are not pursuing them . we provided a draft of this report to the department of health and human services ( hhs ) for comment and hhs provided written comments , which are reprinted in appendix ii . in its comments , hhs generally agreed with our findings , and provided more information regarding our finding that cms is not pursuing 6 of the 23 practices we identified for prescription drug fraud , waste , and abuse . generally , the agency provided additional information for why cms is not pursuing certain practices as part of its program integrity efforts , such as the use of clinical guidelines , pdmps , and lock - in programs .