maintain leadership capacity . both at home and abroad , a large percentage of senior executives will be eligible to retire over the next several years . in the united states , for example , the federal government faces an estimated loss of more than half of the career ses by october 2007.other countries that face the same demographic trend use succession planning and management to maintain leadership capacity in anticipation of the turnover of their senior executive corps due to expected retirements . canada is using aexdp to address impending retirements of assistant deputy ministers — one of the most senior executive - level positions in its civil service . as of february 2003 , for example , 76 percent of this group are over 50 , and approximately 75 percent are eligible to retire between now and 2008 . a recent independent evaluation of aexdp by an outside consulting firm found the program to be successful and concluded that aexdp participants are promoted in greater numbers than , and at a significantly accelerated rate over , their nonprogram counterparts . specifically , of the participants who joined the program at the entry level , 39 percent had been promoted one level and another 7 percent had been promoted two levels within 1 year compared to only 9 percent and 1 percent for nonparticipants during the same period . this evaluation further concluded that aexdp is a “valuable source” of available senior executives and a “very important source of well - trained , future assistant deputy ministers.” increase retention of high - potential staff . canada's office of the auditor general ( oag ) uses succession planning and management to provide an incentive for high - potential employees to stay with the organization and thus preserve future leadership capacity . specifically , oag identified increased retention rates of talented employees as one of the goals of the succession planning and management program it established in 2000 . according to a senior human capital official , oag provided high - potential employees with comprehensive developmental opportunities in order to raise the “exit price” that a competing employer would need to offer to lure a high - potential employee away . the official told us that an individual , who might otherwise have been willing to leave oag for a salary increase of cn$5,000 , might now require cn$10,000 or more , in consideration of the developmental opportunities offered by the agency . over the program's first 18 months , annualized turnover in oag's high - potential pool was 6.3 percent compared to 10.5 percent officewide . this official told us that the retention of members of this high - potential pool was key to oag's efforts to develop future leaders . effective succession planning and management initiatives provide a potentially powerful tool for fostering broader governmentwide or agencywide transformation by selecting and developing leaders and managers who support and champion change . our work has shown the critical importance of having top leaders and managers committed to , and personally involved in , implementing management reforms if those reforms are to succeed . agencies in the united kingdom and australia promoted the implementation of broader transformation efforts by using their succession planning and management systems to support new ways of doing business .