dod has revamped its advertising programs . the active - duty services , except for the marine corps , substantially revised their advertising campaigns and selected new advertising agencies as their contractors . they produced new advertising strategies and campaigns , complete with new slogans and revised television , print , and radio advertisements , along with new brand images defined by distinct logos , colors , and music . the services , in conjunction with their advertising agencies , conducted new research on young adults — their primary target market . during this period , the joint program developed an advertising campaign to target influencers of prospective recruits , as recommended in dod's review . in addition to their overall campaigns , all of the services have specialized campaigns to target diverse segments of the young adult population . in commenting on this report , dod stated that the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , in concert with the services , will develop an advertising strategic framework to provide overall direction for dod's advertising programs . the framework , with associated outcome measures , would allow the office to monitor advertising results regularly and make fact - based decisions at a strategic level . it would provide an overarching structure within which each service would develop its own advertising program strategy , program objectives , and outcome measures . the framework would also direct the activities of the dod joint program to ensure support to the services . dod also commented that current research has not advanced to the point where models exist that adequately account for the many factors that affect recruiting as well as for the differences in the services . dod stated that it will address this research gap through several initiatives intended to advance the measurement of the performance of recruiting and advertising . the national academy of sciences is currently developing an evaluation framework for recruiting and advertising and expects to publish a report in early 2004 . dod's comments are provided in their entirety in appendix ii . dod officials also provided technical comments that we have incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretaries of defense , the army , the navy , and the air force ; and the commandant of the marine corps . we will send copies to other interested parties upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-5559 if you or your staffs have any questions regarding this report . key contributors to this report were john pendleton , lori atkinson , nancy benco , kurt burgeson , alan byroade , chris currie , latonya gist , jim mcgaughey , charles perdue , barry shillito , and john smale . to describe the changes in the department of defense's ( dod ) advertising programs and advertising funding trends since the late 1990s , we reviewed advertising exhibits in the operation and maintenance congressional justification books as well as budget information provided by the office of the secretary of defense .