section 501 . we received summary tables and copies of pdfs of all form 8886-t , disclosure by tax - exempt entity regarding prohibited tax shelter transaction , for tax years 2004 through 2016 . we checked the reliability of irs's summary tables and manually reviewed the pdf submissions to generate descriptions of the form 8886-t data . we conducted reliability testing for all of the data we used for this objective . for the audit and tax return data , we interviewed relevant irs officials and compared our statistical runs with publicly available statistics . for the form 8886 and form 8918 disclosure data , we interviewed relevant irs officials . for the 8886-t data , we compared the summary tables irs provided with the pdfs of the original form 8886-t submissions . to assess how irs identifies emerging abusive tax schemes and to identify potential improvements , we reviewed documentation on programs that help irs identify possible abusive tax schemes involving tax - exempt entities . we identified the programs by reviewing irs documentation , including the internal revenue manual , in combination with irs's determination of relevant programs ( see appendix vi for more details about these programs ) . we then identified criteria appropriate for assessing the programs' alignment selected principles from standards for internal control in the federal government ( green book ) and leading practices from our fraud risk management framework . to select these criteria , we reviewed the green book and fraud risk management framework to identify principles relevant to specific aspects of irs's programs for identifying and initiating enforcement actions against abusive tax schemes involving tax exempt entities . irs agreed that these criteria were appropriate . the following list shows the criteria we selected through this process . green book principle 3: establish structure , responsibility , and green book principle 4: demonstrate a commitment to recruit , develop , and retain competent individuals green book principle 7: identify , analyze , and respond to risks green book principle 8: assess fraud risk gao fraud risk management framework overarching concept 1.2 ( structure ) gao fraud risk management framework overarching concept 2.1 ( plans exist to assess fraud ) green book principle 10: design control activities green book principle 13: use quality information green book principle 14: communicate internally green book principle 16: perform monitoring activities after establishing appropriate criteria , two analysts independently reviewed appropriate evidence and determined whether the evidence aligned with the criteria for the programs was based on the attributes for the green book criteria and fraud risk management framework guidance . we also considered how the programs met te / ge's objective to “promote the highest degree of voluntary compliance with the statutes governing qualification of plans and exemption of certain types of organizations from tax and to determine the extent of compliance and the causes of noncompliance with the tax laws by plans and organizations,” and irs's objective to “identify new types of tax transactions or promotions that are either abusive or potentially abusive requiring different levels of coordination and varying strategies.” we determined the criterion was met only if all of the programs under review offered sufficient support . table 1 shows how we assessed the programs we reviewed on the criteria .