corps headquarters officials agreed with our analysis . after taking the corps' misapplication of growth rates into consideration , there remained about a $4.7 million gap between the corps' estimated annual project benefits and the outcome of our efforts to replicate its results . while the corps has included some costs for assessing the likely environmental impacts of the project , should monitoring or construction activities reveal unanticipated problems , the costs to slow the dredging schedule or rebuild damaged habitat are unclear . in addition , discussed below are several other uncertainties that we identified during our review that may increase or decrease costs by an as yet unquantified amount . one such uncertainty concerns the recent addition of beach replenishment to the project's plan for disposal of dredged material . the corps' current disposal plan calls for transporting sand dredged from the lower delaware bay to broadkill beach in delaware . however , it is unclear whether the clean sand will ultimately go to broadkill beach because , pending an agreement with the state of delaware , another beach , or beaches , could be selected . using a beach that is closer to the dredging area would result in a lower cost for beach replenishment than is currently estimated . alternatively , if the selected beach were farther from the channel - dredging area , the cost of the operation would be higher than estimated . for example , the current costs of dredging the channel and transporting the sand to broadkill beach are estimated at $10 per cubic yard ; the costs for the same activities with dewey - rehoboth beach as the destination would be about $18 per cubic yard . given the uncertainty about which beach or beaches will ultimately be chosen , the final cost of this activity is unclear . corps headquarters officials have stated that this problem could potentially be corrected by modifying the project construction schedule . however , any modification of the schedule would affect the total project cost . finally , the corps did not include in its estimate all the capital investments that private companies , such as oil refineries , would need to make to take advantage of the deeper channel . for example , officials at two refineries told us that they would need to build additional on - site storage capacity to take advantage of a deeper channel , but these costs were not included in the cost estimate . while taking this omission into account would likely increase annualized project costs , the corps had not addressed this issue at the time of our review . corps headquarters officials stated that they assumed no land - side costs attributable to the proposed project at the time of the 1998 limited reevaluation report . however , these officials further stated that a reanalysis of the project would reconsider the assumption of no land - side costs , in addition to other potential capital investment costs faced by the benefiting firms . there are a number of uncertainties related to project benefits and costs that could impact the economic analysis .