courthouse project . to obtain information on courthouse construction and other costs , we reviewed relevant laws related to the construction of courthouses , appropriations laws , project prospectuses , and budgetary data . we also interviewed officials from gsa and the judiciary . we provided aousc , gsa , and the department of justice with draft copies of this report for their review and comment . aousc and gsa provided technical clarifications , which were incorporated as appropriate . courthouse project proposal address the underlying conditions that led to los angeles's high urgency score ? what construction and other costs , if any , may be required to meet judiciary and related needs in los angeles ? to determine whether the current project proposal would address the courthouse space , security , and operational concerns in los angeles , we inspected the current and planned sites for the u.s. district court in los angeles . we also interviewed judges and officials from the u.s. district court in los angeles , and officials from the administrative office of the u.s. courts ( aousc ) , gsa , and u.s . marshals service ( marshals service ) . we reviewed the urgency score criteria developed by the judiciary and planning studies developed for gsa and the judiciary for the l.a . to ensure the reliability of information presented in this report , we corroborated much of the documentation on construction cost estimates , planning studies and prospectuses , and urgency score criteria through testimonial interviews with gsa and judiciary officials . a list of related gao reports on courthouse construction appears at the end of this report . we conducted our work from june 2004 through september 2004 in los angeles , california , and washington , d.c. , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . this report summarizes the information we provided to your staff during our september 23 , 2004 , briefing . the briefing slides are included in appendix i . los angeles has one of the largest federal court operations in the nation , processing more than 16,000 cases per year and serving an area with more than 11 million people . in downtown los angeles , the district court operations are split between two buildings — the spring street courthouse and the roybal federal building — that are approximately one - quarter mile apart . the spring street building , considered by the court to be the main courthouse in los angeles , is more than 65 years old and , according to judiciary and gsa officials , requires major renovations and does not currently meet the security or space needs of the judiciary . by contrast , the roybal building was constructed in the early 1990s and , according to gsa officials , complied with design and security specifications that were in place at the time it was built . however , inefficiencies occur because the court's operations are split between these two buildings . federal courthouse construction projects are prioritized based on urgency scores assigned by the judiciary — the higher the score , the more urgent the project is considered ( see table 1 ) .