( see fig . the percentage of admitting physicians who were investors varied by specialty hospital type , ranging from about 7 percent at women's hospitals to about 44 percent at surgical hospitals . we identified three basic business structures for specialty hospitals . our survey results indicated that about one - third of specialty hospitals were independent . most of these hospitals were orthopedic or surgical and 76 percent had some degree of physician ownership . approximately one - third of specialty hospitals were owned in part by a specialty hospital chain . among this group , most hospitals were cardiac or orthopedic and 76 percent had some degree of physician ownership . the remaining one - third of specialty hospitals were owned or operated in part by local general hospitals . almost half ( 48 percent ) of the hospitals in this last group , which varied in specialty type , had some degree of physician ownership . in 2001 , specialty hospitals accounted for approximately $871 million , or 1 percent , of medicare's spending on hospital inpatient services . nearly two - thirds of this amount went to cardiac hospitals . ( see table 2. ) although 28 states had at least one existing specialty hospital , about two - thirds of the 100 specialty hospitals we identified were located in 7 states . the specialty hospitals that are planned to open over the next few months or years will reinforce this pattern of concentration . discharges are classified according to a list of drgs . drg payment rates are based on the expected cost of the diagnosis group's typical case compared with the cost for all medicare inpatient cases . the drg payment is not adjusted for within - drg differences in severity of illness . therefore , hospitals have a financial incentive to treat as many patients as possible whose costs are low relative to the costs of the average patient in each drg . our april 2003 study found that 21 out of 25 specialty hospitals treated a lower percentage of patients who were severely ill compared with patients in the same diagnosis categories treated at general hospitals in the same urban areas . for example , in an urban area in texas , 3 percent of an orthopedic hospital's patients with that hospital's most common diagnoses were classified as severely ill , as compared with 8 percent of patients with the same diagnoses treated by the area's more than four dozen general hospitals . in an urban area in arizona , about 17 percent of a cardiac hospital's patients with that hospital's most common diagnoses were classified as severely ill , as compared to 22 percent of patients with the same diagnoses treated by the area's more than two dozen general hospitals . not all specialty hospitals treated patients who were , by comparison , less sick . two of the 25 specialty hospitals treated a higher percentage of severely ill patients and two others treated about the same percentage as area general hospitals . in examining the illness severity differences between specialty and general hospitals , we did not determine the clinical or economic importance of these differences . for - profit status is a salient characteristic of specialty hospitals we identified .