nsps does not include such a certification provision . on the other hand , the senior executive service needs to take the lead in matters related to pay for performance . the nsps would include provisions intended to ensure collaboration with employee representatives in the planning , development , and implementation of a human resources management system . as discussed at the civil service and agency organization subcommittee , committee on government reform hearing on tuesday , direct employee involvement in the development of the nsps legislative proposal has thus far been limited . nevertheless , if additional authorities are granted to dod , congress should consider establishing additional safeguards to ensure the fair , merit - based , transparent , and accountable implementation of nsps . this includes addressing the issues i have raised in this statement . as i have suggested , congress should consider providing governmentwide broad banding and pay for performance authorities that dod and other federal agencies can use provided they can demonstrate that they have a performance management system in place that meets certain statutory standards and can be certified to by a qualified and independent party , such as opm . congress should also consider establishing a governmentwide fund whereby agencies , based on a sound business case , could apply for funds to modernize their performance management systems and ensure that those systems have adequate safeguards to prevent abuse . this would serve as a positive step to promote high - performing organizations throughout the federal government while avoiding further fragmentation within the executive branch in critical human capital policies and approaches . we look forward to continuing to support congress and work with dod in addressing the vital transformation challenges it faces . chairman hunter , mr. skelton , and members of the committee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have . for further information on human capital issues at dod , please contact derek stewart , director , defense capabilities and management on ( 202 ) 512-5559 or at stewartd@gao.gov . for further information on governmentwide human capital issues , please contact j. christopher mihm , director , strategic issues , on ( 202 ) 512-6806 or at mihmj@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included william doherty , clifton g. douglas , jr. , christine fossett , bruce goddard , judith kordahl , janice lichty , bob lilly , lisa shames , ellen rubin , edward h. stephenson , jr. , tiffany tanner , marti tracy , and michael volpe . moving forward , and aside from the specific statutory provisions on consultation , the active involvement of employees will be critical to the success of nsps , or for any human capital reform for that matter . the legislation has a number of provisions designed to give dod flexibility to help obtain key critical talent . these authorities give dod considerable flexibility to obtain and compensate individuals and exempt them from several provisions of current law .