below is a list of these actions . figure 4 describes the process for taking secretarial action against an airport .  90-day action — the secretary notifies foreign government officials that they have 90 days to address security deficiencies that were identified during the airport assessment and recommends steps necessary to bring the security measures at the airport up to icao standards .  public notification — if , after 90 days , the secretary finds that the government has not brought security measures at the airport up to icao standards , the secretary notifies the general public that the airport does not maintain and carry out effective security measures .  modification to air carrier operations — if , after 90 days , the secretary finds that the government has not brought security measures at the airport up to icao standards:  the secretary may withhold , revoke , or prescribe conditions on the operating authority of u.s. - based and foreign air carriers using that airport to provide transportation to the u.s. , following consultation with appropriate host government officials and air carrier representatives , and with the approval of the secretary of state .  the president may prohibit a u.s. - based or foreign air carrier from providing transportation between the united states and any foreign airport that is the subject of a secretarial determination .  suspension of service — the secretary , with approval of the secretary of state , shall suspend the right of any u.s. - based or foreign air carrier to provide service to or from an airport if the secretary determines that a condition exists that threatens the safety or security of passengers , aircraft , or crew traveling to or from the airport , and the public interest requires an immediate suspension of transportation between the united states and that airport . tsa inspectors use 40 icao standards and 1 recommended practice when conducting foreign airport assessments . of the 40 , tsa identified 22 as critical . these 22 critical standards are in bold . 3.2.1 each contracting state shall require each airport serving civil aviation to establish , implement and maintain a written airport security program appropriate to meet the requirements of the national civil aviation security programme . 3.2.2 each contracting state shall ensure that an authority at each airport serving civil aviation is responsible for coordinating the implementation of security controls . 3.2.3 each contracting state shall ensure that an airport security committee at each airport serving civil aviation is established to assist the authority mentioned under 3.2.2 in its role of coordinating the implementation of security controls and procedures as specified in the airport security programme . 3.4.1 each contracting state shall ensure that the persons implementing security controls are subject to background checks and selection procedures . 3.4.2 each contracting state shall ensure that the persons implementing security controls possess all competencies required to perform their duties and are appropriately trained according to the requirements of the national civil aviation security programme and that appropriate records are maintained up to date . relevant standards of performance shall be established and initial and periodic assessments shall be introduced to maintain those standards .