this is called proxy voting . according to the department of labor's ( dol's ) interpretation of the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) of 1974 , with these voting rights , fiduciaries are required to cast votes solely in the interest of plan participants and beneficiaries . the retirement security of these plan participants can be affected by how certain issues are voted on during company stockholder meetings and , therefore , relies on fiduciaries acting solely in the interest of pension plan participants and beneficiaries . however , recent corporate scandals have highlighted the fact that fiduciaries are faced with conflicts of interest that could lead them to breach their responsibility to act solely on behalf of participants . for example , in 2002 , the securities exchange commission ( sec ) investigated whether a vote cast in favor of a merger between hewlett - packard ( hp ) and compaq by deutsche bank asset management ( deam ) , a large asset manager with the fiduciary responsibility for voting proxies , was influenced by a conflict of interest . the sec found that a material conflict of interest was created when deam failed to disclose to its advisory clients that deutsche bank's investment banking ( deib ) division was working for hp on the merger and had intervened in deam's proxy process on behalf of hp . because of conflicts of interest in the proxy voting system and the potential adverse effects of such conflicts on the retirement security of americans , you asked us to describe ( 1 ) conflicts of interest in proxy voting , ( 2 ) actions taken by plans and plan fiduciaries to manage conflicts of interest , and ( 3 ) dol's enforcement of proxy voting requirements . to determine what conflicts exist in proxy voting , we conducted face - to - face and telephone interviews which included officials at dol's employee benefits security administration ( ebsa ) and at sec , securities and proxy voting industry professionals , officials of public and private pension plans , erisa attorneys , asset managers , and proxy voting firms , research organizations , and proxy solicitors . we asked 25 shareholder activist professionals , academics , and economists to respond to a series of questions for a written reply and received 14 responses . to determine the extent to which certain companies' pension plans hold proxy voting power within the plan sponsor , we analyzed plan financial information filed annually ( form 5500 data ) with dol's ebsa . we analyzed data for the fortune 500 companies for plan year 2001 , which was the most recent year for which complete plan - specific data were available . to determine what safeguards fiduciaries have put in place to manage conflicts of interest , we reviewed proxy voting guidelines and interviewed a number of public and private pension plan sponsors , asset managers , proxy voting firm representatives , and other experts . to determine dol's enforcement efforts in this area , we reviewed dol enforcement material and previously issued gao reports on dol's enforcement program and interviewed officials at ebsa . we conducted our work between april 2003 and may 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .