medicare . medicare funding for survey activities is requested and provided as part of a lump sum appropriation for the cms program management account , which generally funds cms operations . for each fiscal year , cms develops a budget request for that account , including an amount for survey activities , giving priority to funding for statutory requirements . in determining the amount for survey activities , cms considers three factors: the number of facilities ; the number of surveys states need to conduct , as determined by the established survey frequencies ; and the cost of surveys , using the number of hours to complete them as a proxy . the request is submitted to congress as part of the president's proposed budget . in the annual appropriations act for hhs , congress authorizes the transfer of a specific amount from the medicare trust funds to cms's program management account , which limits the amount of money that cms can use for operations , including survey activities . typically , tables within the conference report identify amounts for survey and other activities funded through the program management account . according to a cms official , the agency generally allocates the amounts specified in the conference report tables to the relevant activities . funding for survey activities covers ( 1 ) state survey operations ; ( 2 ) direct federal surveys , such as community mental health centers ; and ( 3 ) support contracts , such as for training surveyors , developing a new nursing home survey methodology , and surveying psychiatric hospitals . the costs of managing survey activities , such as salaries for staff of cms's survey and certification group and federal surveyors in each of cms's 10 regional offices , are also funded through cms's program management account , but not as part of the funds designated in the conference report for survey activities . each august , cms notifies states of their projected medicare budget allocations for the federal fiscal year starting october 1 , based on the president's proposed budget . after enactment of the appropriations act , the agency notifies states of any changes in their medicare allocations for survey activities . at the end of the federal fiscal year , cms may provide supplemental funds to states that spent more than their initial medicare allocations by redistributing funds from states that spent less than their allocations . medicaid . for surveys of facilities funded by medicaid , states generally pay 25 percent of the costs and the federal government pays the remaining 75 percent . the president's budget proposal provides congress with an estimate of medicaid spending for survey activities based on projected workload . the annual appropriations act for hhs includes an amount for the federal share of medicaid expenditures , including states' expenditures for survey activities . funds are provided to states based on claims submitted for survey activities or state estimates of activities to be conducted . non - medicaid state funding .