transportation of persons / things . state homes and homeless veteran support . rent , communications , and utilities including gas , electricity , water , sewer , and phone . supplies including drugs , medicines , hospital supplies , blood products , and prosthetic supplies . services including fee - basis physician , nursing , dental , hospitalization stays , research , and prosthetic repair . vha officials said they used miscellaneous obligations to administratively reserve estimated funds required to facilitate the payments for goods and services for which specific quantities and time frames were uncertain . specifically , a miscellaneous obligation can be created for an estimated amount and then modified as specific quantities are needed or specific delivery dates are set . in contrast , when a purchase order is used to obligate funds , the obligated amount cannot be changed without a modification of the purchase order . according to vha officials , the need to prepare numerous modifications to purchase orders could place an undue burden on the limited contracting personnel available at individual centers and could also require additional work on the part of fiscal services personnel . therefore , vha officials view the use of miscellaneous obligations as having the benefit of reduced workload . another cited benefit was that miscellaneous obligations simplify the procurement process when no underlying contract or purchase order exists . for example , providing medical care on a fee - basis to veterans outside of vha medical centers may involve the services of thousands of private physicians nationwide . attempting to negotiate a separate agreement or contract with each of these individuals would be a difficult task for vha's contracting staff . under the policies and procedures in place during fiscal year 2007 , vha centers could use miscellaneous obligations as umbrella authorizations for fee - based medical services performed by a number of different physicians . in effect , in cases for which there is no preexisting contract , the miscellaneous obligation form becomes the record of an obligation . in september 2008 , we reported that va policies and procedures were not designed to provide adequate controls over the use of miscellaneous obligations . the use of miscellaneous obligations carries inherent risk due to a lack of a negotiated contract . without effectively designed mitigating controls , the use of miscellaneous obligations may also expose vha to increased risk of fraud , waste , and abuse . vha did not have effective basic internal controls nor mitigating controls with respect to oversight by contracting officials , segregation of duties , and supporting documentation for recording the obligation of funds . our standards for internal control in the federal government state that agency management is responsible for developing detailed policies and procedures for internal control suitable for its agency's operations and ensuring that they provide for adequate monitoring by management , segregation of duties , and supporting documentation for the need to acquire specific goods in the quantities purchased . we identified control design flaws in each of these areas , and we confirmed that these weaknesses existed in our case studies of va fiscal year 2007 transactions at pittsburgh , cheyenne , and kansas city , as shown below in table 1 .