databases . to help vet antiquities for sale , art market experts also informed us that databases exist for tracking stolen art and antiquities . for example , art market dealers often check with the databases maintained by art loss register and art recovery international . both organizations are private companies that , according to their representatives , include some information from the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) and other law enforcement agencies in their databases , in addition to registering stolen items on behalf of individuals . state officials and art market experts noted that these databases only contain items for which ownership information and descriptions have been documented , whereas items looters have excavated from the ground or items otherwise undocumented prior to being looted would not be registered in the databases . association guidelines . professional and commercial associations related to museums , antiquities , and ancient coins have developed guidance for their members to follow , such as codes of ethics , guidelines for conducting due diligence , and affidavits for buyers and sellers . for example , the association of art museum directors ( aamd ) has guidelines regarding the definition of “antiquity” to help inform due diligence required for transactions of such items . aamd updated its guidance for acquiring archaeological material and ancient art in 2013 , including a statement deploring illicit excavation of archaeological materials and ancient art ; the destruction or defacing of ancient monuments ; and the theft of art from museums , individuals , and other repositories . in addition , the international association of dealers in ancient art established a code of ethics and practice that states its members should not purchase or sell objects until they have established , to the best of their ability , that such objects were not stolen from excavations , can guarantee the authenticity of all objects they offer to the best of their professional knowledge and belief , and check items in excess of a certain dollar value with stolen art registers recognized by the association's board . furthermore , the international association of professional numismatists established a code of ethics that lists five responsibilities for its members , including a statement calling on members to never knowingly deal in any item stolen from a public or private coin collection or reasonably suspected to be the direct product of an illicit excavation , and to conduct transactions in accordance with the laws of the countries in which they do business . u.s. agencies , including the departments of state , homeland security ( dhs ) , justice ( doj ) , the treasury ( treasury ) , and defense ( dod ) , as well as the smithsonian , reported having roles and responsibilities related to protecting cultural property worldwide , as shown in table 1 . u.s. agencies and the smithsonian have undertaken five categories of activities intended to protect iraqi and syrian cultural property , including awareness raising , information sharing , law enforcement efforts , overseas capacity building , and preventing destruction , as shown in figure 7 .