alternatives . few of the federal reserve's initial regulatory flexibility analyses identified alternatives to the proposed rule and some did not explain why there were no alternatives . although most of the rules' analyses ( 10 of 17 ) described alternatives , all but 2 stated that there were no alternatives that would have less economic impact on small entities . of the 6 rules that might impose compliance requirements on small entities , 2 included such a statement , 1 had no mention of alternatives , and another solicited comments on any significant alternatives that would reduce burden associated with the proposed rule . analyses for the other two rules described alternative approaches included in the proposed rule to limit economic impact on small entities . for example , one of the rules incorporated an applicability threshold for certain compliance requirements and the other exempted small entities from some of the rule's provisions and applied a longer transition period . other components . several of the final regulatory flexibility analyses also lacked other rfa - required components . in particular , only three of the six rules described steps taken to minimize economic impact on small entities and reasons for selecting the alternative adopted in the final rule . the other three rules did not include either component . the reasons cited for selecting the approach in the final rule generally reflected the actions taken by the agency to mitigate the rule's economic impact on small entities . for the other financial regulators ( fdic , cfpb , cftc , occ , and sec ) , most of the regulatory flexibility analyses we reviewed included the components required by rfa , but the extent of the analyses varied among regulators , with some lacking required information or having other limitations . cfpb's regulatory flexibility analyses generally included all required components . however , for three of the seven rules neither the initial nor final analyses estimated compliance costs for small entities . in some cases , the analyses stated that costs likely would be minimal or described difficulties in estimating costs such as a lack of information about the current practices of subject entities . of the analyses that included cost estimates , several did not quantify all identified costs or explain why such estimates were not available . unlike other regulators we reviewed , cfpb is required to seek input from small entities during the rulemaking process ( through small business review panels ) when proposed rules are expected to have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities . cfpb's regulatory flexibility analyses often incorporated information received from these panels in its assessment of potential economic effects and regulatory alternatives . for example , several analyses that estimated compliance costs relied on information from small entities that participated in the panel process as well as data from other sources . the description of regulatory alternatives often reflected comments received from small - entity representatives . although each of cfpb's initial analyses described alternatives , in some cases , it was not clear whether cfpb had identified alternatives of its own .