the department has implemented most of the recommendations . likewise , the dod office of inspector general has reported on internal control deficiencies , such as the distribution of excess property to law enforcement agencies without the accountability necessary to ensure that the released property had the proper authorization . the inspector general has made recommendations , which the department has also implemented . our testimony today summarizes key findings from our july 2017 report on dod excess property . accordingly , our testimony addresses ( 1 ) how federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies reported using and benefiting from excess controlled property transferred to them through the leso program ; and ( 2 ) the extent to which dla has taken actions to enhance processes , including internal controls , related to its transfers of excess controlled property . to conduct our work , we reviewed dod policies and procedures , interviewed and surveyed cognizant officials , and conducted independent testing of leso's application and dla's transfer process . specifically , we conducted a survey of 15 participating federal law enforcement agencies as well as 53 state coordinators who had controlled property transferred to their offices through the leso program during calendar years 2013 , 2014 , and 2015 to gain an understanding of their use of the leso program . also , we conducted non - generalizable case studies of five states: arizona , georgia , maryland , michigan , and texas . we interviewed federal , state , and local law enforcement officials in each of the selected states to gain an understanding of how property is transferred to them , including how they screen for , obtain , and dispose of dod excess controlled property . additionally , our investigators created a fictitious federal agency to conduct independent testing of the leso program's internal controls and dla's transfer of controlled property to law enforcement agencies . we also compared dla and leso practices to those identified in gao's a framework for managing fraud risks in federal programs ( hereafter cited as the fraud risk framework ) . issued in july 2015 , gao's fraud risk framework is a comprehensive set of leading practices that serves as a guide for program managers to use when developing efforts to combat fraud in a strategic , risk - based manner . further details on our scope and methodology are included in our report . the work on which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards and our investigative work was performed in accordance with the council of inspector general on integrity and efficiency standards for investigations . federal law enforcement agencies and state coordinators in our survey — as well as officials we interviewed from federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies — reported various uses of dod excess controlled property for law enforcement activities . the reported uses included enhancing counterdrug , counterterrorism , and border - security activities . also , law enforcement agencies reported using dod's excess controlled property for other law enforcement activities , such as search and rescue , natural disaster response , surveillance , reaching barricaded suspects , police training , and the serving of warrants .