key contributors to this report are listed in appendix i . employees identified through this process were generally counseled against further misuse . finally , one company , in 2001 , monitored the inappropriate websites employees visited , such as hate , violence , and pornographic , and in 2002 , it purchased new software to block these offensive sites . generally , the companies we reviewed — regardless of whether they routinely reviewed employee computer use or examined individual employee records only to pursue particular complaints — reported that the total number of investigations was very small as a proportion of the number of employees with access to e - mail , the internet , or computer files . the number of annual investigations ranged from 5 to 137 and represented less than 1 percent of the total domestic employees at these companies . for example , one company with more than 50,000 domestic employees reported 72 e - mail investigations and 48 internet investigations in calendar year 2001 . we found companies most often investigated the alleged misuse of employee e - mail followed by investigations of internet use . not surprisingly , the company that routinely reviewed employee internet use initiated the most investigations on employee internet conduct — 90 investigations . investigations of the content of employees' computer files were the smallest in number , and only one company told us that they had initiated investigations related to them . only 2 of the 14 companies we interviewed were able to provide data on the types of disciplinary actions taken against employee misuse of computer resources . one company reported that of its 20,000 employees , it terminated 2 employees for inappropriate e - mail use , 2 for internet misuse , and 1 for computer file violation in 2001 . the other company reported that over a 5-year period it had terminated 14 employees for misuse of the internet . most of the 14 companies reported various types of actions that could be taken against employees for inappropriate use of computer resources . four companies told us these actions ranged from informal discussions or formal counseling between the employee and company managers to terminations . only the most flagrant and repeated violations would result in employee termination . officials reviewed this list to determine if inappropriate sites have been visited . eight of the interviews were by telephone and 6 were site visits . in these discussions , we talked with various company officials , including representatives from their general counsel's offices , human resource departments , internal audit , and computer security administrators . the data gathered from these 14 companies are for illustrative purposes only and do not represent the monitoring policies and procedures for all private sector companies in the united states . we obtained detailed information on written policies covering the employee use of company computer resources and reviewed the written policies of 8 of these companies . we also obtained comments on a draft of this report from experts on employee rights and the legal aspects of private sector monitoring . because there are no federal executive agencies with oversight responsibilities in this area , we did not obtain federal agency comments on this report .