pub . 113-146 , § 202 ( g ) , 128 stat . on september 1 , 2016 , the president concurred with 15 of the 18 recommendations and directed va to implement any of the 15 recommendations that the department was not already working to implement . assessment of the commission on care's recommendations and a description of the recommendations vha is directed to implement . in addition to the reviews required by the choice act , vha initiated internal task forces to examine organizational structure changes and make recommendations . for example , vha chartered its governance task force in december 2014 , with the goal of making recommendations to improve operational effectiveness and efficiency , and to align the agency to strengthen business processes . according to the task force's charter , vha needed to modify its governance structure to help address recent issues with substandard and inconsistent care delivery . the governance task force submitted a report in february 2015 with 21 recommendations . for example , the task force recommended reorganizing vha's central office around functional areas and establishing processes for regular review and revision of the visn and vha central office structures . a governance task force recommendation to examine visn staffing resulted in vha chartering another task force , the visn staffing task force , in february 2015 . in july 2015 , this task force submitted a report to the dush for operations and management with recommendations for a new visn staffing model . it included an option for reorganized visn organizational structures ; new positions focused on special populations ( eg , women's health , rural health ) , nursing , and communications ; and staffing limits that would result in 95 fewer visn full - time - equivalent staff nationally in fiscal year 2016 compared to fiscal year 2012 . in addition , vha chartered a task force — the integrated project team — in september 2015 to develop a detailed , time - limited , and organization - specific plan for , and initiate implementation of , selected recommendations from the independent assessment required by the choice act . according to the task force's charter , it was formed because , in a climate of intense public and congressional scrutiny , vha needed to act quickly and could not afford to wait for the commission on care to publish its recommendations , which were to incorporate the results of the independent assessment . despite several critical internal and external reviews , vha does not have a process that ensures that recommendations resulting from these reviews are evaluated to determine appropriate actions and that any such appropriate actions are implemented . ( see app . i for a table of recent internal and external reviews that examined vha's organizational structure. ) the lack of such processes is inconsistent with federal standards for internal control , which state that management should remediate identified internal control deficiencies on a timely basis . this remediation may include evaluating the results of reviews to determine appropriate actions , and , once decisions are made , completing and documenting corrective actions on a timely basis .