workforce planning . in recent reports , we and agriculture's inspector general have raised concerns about the forest service's ability to maintain an effective workforce through strategic workforce planning . in a 2010 report , we noted that the forest service ( like interior and the environmental protection agency ) had fallen short with respect to two of the six leading principles that we and others have identified as important to effective workforce planning: ( 1 ) aligning the agency's workforce plan with its strategic plan and ( 2 ) monitoring and evaluating its workforce - planning efforts . without more clearly aligning its workforce plans with its strategic plan , and monitoring and evaluating its progress in workforce planning , as we recommended in that report , the forest service remains at risk of not having the appropriately skilled workforce it needs to effectively achieve its mission . in addition , we reported that the forest service developed and issued annual workforce plans containing information on emerging workforce issues and that the agency had identified recommendations to address these issues but did not communicate its recommendations , nor assign responsibility for implementing recommendations . for the forest service to further capitalize on its existing workforce - planning efforts , we recommended that the agency communicate its recommendations in its annual 5-year workforce plan , assign responsibility and establish time frames for implementing the recommendations , and track implementation progress . as of november 2010 , the forest service had begun several actions to address our recommendations , although they had not yet been fully implemented . workforce planning is of particular concern in the area of wildland firefighting . in march 2010 , agriculture's inspector general reported that the forest service lacked a workforce plan specific to firefighters , despite the relatively high number of staff eligible to retire among those in positions critical to firefighting and the agency's own expectations of an increase in the size and number of fires it will be responsible for suppressing . as the inspector general noted , a lack of qualified firefighters due to retirements and inadequate planning could jeopardize the forest service's ability to accomplish its wildland fire suppression mission , resulting in the loss of more property and natural resources and increased safety risks to fire suppression personnel . strategic approaches for protecting and securing federal lands . in 2010 , we issued reports examining different aspects of the forest service's response to illegal activities occurring on the lands it manages , including human and drug smuggling into the united states . for example , we reported that the forest service , like other federal land management agencies , lacks a risk - based approach to managing its law enforcement resources and concluded that without a more systematic method to assess risks posed by illegal activities , the forest service could not be assured that it was allocating scarce resources effectively . for federal lands along the united states border , we reported that communication and coordination between border patrol and federal land management agencies , including the forest service , had not been effective in certain areas , including the sharing of intelligence and threat information , deployment plans , and radio communications between the agencies .