dhs has some of the most extensive acquisition needs within the federal government . in fiscal year 2007 , dhs obligated about $12 billion to acquire goods and services ranging from the basic goods and services federal agencies purchase , such as information technology equipment and support , to more complex and unique acquisitions , such as airport security systems and coast guard ships . dhs and its component agencies have faced a number of challenges related to procuring services and major system acquisitions . when dhs was formed in 2003 , it was responsible for integrating 22 agencies with disparate missions . of these , only seven came with their own procurement offices , only some of which had also managed complex acquisitions such as the coast guard's deepwater program or tsa's airport screening programs . while the homeland security acquisition manual and the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) do not distinguish between the terms acquisition and procurement , dhs officials have noted that procurement — the actual transaction to acquire goods and services — is only one element of acquisition . the term acquisition can include the development of operational and life - cycle requirements , such as formulating concepts of operations , developing sound business strategies , exercising prudent financial management , assessing trade - offs , and managing program risks . we have identified three key performance areas for acquisition management: assessing and organizing acquisition functions to meet agency needs ; developing clear and transparent policies and processes for all acquisitions ; developing an acquisition workforce to implement and monitor acquisitions . our prior work has shown that these are among the key elements of an efficient , effective , and accountable acquisition function . while interagency contacting is often chosen because it requires less planning than establishing a new contract , evaluating the selection of an interagency contract is important because not all interagency contracts provide good value when considering both timeliness and total cost . although dhs guidance has required planning and analysis of alternatives for all acquisitions since july 2005 , we found that it was not conducted for the four cases in our review for which it was required . inaccurate federal procurement data is not unique to dhs and is a long - standing governmentwide concern . our prior work and the work of the general services administration's inspector general have identified issues with the accuracy and completeness of fpds and fpds - ng data , and omb has stressed the importance of submitting timely and accurate procurement data to fpds - ng . the acquisition advisory panel has also raised concerns about the accuracy of fpds - ng data . we conducted these performance audits in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the following summarizes each of these three areas: assessing and organizing the acquisition function: since it was created in 2003 , dhs has recognized the need to improve acquisition outcomes , and has taken some steps to organize and assess the acquisition function .