ii ) . dod commented that bah does an excellent job of achieving the objective of providing servicemembers with the same quality and quantity of housing that their civilian counterparts can afford . however , dod also noted that servicemembers may have difficulty finding adequate housing if there are substantial changes in the supply of or demand for housing in a local area , at least until the private market has had time to adjust to the changing conditions . dod also observed that servicemembers with large families , who seek larger housing than an average size family , may have difficulty finding adequate housing using their bah payments alone and may apply for federal rental housing programs . however , dod also stated that servicemembers should be eligible for federal housing subsidies under the same terms as their civilian counterparts . furthermore , dod commented that excluding bah from income determinations might transfer existing scarce resources from low - income civilians to the military and generate ill - will among civilians toward the military . finally , dod stated that , while our draft report showed that excluding bah from income determinations might not have the desired effect of increasing the supply of rental housing for servicemembers , there might be other ways in which the government could assist the private market in responding to housing shortgages . our draft report discussed the particular difficulties of large families — even those receiving rental assistance — in finding suitable housing . the draft report also addressed the potential role of existing programs , particularly the lihtc program , in stimulating production of affordable housing near growing installations . however , examining other possible federal strategies for increasing the supply of private housing was beyond the scope of this study . we are sending copies of this report to other interested congressional committees ; the secretaries of the departments of agriculture , defense , housing and urban development , and the treasury ; and the commissioner of internal revenue . we will make copies available to others upon request . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please call me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 if you or your staff have any questions about this report . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . see appendix iii for key contributors to this report . our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) how excluding the basic allowance for housing ( bah ) from income determinations would have affected the eligibility of servicemembers receiving bah as of december 2005 and ( 2 ) programmatic and market factors that could affect eligible servicemembers' participation in the programs in selected communities gaining military personnel .