ex - im concurred with this recommendation . while ex - im included an assessment of the risk of loss associated with implementing the three congressional mandates in its business plan as required by the reauthorization act , ex - im missed the opportunity to present any risk rating data to support its risk evaluations , though this was not required . again limited by its lack of final projected loss rates — which are calculated using risk ratings of transactions as a key variable — at the time of the business plan , ex - im did not present any projected risk rating data in the plan . while the business plan did not include any risk rating data related to the three congressional mandates , to further examine ex - im's conclusions on risk of loss associated with complying with the three mandates , we analyzed the weighted - average risk ratings for 2008 and 2012 related to these mandates as compiled by ex - im ( see table 2 ) . our analysis shows that ex - im's overall weighted - average risk rating declined between 2008 and 2012 . however , transactions related to these three mandates generally had higher weighted - average risk ratings than the overall weighted - average risk ratings for both years , except for transactions that partially support small businesses . ex - im did not include risk ratings of transactions supporting the small business , sub - saharan africa , and renewable energy mandates in the business plan , and has not routinely reported the mandates' performance ( for example , default rates ) at the subportfolio level . recently , the bank's growth has created growing targets that could lead the bank to devote an increasing portion of its limited staff and resources to activities that are particularly time - and resource - intensive , such as small business authorizations , or set goals that may not be achievable in the current market , such as providing a set amount of renewable energy financing that is higher than the demand . omb criteria indicate that agency targets should be ambitious , yet realistic , and reflect careful analysis , factors affecting outcomes , and agency capacity and priorities . based on ex - im's projected total authorizations for 2013 and 2014 , ex - im would have to authorize $3.8 billion in renewable energy financing in 2013 and $4.3 billion in 2014 to meet the 10 percent target ( see fig . ex - im officials stated that additional administrative resources would not enable it to meet its renewable energy target , as its inability to meet the target results from a lack of demand for renewable energy export financing . recent transactions have had limited time to default and may not default until they are more seasoned . assuming an 11-year average repayment term increases the estimate by approximately $1 billion . in combination , varying the model's assumptions about the percentage of short - term authorizations in ex - im's portfolio ( using a 30 percent assumption or actual historical data ) and average repayment terms ( 9 or 11 years ) results in a range of 2014 exposure estimates between $132 billion and $144 billion ( see fig .