silent returns . some taxpayers filed 2014 tax returns that did not report health coverage information , claim an exemption , or report an srp . irs refers to these cases as silent returns . according to irs officials , one reason for silent returns is that some taxpayers could be claimed as a dependent on another return . according to preliminary filing season data , as of may 28 , 2015 , more than 11 million taxpayers filed silent returns ( see table 2 ) . irs officials estimated that about 58 percent of the silent returns posted as of the end of may 2015 were from filers who reported that they could be claimed as dependents on another return . one reason a taxpayer might file a silent return could be the first - year challenge of understanding the complex new shared responsibility reporting requirement . irs goals include encouraging voluntary compliance with tax responsibilities and its mission includes enforcing the law with integrity and fairness to all . irs has various tools that it can use to enhance taxpayer understanding and encourage compliance with new reporting requirements . according to irs officials , irs has solicited feedback from paid preparers and tax software companies and will consider their input to help determine changes to the form 8965 , health coverage exemptions instructions that could facilitate more accurate reporting . additional tools are also available . most tax returns are filed using tax software and irs provides guidance to tax software companies regarding changes to filing requirements . officials from a tax software company told us that with clear policy instruction from irs and sufficient time , they could design their tax software to prevent taxpayers from omitting required health coverage information on their returns . for tax year 2014 the company's tax software guided , but did not require , taxpayers to report health coverage information . irs can also issue soft notices — irs letters to taxpayers that are designed to serve as an educational tool and improve voluntary compliance , and generally do not require taxpayers to respond to irs . in the past , irs has used soft notices to correct errors and collect funds without initiating an examination . according to irs officials , certain tools used to encourage compliance with other requirements are not available to address silent returns . specifically , irs has determined that it does not have the authority to reject tax returns at filing because they are silent , although irs can reject returns that do not include other required information . preparers do not need to meet due diligence requirements that are specific to the shared responsibility provision.practices for practitioners to gather necessary health coverage information to use in preparing 2014 tax returns for their clients , which stated that tax preparers are expected to exercise the same due diligence for reporting client's health care coverage information as they would for nearly all other entries on a tax return . for example , for paper tax returns , irs staff review each return to ensure that all forms and data needed to process the return are included , and irs may correspond with taxpayers to obtain missing information .