transaction data . according to task force officials , the foundation to their strategy has been their ability to obtain and analyze data from individual msb transactions . under the warrant , the msb was ordered to electronically divert into a holding account wire transfers sent to or from arizona that matched specifically targeted names or criteria . when the receiving individuals tried to obtain the funds , they were told that the funds had been seized by the state and that they could call a dedicated 1-800 number if they believed the state erred in seizing their funds . according to task force officials , most of the seizures were not contested . according to arizona law enforcement officials , while alien smuggling into arizona has not been eliminated , the above strategy has significantly disrupted alien smuggling operations in arizona and has largely eliminated the ability of msbs in arizona to receive smuggling payments . to what extent do ice / oi and cbp have objectives related to alien smuggling along the southwest border and to what extent have they implemented internal controls to measure progress toward these objectives ? to address these questions , we conducted site visits and interviews with officials in all four of the oi special agent - in - charge ( sac ) offices along the southwest border: san diego , phoenix , el paso , and san antonio . we also interviewed officials with six of the nine border patrol sectors along the southwest border — san diego and el centro , california ; yuma and tucson , arizona ; and el paso and laredo , texas . the six border patrol sectors were selected based on their proximity to oi sac offices we visited and their varying volumes of removable alien apprehensions . while the officials' perspectives that we obtained from the sectors cannot be generalized to all border patrol officials along the southwest border , they provided us with an overview of how their enforcement programs operate within and across sectors . we also interviewed officials in all five u.s. attorney's districts along the southwest border . in addition , to address oi's use of investigative resources , we analyzed data from fiscal years 2005 ( the date of our last report ) through 2009 from tecs , the system oi uses to manage its cases . to identify possible opportunities for ice to use its investigative resources more effectively , we analyzed self - reported investigation data from oi's case management system from fiscal years 2005 through 2009 to determine the extent to which investigative resources were spent on oi's main mission of conducting criminal investigations . to address the results of oi investigations , we analyzed data from justice's executive office of u.s . attorneys for the period from fiscal years 2005 through 2009 . to address progress in seizing assets related to alien smuggling , we analyzed oi and border patrol data on seizures made from fiscal years 2005 through 2009 .