having multiple federal agencies involved in financial literacy efforts can have certain advantages . in particular , providing information from multiple sources can increase consumer access and the likelihood of educating more people . moreover , certain agencies may have deep and long - standing expertise and experience addressing specific issue areas or serving specific populations . for example , the securities and exchange commission has efforts in place to protect securities investors from fraudulent schemes , while the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) oversees most , but not all , federally supported housing counseling . similarly , the department of defense ( dod ) may be the agency most able to efficiently and effectively deliver financial literacy programs and products to servicemembers and their families . however , as we stated in a june 2011 report , relatively few evidence - based evaluations of financial literacy programs have been conducted , limiting what is known about which specific methods and strategies — and which federal financial literacy activities — are most effective . further , the participation of multiple agencies highlights the need for strong coordination of their activities . in general , we have found that the coordination and collaboration among federal agencies with regard to financial literacy have improved in recent years , in large part due to the multiagency financial literacy and education commission . the commission was created by congress in 2003 and charged , among other things , with developing a national strategy to promote financial literacy and education , coordinating federal efforts , and identifying areas of overlap and duplication . among other things , the commission , in concert with the department of the treasury , which provides its primary staff support , has served as a central clearinghouse for federal financial literacy resources — for example , it created a centralized federal website and has an ongoing effort to develop a catalog of federal research on financial literacy . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . there is no single definition for financial literacy , which is sometimes also referred to as financial capability , but it has previously been described as the ability to make informed judgments and to take effective actions regarding current and future use and management of money . financial literacy encompasses financial education — the processes whereby individuals improve their knowledge and understanding of financial products , services , and concepts . however , being financially literate refers to more than simply being knowledgeable about financial matters ; it also entails utilizing that knowledge to make informed decisions , avoid pitfalls , and take other actions to improve one's present and long - term financial well - being . federal , state , and local government agencies , nonprofits , the private sector , and academia all play important roles in providing financial education resources , which can include print and online materials , broadcast media , individual counseling , and classroom instruction . evidence indicates that many u.s. consumers could benefit from improved financial literacy efforts .