part 104 . additionally , the coast guard is conducting a study designed to help determine whether additional actions could better ensure the security of offshore energy infrastructure in the gulf of mexico , including modus . this study is expected to be completed in the fall of 2011 . gaining a fuller understanding of the security risks associated with modus could better inform coast guard decisions and potentially improve the security of these facilities . further , the coast guard has implemented a new risk - based oversight policy for modus , including foreign - flagged modus , to address safety and environmental protection issues . this policy includes a targeting matrix to assist inspectors in determining whether a foreign - flagged modu may require increased oversight , based on inspection history or other related factors , through more frequent examinations by the coast guard . additionally , the policy calls on coast guard field units to conduct random , unannounced examinations of a portion of all modus in their areas of responsibility . although this policy does not directly address security , increased oversight resulting from this new policy could help mitigate some of the ways in which a modu might be at risk of a terrorist attack . chairman lobiondo , ranking member larsen , and members of the subcommittee , this completes our prepared statement . we would be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time . for questions about this statement , please contact stephen l. caldwell at ( 202 ) 512-9610 or caldwells@gao.gov , or frank rusco at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . in addition to the contacts named above , key contributors to this testimony were christopher conrad , assistant director ; jon ludwigson , assistant director ; lee carroll and erin o'brien , analysts - in - charge ; and alana finley . thomas lombardi provided legal support and lara miklozek provided assistance in testimony preparation . maritime security: coast guard should conduct required inspections of offshore energy infrastructure . gao - 12-37 . washington , d.c.: october 28 , 2011 . deepwater horizon oil spill: actions needed to reduce evolving but uncertain federal financial risks . gao - 12-86 . washington , d.c.: october 24 , 2011 . maritime security: progress made , but further actions needed to secure the maritime energy supply . gao - 11-883t . washington , d.c.: august 24 , 2011 . oil and gas: interior's restructuring challenges in the aftermath of the gulf oil spill . gao - 11-734t . washington , d.c.: june 2 , 2011 . maritime security: dhs progress and challenges in key areas of port security . gao - 10-940t . washington , d.c.: july 21 , 2010 . oil and gas management: interior's oil and gas production verification efforts do not provide reasonable assurance of accurate measurement of production volumes . gao - 10-313 . washington , d.c.: march 15 , 2010 . mineral revenues: data management problems and reliance on self - reported data for compliance efforts put mms royalty collections at risk . gao - 08-893r .