the reduction in delays generates savings . similarly , sometimes weather - related factors such as fog require wider channels . if a wider channel permits increased vessel traffic during foggy conditions , savings are also generated . according to a corps official , channel widening projects are typically less expensive than channel deepening projects , though their benefits also tend to be lower . the minimum bcr has been higher for new start construction projects than ongoing projects , reflecting the administration's preference for fewer new start projects . prior to fiscal year 2008 , a different measure was used instead of bcr as the primary economic metric . table 5 shows the changes in the bcr requirements over the past 5 years . office of management and budget ( omb ) staff stated they recommended changing the measure to create more stability . nevertheless , according to corps division officials , there is still uncertainty about whether particular projects will be included in the budget request . since , according to corps and omb staff , the bcr threshold set by omb can change from year to year , a project may meet the bcr threshold 1 year but fail to meet it in future years , making it difficult for the corps to make long - term commitments . for example , one division cited a hydropower plant that had been funded since 2005 , but was not included in the president's 2010 budget request because it had a bcr of 1.7 and the bcr threshold for ongoing projects that year was 2.5 . officials at another division estimated that three to four projects in their jurisdiction had been put on hold since the introduction of performance - based budgeting because they could not meet the bcr threshold . officials at some divisions told us that this uncertainty and the failure of a project to be budgeted has negatively affected the corps' relationship with local sponsors . some division officials also told us that this increased uncertainty has made workforce planning more challenging . over the past decade the number of projects included in the budget request for the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) has varied . the number of construction projects has in general decreased , though it has been more stable in recent years , as shown in figure 4 . the number of investigations projects included in the budget request has followed a similar trend to the construction account , though the degree of the decrease over time has been greater , as shown in figure 5 . compared to the construction and investigations accounts , the operation and maintenance ( o&m ) account has been relatively stable , as shown in figure 6 . while we agree that the corps' current processes may incorporate project review findings , we continue to believe that establishing a documented process for the use of such information in the corps' budget formulation would ensure that the corps routinely makes the best use of all available information . additionally , having a documented process would improve understanding of how information from the review boards shapes program priorities and affects decision making .