the air force has no guidance . the army's acquisition regulation supplement requires that igces include a narrative summary detailing how costs were developed and supporting information ( see sidebar ) . the dhs acquisition manual also contains detailed documentation requirements , stating that igces must address the information used , sources of data , and assumptions made for the requirements as outlined in the statement of work in a contract . although dod and dhs guidance specifically calls for information on how the igce was prepared , as previously noted , it was not always followed . when regulations or guidance are not followed to clearly document igces , agencies may be missing opportunities to more effectively plan acquisitions . limited data sources . several contracting and program officials noted that they rely largely — and sometimes exclusively — on historic data for developing igces , often from a predecessor contract for the same requirement . the gao cost estimating guidance identifies historical cost information as a valuable resource , but some officials said that reliance on historical data can result in inaccurate estimates because the market can change over time.for example , an army contracting officer noted that labor rates for information technology services in her area had decreased in recent years , but that may be reflected in an igce based on data from a previously - awarded contract.further , for the two hud contracts in which the igces overestimated the price at award by the greatest amounts , documents in the contract files explained that their reliance on historic data contributed to the difference . for example , the igce for an hhs non - competed contract — awarded under the urgency exception to competition — was a new requirement for professional support services and almost 20 percent under the $699,000 expected contract value at award . once the requirement has been established through one or more contracts over years , the contracting officer said he can use these data to better estimate the cost for future contracts . in addition , the gao cost estimating guidance notes that numerous sources of suitable , relevant and available data represent a basic characteristic of credible cost estimating . while some program officials used a limited number of data sources to support their igces , other officials cited the importance of obtaining multiple sources . this includes getting labor rate information from multiple contractors and ensuring that the information reflects current market value . for example , contracting officials at the department of labor explained that they previously used historical data for developing igces for contracts awarded by job corps — an education and training program for economically disadvantaged youth — but revised their approach to incorporate other information , such as bureau of labor statistic wage rate data , to ensure that their igces do not solely rely on data for labor rate estimates from previously awarded contracts . reliance on federal supply schedules . officials cited another factor contributing to inaccurate igces is a reliance on the general services administration's ( gsa ) federal supply schedule contract prices and other resources that post pre - negotiated contractor labor rates as a primary source .