circuit . in the ilec unbundling rulemaking , the d.c . circuit vacated and remanded the rule in part , which means that part of the rule was struck down , part of the rule was returned to fcc for reconsideration , and part of the rule was upheld . in response to the court's ruling , in august 2004 , fcc issued another rule and nprm soliciting comment on alternatives that would be consistent with the court's ruling , as well as a rule implementing a 12-month plan to stabilize the telecommunications market while the new rules were being written . six months later , fcc issued a rule that the commission said was consistent with the court's guidance . this rule was also challenged and upheld by the d.c . circuit . several stakeholders told us that they learn which items fcc is about to vote on even though that information is not supposed to be released outside of fcc . fcc circulates information internally approximately 3 weeks before a public meeting to inform fcc staff of what is scheduled to be voted on at the public meeting . fcc rules prohibit the disclosure of this information to anyone outside of fcc . specifically , the information is considered nonpublic information and cannot be released by any fcc employee without authorization from the fcc chairman . fcc officials in the units responsible for the case study rules and fcc officials in the units that conducted most of the rulemakings between 2002 and 2006 all told us that this is nonpublic information , and that they do not release it outside of fcc . however , nine stakeholders — both those involved in the case studies we reviewed and other stakeholders with whom we spoke who regularly participate in fcc rulemakings — told us that they hear this information from both fcc bureau staff and commissioner staff . one stakeholder — representing a large organization that is involved in numerous rulemakings — told us that fcc staff call them and tell them what items are scheduled for a vote . in contrast , a number of other stakeholders told us that they do not learn this information and do not know which items are scheduled for a vote . these stakeholders , who generally represent consumer and public - interest groups , told us that they do not know when fcc is about to vote on a rulemaking or when it would be best to meet with fcc staff to make their arguments . in contrast , stakeholders who know which items have been scheduled for a vote know when to schedule a meeting with fcc commissioners and staff because they know when fcc is about to vote on a rulemaking . fcc officials told us that , for stakeholders to successfully make their case before fcc , “timing is everything.” specifically , if a stakeholder knows that a proposed rule has been scheduled for a vote and may be voted on in 3 weeks , that stakeholder can schedule a meeting with fcc officials before the rule is voted on .