our findings are preliminary . it was beyond the scope of our work for this statement to review the efforts underway in other military services . we discussed the facts contained in this statement with army officials , and we incorporated their comments where appropriate . our work , which began in july 2007 , is being conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in summary , the army continues to increase support to servicemembers undergoing medical treatment and disability evaluations , but faces challenges reaching or maintaining its goals . to provide a more integrated continuum of care for servicemembers , the army has developed a new organizational structure called warrior transition units . within each unit , a servicemember is assigned to a team of three key staff — a primary care manager , a nurse case manager , and a squad leader — who manage the servicemember's care . since september 2007 , the army has made considerable progress in staffing this structure , increasing the number of staff assigned to key positions by almost 75 percent . however , shortfalls continue to exist in some areas — 11 of the 32 u.s. warrior transition units had less than 90 percent of needed staff for one or more key positions . in addition , the army is facing other challenges , which include replacing borrowed staff in key positions with permanently assigned staff without disrupting the continuity of care for servicemembers and moving additional eligible servicemembers into the units without exacerbating existing staff shortfalls in some locations . furthermore , another emerging challenge is the army's ability to gather reliable and objective data on how well the units are meeting servicemembers' needs . some servicemembers may not recover sufficiently to return to duty . to support servicemembers who must undergo a fitness for duty assessment and disability evaluation , the army is reducing caseloads and expanding hiring of key staff responsible for helping servicemembers navigate the process . for example , for evaluation board liaisons who help servicemembers track the process , the army established an average caseload goal of 30 servicemembers per board liaison and hired more board liaisons to help meet this goal . however , almost one - third of treatment locations — which support about half of servicemembers in the disability evaluation process — have not met this goal . in addition , the army assigned 18 additional legal staff to support the disability evaluation process in june 2007 ; however , current staffing levels are still insufficient for widespread legal support early in the process . the army has other efforts underway to improve servicemembers' ability to navigate the disability process , such as conducting standardized briefings about the evaluation process , but reliable data on the effectiveness of these and other efforts are not yet available .