trustee . in some cases , gsa also leases space for the judiciary in private office buildings . the district courts are the trial courts of the federal court system and occupy the most judiciary space . there are 94 federal judicial districts — at least one for each state , the district of columbia , and four u.s. territories — organized into 12 regional circuits . each circuit has a court of appeals whose jurisdiction includes appeals from the district and bankruptcy courts located within the circuit , as well as appeals from decisions of federal administrative agencies . when a new courthouse is built , gsa — rather than the judiciary — decides whether to retain the old courthouse and , when the building is retained , determines how it should be reused . in determining whether to retain an old courthouse , gsa considers the building's condition ; its historic or architectural significance ; the judiciary's interest in occupying the building ; local market conditions , such as prevailing lease rates for commercial space ; and the existing and projected base of other prospective federal tenants within the area . according to gsa , if the agency determines that the government no longer needs the building , the agency generally uses the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 , as amended , ( property act ) to dispose of it , following the process shown in figure 1 . in addition , gsa has other authorities to dispose of old courthouses , such as the public buildings act of 1959 , as amended , which follow a different process . as shown in figure 1 , gsa may dispose of federal real property through public benefit conveyances ( pbc ) to state or local governments and certain nonprofits for approved public benefit uses or negotiated sale to state and local government entities , but not before screening the property for use by other federal agencies and homeless service providers if the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) has determined the property suitable for homeless assistance . if no interest is received from eligible public or nonprofit entities , the agency concludes that there is no public benefit use for the property and proceeds with plans to market it for competitive public sale . forty of the 66 old courthouses replaced or supplemented by new courthouses since 1993 were retained for reuse by the government . gsa disposed of most of the remaining old courthouses through pbcs or sales to state and local governments , eligible nonprofits , or private sector entities . as figure 2 illustrates , of the 40 retained old courthouses , 36 were being reused by the judiciary and other federal tenants ; 3 were vacant ; and 1 was largely closed for a major renovation . appendix ii contains detailed information about the 66 courthouses , including their status , disposal method , proceeds , and current uses or major tenants . among the retained and reused old courthouses , the judiciary had the largest share of space in 25 , some space in 5 , and occupied no space in the other 6 . the various judiciary tenants are sometimes co - located within the same old courthouse .