faa agreed with our recommendation . even as faa's strategic plan states the agency's focus on promoting the development of a skilled aviation maintenance workforce to integrate new technologies , the agency has acknowledged that the current curriculum requirements for amt schools and mechanic testing standards are outdated . faa officials , employers , and amt school officials we interviewed said the current curriculum requirements do not emphasize commonly used modern aircraft technologies , such as avionics and composite materials . over the years , faa has attempted several times to revise curriculum requirements for amt schools through the rulemaking process , and efforts to revise these requirements are ongoing through this process . faa is also currently updating the testing standards for mechanics . faa officials have noted several challenges to updating the curriculum requirements including competing demands at the department level and the extent of comments faa has received from stakeholders in response to proposed changes . in october 2015 , faa published a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) with the stated goal of updating the existing amt school curriculum . faa issued a supplemental nprm in april 2019 that expanded the scope of the nprm it issued in october 2015 . comments on the supplemental nprm were due in june 2019 . as of october 2019 , faa officials said they were in the process of reviewing the comments . faa officials told us that a final rule will be published some time toward the end of 2020 . a repairman certificate is only valid at the employer for which it was issued . non - certificated aviation maintenance workers include individuals who are supervised by certificated mechanics or repairmen in performing repair work . existing federal data shed light on key workforce characteristics such as the number of faa - certificated mechanics and repairmen , their age , sex , and education . specifically: as of december 2018 , about 295,000 individuals held a mechanic certificate and about 35,000 held a repairmen certificate . the median age of faa - certificated mechanics and repairmen was 54 years old , according to our analysis of faa data . three percent of all aviation maintenance certificate holders were women as of december 2018 . attending amt school was the most common pathway certificated individuals used to qualify for the faa tests to become mechanics . existing federal data also provide some information on employment characteristics such as the supply of certificated workers . however , neither the strategic plan nor the steering committee charter provides specific information on how faa plans to select and measure any efforts it undertakes related to these objectives . without routinely analyzing its own data or leveraging others' data , faa may not have certain information it needs to track or ensure progress toward its workforce development goals . we identified several areas in which improved data analysis , collection , or coordination could assist faa in measuring progress and understanding how to target its resources in support of its workforce related objectives .