these agreements are not generalizable to other components . appendix ii provides more information about our overall scope and methodology . the performance audit upon which this report is based was conducted from january 2017 to april 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we subsequently worked with dod and treasury from april 2018 to july 2018 to prepare this unclassified version of the original sensitive report for public release . this public version was also prepared in accordance with these standards . cfius was established by executive order in 1975 to monitor the effect of and to coordinate u.s. policy on foreign investment in the united states . the cfius process may conclude after consensus is reached by all agencies and the co - lead agencies certify to members of congress that there are no unresolved national security concerns , and the transaction receives safe harbor . at the end of the national security investigation , if the committee does not reach consensus that there are no unresolved national security concerns or the committee concludes by consensus that a foreign investment threatens to impair national security and the threat cannot be mitigated , cfius elevates the transaction to the president . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the deputy assistant secretary of defense for mibp , and the secretary of the treasury . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or makm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi . the number of transactions cfius reviewed from 2012 through 2017 more than doubled , increasing from 114 transactions to 238 transactions . during that time , the number of transactions dod was responsible for co - leading increased by about 57 percent , to 99 transactions in calendar year 2017 . from 2016 through 2017 alone , these increases resulted in dod reviewing almost 65 additional transactions , and co - leading about 30 additional transactions , a substantial increase in workload in one year . dod also experienced an increase in the cumulative number of mitigation agreements it was responsible for monitoring , more than doubling from 39 in 2012 to 84 in 2017 . although the information provided in this report is more limited , this report addresses the same objectives and uses the same methodology as the sensitive report .