since that time , the definition has evolved . for example , nasdr and nyse use two definitions of day trading in the recent amendments to their margin rules . we discussed changes in the markets , such as decimalization , and how the move to decimals has impacted day traders . we also discussed common trends among day traders and day trading firms . in addition , we collected information on changes specific to individual firm operations . compared with the written supervisory procedure and net capital rule violations , fewer examinations had short sale , advertising , and margin and customer - lending rule violations . the short sale rule violations included failing to properly indicate trades as “short” ( sale ) or “long” ( purchase ) , effecting short sales below the price at which the last sale was reported or on a zero - minus tick , and improperly marking short orders as long without first making an affirmative determination that the securities were in the trader's account or ready to be delivered prior to settlement . although examiners continued to find some advertising violations involving omissions of fact and misstatements , many of the violations involved failure to properly maintain advertising files and other documentation requirements . for example , firms were cited for failure to document advertising approvals and make required submissions to nasdr . the customer lending and margin violations involved failure to secure additional funds to cover margin calls and allowing traders to trade when the regulation t margin requirement had not been met . numerous other deficiencies were also cited , including failure to inform customers who access selectnet that nasd monitors trading activity and that the customers can be subject to prosecution for violations of securities laws , improper registration issues such as failure to properly register branches , and improper registration of traders . of the sec examinations reviewed , 34 resulted in deficiency or violation letters , 3 indicated that no violations had been found , and 7 resulted in a referral to an sro or to sec's division of enforcement . of the nasdr examinations we reviewed , 39 resulted in a letter of caution , 5 resulted in a compliance conference , 12 were filed without action , and at least 2 resulted in formal complaints or referrals to sec or nasdr enforcement . since the enforcement actions announced in february 2000 , nasdr and sec have settled several disciplinary actions against day trading firms and their principals , including fines , civil money penalties , censures , and the expulsion of one firm from the business . sec brought several enforcement actions related to day trading in june 2001 . first , sec instituted and settled proceedings against jpr capital corporation and several of the firm's current and former executives . sec found that the firm had violated federal margin lending rules , among other things . all of the respondents to the proceedings consented to sec's order without admitting or denying the allegations , agreed to pay civil money penalties , and consented to other relief .