your cooperation is appreciated . kral , administrator for the office of homeland security , at ( 202 ) 727-5934 . in addition , ernie hazera , joseph byrns , chelsa kenney , laurie latuda , jeanine lavender , amy rosewarne , susan sato , and amelia shachoy made key contributions to this report . the government accountability office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . what features of federal programs enhance regional emergency preparedness coordination ? how does regional coordination for emergency preparedness in the ncr incorporate features from other metropolitan areas and federal programs ? we selected six metropolitan areas in which to examine regional coordination: dallas - fort worth , los angeles , new york city , philadelphia , the san francisco bay area , and tampa - st. petersburg . we selected these locations based on such factors as their vulnerability to terror events indicated by the presence of potential targets , such as critical infrastructure and important federal and commercial facilities . we also selected metropolitan areas with a large number of regional jurisdictions that indicated a level of complexity in approaching emergency preparedness from a regional perspective . within each area , we examined certain federal programs - – such as metropolitan planning organizations ( mpo ) , regional estuary preservation efforts , and uasi , which require regional coordination . we included in our analysis nonemergency preparedness programs , such as transportation planning ( involving mpos ) that have existed for decades and have developed their own regional organizations and planning practices . examining such programs can provide insights into how to structure regional homeland security efforts , which are relatively new , in the aftermath of the september 11 , 2001 , terror attacks . we met with and obtained documentation from mayors' offices , city and / or county offices of emergency management , state emergency management offices , regional planning councils , or mpos ; other regional bodies , offices , and task forces ; and program directors for selected programs that require coordination . we also contacted officials of the responsible federal agencies , including dhs , the department of transportation ( dot ) , and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) . we reviewed relevant reports , studies , and guidelines on homeland security and emergency preparedness . we conducted our review from july 2003 to september 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . see appendix i for more details on our scope and methodology . historically , the american governance system , divided into federal , state , and local jurisdictions , does not provide a natural vehicle for addressing public policy issues from a regional , multijurisdictional perspective . the autonomy of local jurisdictions and competing priorities within and among them can make regional coordination difficult . efforts that seek to overcome these challenges to coordinate regionally must take into account the different operational structures and civic traditions of states and municipalities . for example , states differ in their relationship to local governments and their promotion of regional infrastructures .