we did not review data for any of the other measures . when we visited the two centers participating in the pilots , center officials showed us documentation they were using to make the process more efficient and consistent . for example , for the 504 pilot , the sacramento center developed standardized letters to send to certified development companies in situations where the center receives an incomplete application package from a company . according to a center official , some district offices spend a lot of time making telephone calls to the development companies requesting the necessary data to complete the processing . however , by using the letters , the official said the center is saving time because it stops processing the application until it receives the needed information , and in the meantime it can continue processing applications that are complete . one official representing certified development companies told us that the companies participating in the pilot initiative for sba's 504 program are pleased with the results of the pilot . officials representing 7 ( a ) lenders said that some lenders might not be in favor of centralization because they have good working relationships with the local sba district office and would prefer to continue working directly with them . sba transformation efforts have been impeded and could continue to be impeded by budget uncertainties and constraints . sba officials stated that due to inflation and increases in employee compensation and benefits , available operating funds had been declining since 2001 as shown in figure 3 . therefore , sba requested specific funding for its transformation . according to sba officials , the agency expected to start its pilot initiative in july 2002 with funds from its 2002 operating budget and then expand the initiative in phase two of its transformation , 6 months later , with funds specifically requested for transformation in its 2003 budget . but sba delayed the start of the pilot until march 2003 due to a number of uncertainties about its budget . sba officials explained that language in its appropriations bills requires that sba notify the appropriations committees 15 days prior to reprogramming its funds for relocating an office or employees , or reorganizing offices . in the summer of 2002 , sba notified the appropriations committees about its intent to go forward with the pilots . however , sba was told that it should first negotiate with its union before moving forward . although sba reached agreement with its union , starting the initiative still remained an issue for sba because , according to officials , it was too late to use 2002 operating funds as it initially planned . while sba then planned to use 2003 operating funds to start the pilot initiative , officials said that the government's 2003 continuing resolution further delayed the start because without an approved operating budget , sba did not know the portion of its operating budget that would be available for transformation .