( see fig . serious accidents resulting in injuries , deaths , and property damage continue to occur . my remarks center on work we have recently completed on fra's overall safety oversight strategy . specifically , we examined how fra ( 1 ) focuses its efforts on the highest priority risks related to train accidents in planning its safety oversight , ( 2 ) identifies safety problems on railroad systems in carrying out its oversight , and ( 3 ) assesses the impact of its oversight efforts on safety . our findings are discussed in more detail in our report , which was released in january . our work was based on a review of laws , regulations , and fra plans and guidance as well as discussions with fra officials and with a range of external stakeholders , including railroads , unions , and state railroad safety organizations . we reviewed fra inspection and enforcement data for 1996 through 2005 , the latest year for which complete data were available at the time of our review . in addition , we examined risk management principles and safety oversight approaches used by other modal administrations within the department of transportation and other organizations that have similar safety missions in order to determine their possible application to fra . our work focused on fra oversight efforts to reduce the rate of train accidents rather than those to reduce highway - rail crossing and trespassing accidents because ( 1 ) the department of transportation's inspector general has recently assessed efforts to reduce highway - rail crossing accidents and ( 2 ) trespassing accidents primarily involve issues not related to railroad safety performance . as part of our review , we assessed internal controls and the reliability of the data elements needed for this engagement and determined that the data elements were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we conducted our work from november 2005 through january 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . a framework for risk management based on industry best practices and other criteria that we have developed divides risk management into five major phases: ( 1 ) setting strategic goals and objectives , and determining constraints ; ( 2 ) assessing risks ; ( 3 ) evaluating alternatives for addressing these risks ; ( 4 ) selecting the appropriate alternatives ; and ( 5 ) implementing the alternatives and monitoring the progress made and results achieved . other transportation oversight organizations have developed and implemented approaches for overseeing industries' overall management of safety risks . in particular , during the last 10 years , apta , phmsa , and transport canada have developed and implemented such oversight approaches for u.s. commuter railroads , u.s. pipelines , and canadian railroads , respectively . this approach to oversight enables fra inspectors and managers to identify a wide range of safety problems . inspectors identify specific compliance problems — conditions that do not meet fra's standards — at sites they visit , by citing defects . inspectors cite violations of safety standards for those defects that they believe warrant enforcement action .