these costs are included as regular operations . finally , according to the officials at agencies we contacted , none of them delayed , deferred , or canceled any programs or activities as a result of resources being used for the fourth of july events for 2016 through 2019 . we provided a draft of this report to the eop , dod , department of the interior , department of homeland security , capitol police , architect of the capitol , dc government , si , american red cross , department of energy , hhs , washington metropolitan area transit authority , department of transportation , and department of justice for review and comment . the eop , dod , department of the interior , dc government , washington metropolitan area transit authority , and department of justice provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . the department of homeland security , capitol police , architect of the capitol , si , department of energy , hhs , and department of transportation informed us that they had no comments on the draft report and the american red cross did not provide comments . as agreed with your offices , unless you publically announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 8 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the executive office of the president , the secretary of the interior , the acting secretary of homeland security , the secretary of defense , the secretary of health and human services , and other interested parties . appendix i describes our scope and methodology in more detail . we conducted this performance audit from july 2019 through june 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . each year more than a dozen federal agencies and state and local jurisdictions were involved in the fourth of july events on the national mall . some were involved in the overall planning , production , and execution of the events as a whole , while others played specific roles in only one event . figure 1 shows the overall geographic layout of each event that occurred on the national mall . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2989 or kociolekk@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii .