i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . fsoc has also developed a consultation framework for the agencies involved in rulemakings . in a november 2011 report , we noted that although fsoc's road map and consultation framework were a positive development in facilitating coordination , they had limited for example , the consultation framework does not provide , usefulness.nor according to fsoc staff is it intended to provide , any specifics about staff responsibilities or processes to facilitate coordination . it also does not describe when interagency coordination is required or what happens when rules conflict with or duplicate each other . we recommended that fsoc work with federal financial regulators to ( 1 ) develop formal coordination policies that would clarify issues such as the timing of coordination , the process for soliciting and addressing comments , and fsoc's role in facilitating coordination and ( 2 ) more fully incorporate the key practices for successful collaboration that we have previously identified . the dodd - frank act gave fsoc the authority to designate financial market utilities ( fmus ) as systemically important if fsoc determines that the failure of an fmu or a disruption in its functioning could threaten u.s. financial stability . similarly , the dodd - frank act provided fsoc with the authority to designate nonbank financial companies for supervision by the federal reserve under its enhanced prudential standards . the act stipulates that fsoc may designate these companies if material financial distress at that company , or the nature , scope , size , scale , concentration , interconnectedness , or mix of the activities of the company could pose a threat to u.s. financial stability . while individual designations are not made through rulemakings , in an effort to be more transparent fsoc has issued rulemakings for designating fmus as systematically important and designating nonbank firms for federal reserve supervision . positioned to judge which potential threats will benefit from interagency discussions . fsoc and ofr could improve their efforts to identify risks and threats by collecting and sharing a common set of financial indicators . systematic collection , analysis , and sharing of financial indicators of key risk factors such as leverage , liquidity , concentrations , underwriting standards , collateral quality , and delinquencies should provide insight into vulnerabilities affecting particular types of financial intermediaries or reveal patterns occurring across the financial system . ofr , through a mechanism such as the financial stability monitor , could play a role in collecting , analyzing , and reporting on these indicators . to improve fsoc's approaches for monitoring threats to financial stability , we recommended that fsoc develop an approach that included systematic sharing of key financial risk indicators across fsoc members and member agencies to assist in identifying potential threats for further monitoring or analysis . in addition , fsoc does not have sufficient processes for identifying or prioritizing potential emerging threats to u.s. financial stability for its annual reports . fsoc's annual reporting process is an ongoing responsibility which , in the absence of a strategic plan , functions as its major strategic planning document and method for communicating with congress and the public , especially regarding potential emerging threats to u.s. financial stability .