, two - engine ) testing . for example: the government has limited ability to influence agreement partners in their approach . the government lacks additional management tools ( beyond performance payments at milestones ) to incentivize partners to meet technical and schedule performance . given the intended goals of the project and the availability of alternative vehicles to deliver goods to the space station when the cots agreements were signed , nasa was willing to accept the risks associated with the disadvantages of using a space act agreement . as the project has progressed , however , and these alternatives are no longer viable or available , nasa has become less willing to accept the risks involved . as a result , the agency took steps aimed at risk mitigation , primarily through additional funding . i would like to point out that neither space act agreements nor more traditional far contracts guarantee positive outcomes . further , many of the advantages and disadvantages identified by nasa for using a space act agreement can also be present when using far - based contracts , depending on how the instrument is managed or written . for example , both a far contract and a space act agreement can provide for cost sharing and the government also has the ability to terminate a far contract or a space act agreement if it is dissatisfied with performance . overall technical risks associated with cygnus development are expected to be reduced through additional software and avionics tests . milestones completed thus far include early mission analyses and reviews , as well as delivery of mission hardware . for example , space act agreements may have more limited options for oversight as compared to other science mission and human spaceflight development efforts that are accomplished under more traditional far contracts . for completing the first 5 new milestones , orbital has received $69 million , with $49 million remaining to be paid . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . cots program and orbital officials also noted technical challenges as reasons for milestone delays . for example , orbital officials said there are several critical taurus ii engine and stage one system tests that need to be completed by the end of the summer , but that the risk inherent in these tests is mitigated through an incremental approach to testing . several factors contributed to the delay in spacex's first demonstration mission readiness review and demonstration mission . these factors include , among others , delays associated with ( 1 ) launching the maiden falcon 9 ( non - cots mission ) , such as falcon 9 software and database development ; ( 2 ) suppliers ; ( 3 ) design instability and production ; ( 4 ) dragon spacecraft testing and software development ; and ( 5 ) obtaining flight safety system approval . for example , spacex encountered welding issues during production of the dragon propellant tanks and also had to redesign the dragon's battery . in preparing for its second cots demonstration flight , spacex has experienced additional design , development , and production delays .