gao - 16-555 . according to usao officials , one of the two prosecutions resulted in a conviction . native americans are a vulnerable population . for example , according to u.s. census bureau statistics , in 2010 , 28 percent of native americans were living in poverty , compared to 15 percent of the general population . also , according to the 2010 national intimate partner and sexual violence survey , conducted by the centers for disease control and prevention , about 27 percent of native american women have been raped in their lifetime compared to 18 percent of women , overall . furthermore , according to several academic studies , native americans have endured a succession of traumatic events that have had lasting consequences for community members . for example , native americans have been subjected to a number of assimilation policies — including boarding schools , relocation , involuntary sterilization , and forced adoptions , which have disrupted family , kinship , community structures , and governance . the historical trauma that the native american community has faced is critical to understanding the vulnerability of today's native men , women , and children to sex and labor trafficking in the united states . you asked us to research human trafficking in indian country and of native americans , in general , including demographic information on victims , services available to victims , and efforts to increase prosecutions . § 1602 ( b ) . this report focuses on federal efforts to address human trafficking in indian country or of native americans regardless of location . interviewed officials from the office of the deputy attorney general , federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , civil rights division / criminal section , criminal division / child exploitation and obscenity section , executive office for u.s . attorneys , and the justice management division . we identified these agencies as having responsibility to investigate and prosecute human trafficking based on our prior work . to address the second objective , we reviewed fiscal year 2014 and 2015 human trafficking grant programs identified through our prior human trafficking work to determine which of these grant programs could be used to address human trafficking in indian country or of native americans regardless of location . to identify any additional grant programs for which funding was awarded in fiscal year 2016 that could be used to address human trafficking in indian country or of native americans regardless of location , we reviewed grant solicitations on doj's and the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) websites and interviewed relevant grant officials . we determined that a grant program would be relevant for the purposes of our review if the grant solicitation ( 1 ) explicitly identified combatting human trafficking or assisting human trafficking victims as an allowable use and identified tribal entities as eligible recipients or ( 2 ) exclusively identified native american crime victims ( regardless of the type of crime ) as eligible beneficiaries . it is possible that there are some programs that were not identified by granting agencies or by our analysis of public records .