( see fig . however , hi trust fund solvency does not measure the growing cost of the part b supplementary medical insurance ( smi ) component of medicare , which covers outpatient services and is financed through general revenues and beneficiary premiums . by the end of the 75- year projection period , smi will represent almost half of total estimated medicare costs . if federal medicaid spending is also considered , an even more complete picture of the future health care entitlement burden emerges . including medicaid , federal health care costs will grow to 14.5 percent of gdp from today's 3.5 percent . taken together , the two major government health programs — medicare and medicaid — represent an unsustainable burden on future generations . in addition , this figure reflects only the federal government's share — the burden of states' medicaid matching costs on state budgets is another fiscal challenge . according to a recent national governors association statement , increased medicaid spending has already made it difficult , if not impossible , for states to increase funding for other priorities . when viewed from the perspective of the federal budget and the economy , the growth in health care spending will become increasingly unsustainable over the longer term.our message remains the same as in my earlier appearances before this committee: to move into the future with no changes in federal health and retirement programs is to envision a very different role for the federal government in the future . assuming , for example , that congress and the president adhere to the often - stated goal of saving the social security surpluses , our long - term simulations show a world by 2030 in which social security , medicare , and medicaid absorb most of the available revenues within the federal budget . under this scenario , these programs would require more than three - quarters of total federal revenue even without adding a prescription drug benefit . ( see fig . little room would be left for other federal spending priorities such as national defense , education , and law enforcement . absent changes in the structure of medicare and social security , sometime during the 2040s government would do nothing but mail checks to the elderly and their health care providers . accordingly , substantive reform of the medicare and social security programs remains critical to recapturing our future fiscal flexibility . as our long - term budget simulations show , this is true even if the entire projected surplus is saved . ( see fig . higher cost estimates are not the only reason why early action to address the daunting challenges of medicare is critical . first , ample time is required to phase in the reforms needed to put this program on a more sustainable footing before the baby boomers retire . second , timely action to bring costs down pays large fiscal dividends for the program and the budget . the high projected growth of medicare in the coming years means that the earlier reform begins , the greater the savings will be as a result of the effects of compounding .