the workforce report is being released today . humanitarian and economic development assistance is an integral part of u.s. global security strategy , particularly as the united states seeks to diminish the underlying conditions of poverty and corruption that may be linked to instability and terrorism . in fiscal year 2003 , usaid expects to obligate about $13 billion and manage programs in about 160 countries . agency staff often work in difficult environments and under evolving program demands . more will be demanded of usaid's staff as they implement large - scale relief and reconstruction programs in afghanistan and iraq while continuing traditional long - term development assistance programs . as a result , it is essential that usaid develop a strategic approach to its workforce planning so that it can identify and attain the essentials skills it needs to accomplish its goals . it is also important that usaid identify and report accurate costs on administering its foreign aid programs . my statement today will cover these two broad areas . i will focus most of my statement on our review of usaid's workforce planning . i will discuss some of usaid's human capital challenges , including its recent efforts to staff missions in afghanistan and iraq , and the status of its efforts to develop a strategic workforce planning system . regarding usaid's operating expense account , i will focus on how the agency's reporting of operating expenses does not always capture the full cost of administering foreign assistance . in 1993 , we reported that usaid had not adequately managed changes in its overseas workforce and recommended that usaid develop a comprehensive workforce planning system to better identify staffing needs and requirements . in the mid - 1990s , usaid reorganized its activities around strategic objectives and began reporting in a results - oriented format but had made little progress in personnel reforms . the accompanying senate report noted that usaid's “cost of doing business” would be better managed if these funds were separately appropriated . congress authorized usaid's separate operating expense account the following year . usaid's criteria for determining the expenses to be paid from operating expense funds are based on guidance it has received from congress as well as its assessment of who benefits from a particular activity — the agency or the intended program recipient . for example , congressional reports in the late 1970s directed usaid to fund the costs of all full - time staff in permanent positions from the operating expense account . usaid faces a number of challenges in developing and implementing a strategic workforce plan . its overseas missions operate in a changing foreign policy environment often under very difficult conditions . usaid's workforce , particularly its u.s. direct - hire foreign service officers , has decreased over the years ; but in recent years program dollars and the number of countries with usaid activities have increased . these factors have combined to produce certain human capital vulnerabilities that have implications for the agency's ability to effectively carry out and oversee foreign assistance . a strategic approach to workforce planning and management can help usaid identify the workforce it needs and develop strategies for attaining this workforce that will last throughout successive administrations .