only to those who are eligible . to better understand these issues , we examined: ( 1 ) how administrative to better understand these issues , we examined: ( 1 ) how administrative costs are defined in selected programs and what rules govern federal and costs are defined in selected programs and what rules govern federal and state participation in funding these costs ; ( 2 ) what is known about the state participation in funding these costs ; ( 2 ) what is known about the amounts of federal and state administrative spending for selected amounts of federal and state administrative spending for selected programs and how they have changed over time ; and ( 3 ) what programs and how they have changed over time ; and ( 3 ) what opportunities exist at the federal level to help states balance cost savings with program effectiveness and integrity . as agreed with your office , we focused our study on seven key programs: adoption assistance , child care & development fund ( ccdf ) , child support enforcement ( cse ) , the food stamp program , foster care , temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) , and unemployment insurance ( ui ) . these programs are among the largest programs serving vulnerable populations and each has annual federal outlays of over $1 billion . each of the programs also is funded in part through state contributions . to address all of our research questions , we interviewed federal officials from each of the programs and the office of management and budget ( omb ) , and we conducted state and local interviews in california , maryland , michigan , ohio , and south carolina . we selected these states to provide a range of total program spending and share of spending on administration as well as a mixture of state and county administrative structures , urban and rural demographics , and geographic location . although our selection includes a range of states , our findings are not generalizable beyond the states included in our study . in addition , to address our first research question , we reviewed laws and regulations on definitions of administrative costs and federal - state participation in funding these costs for the selected programs . we also reviewed relevant circulars issued by the omb . to address our second question , we analyzed administrative spending data , as defined for financial reporting purposes by program laws and regulations , for each program for fiscal years 2000-2004 , including federal and state shares of spending . fiscal year 2004 data were the most recent data available for all seven programs at the time of our review . we assessed the reliability of the administrative spending data by interviewing ( 1 ) agency officials knowledgeable about the data and ( 2 ) state officials in the five states we visited knowledgeable about the data as reported to the federal government . we also reviewed state single audit reports and talked to state auditors in the states we visited to identify any known problems with the administrative spending data or the technology systems that store the data . our reviews and discussions did not identify significant problems with the data .