va has begun implementing some cares decisions . specifically , va is currently in varying stages ( eg , planning or construction ) of implementing 34 of the major capital projects that were identified in the cares process . eight major capital cares projects are complete . although va is moving forward with the implementation of some cares decisions , we previously reported that a number of va officials and stakeholders , including representatives from veteran service organizations and local community groups , view the implementation process as too lengthy and lacking transparency . for instance , stakeholders in big spring , texas , noted that it took almost 2 years for the secretary to decide whether to close the facility . during this period , there was a great deal of uncertainty about the future of the facility . as a result , there were problems in attracting and retaining staff at the facility , according to network and local va officials . we also previously reported that a number of stakeholders we spoke with indicated that the implementation of cares decisions has been influenced by competing stakeholders' interests — thereby undermining the process . in its february 2004 report , the cares commission also noted that stakeholder and community pressure can act as a barrier to change , by pressuring va to maintain specific services or facilities . in 2007 , we reported that va does not use , or in some cases does not have , performance measures to assess its progress in implementing cares or whether cares is achieving the intended results . interested representatives of the homeless submit to the department of health and human services ( hhs ) a written notice of their intent to apply for a property for homeless use during the 60-day holding period . in addition , performance measures can be used by stakeholders , such as veterans' service organizations or local communities , to hold agencies accountable for results . although va has over 100 performance measures to monitor other agency programs and activities , these measures either do not directly link to the cares goals or va does not use them to centrally monitor the implementation and impact of cares decisions . we also reported that va lacked critical data , including data on the cost of and timelines for implementing cares projects and the potential savings that can be generated by realigning resources . given the importance of the cares process , we previously recommended that va develop performance measures for cares . such measures would allow va officials to monitor the implementation and impact of cares decisions as well as allow stakeholders to hold va accountable for results . in responding to our recommendation , va created the cares implementation monitoring working group . this working group has identified performance measures for cares and the group will monitor the implementation and impact of cares decisions . va has a variety of legal authorities available to help it manage real property . these authorities include enhanced - use leases ( eul ) , sharing agreements , and outleases . ( see table 3 for descriptions of these authorities. ) va uses these authorities to help reduce underutilized and vacant property .