no further action has been taken . another investigation , carried out in 1999 , involved a native american tribe selling cigarettes on the internet directly to consumers and other tribes . the tribe was not paying state tobacco excise taxes or notifying states of cigarette sales to other than wholesalers , as required by the jenkins act . atf referred the case to the state of arizona , where it was resolved with no criminal charges filed by obtaining the tribe's agreement to comply with jenkins act requirements . a third atf investigation of an internet vendor for cigarette smuggling and jenkins act violations was ongoing at the time of our work . on january 31 , 2002 , the commissioner of the connecticut department of revenue services sent a letter to the director of atf requesting assistance in addressing the growing problem of internet and mail order cigarette sales without jenkins act compliance . the atf director responded to the commissioner by letter dated april 5 , 2002 . the atf director expressed concern about growing internet cigarette sales and the impact on collection of state cigarette excise taxes . the director highlighted three initiatives atf is planning to help address this problem . atf will solicit the cooperation of tobacco manufacturers and determine who is selling cigarettes to internet and mail order companies . atf believes the tobacco manufacturers will render support and place their distributors on notice that some of their customers' business practices may be defrauding states of tax revenues . the director said atf will remind the tobacco manufacturers of jenkins act requirements and that sales involving native americans are not exempt . atf will contact shippers / couriers to determine if they have any prohibitions against the shipment of cigarettes . atf will also inform them of the likelihood that some of their customers are selling cigarettes on the internet and violating the jenkins act , as well as potentially committing mail fraud , wire fraud , and money laundering offenses . atf will request that the common carriers be more vigilant and conscientious regarding their customers and the laws they could be violating . according to the director , atf will provide technical assistance to the state of connecticut or members of the u.s. congress working with connecticut on a legislative response to address the issue of tobacco sales on the internet . atf officials said that because atf does not have primary jenkins act jurisdiction , it has not committed resources to investigating violations of the act . however , the officials said strong consideration should be given to transferring primary jurisdiction for investigating jenkins act violations from the fbi to atf . according to atf , it is responsible for , and has committed resources to , regulating the distribution of tobacco products and investigating trafficking in contraband tobacco products . a change in jenkins act jurisdiction would give atf comprehensive authority at the federal level to assist states in preventing the interstate distribution of cigarettes resulting in lost state cigarette taxes since atf already has investigative authority over the ccta , according to the officials .