preference programs have proliferated over time . in response to differing statutory requirements , agencies pursue different approaches to monitoring the various criteria set for programs . the result is a lack of systematic review and little to no reporting on impact . u.s. trade preferences have evolved into an increasingly complex array of programs . congress generally considers these programs separately , partly because they have disparate termination dates . many countries participate in more than one of these programs . of the 137 countries and territories eligible for preference programs , as of january 1 , 2007 , 78 benefit from more than one program , and 34 were eligible for more than two programs . while there is overlap in various aspects of trade preference programs , each program is currently considered separately by congress based on its distinct timetable and expiration date . typically the focus has been on issues relevant to specific programs , such as counternarcotics cooperation efforts in the case of atpa , or phasing out benefits for advanced developing countries in the case of gsp . as a result , until last year's hearing before this committee , congressional deliberations have not provided for cross - programmatic consideration or oversight . many developing countries have expressed concern about their inability to take advantage of trade preferences because they lack the capacity to participate in international trade . sub - saharan africa has been the primary focus of u.s. trade capacity - building efforts linked to the preference programs , with the united states allocating $394 million in fiscal year 2006 to that continent . although agoa authorizing legislation refers to trade capacity assistance , ustr officials noted that congress has not appropriated funds specifically for that purpose . however , ustr has used the legislative language as leverage with u.s. agencies that have development assistance funding to target greater resources to trade capacity building . in other regions of the world , u.s. trade capacity building assistance has less linkage to preference programs . separate reporting for the various preference programs makes it difficult to measure progress toward achieving the fundamental and shared goal of promoting economic development . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in an effort to promote and achieve various u.s. foreign policy objectives , trade preference programs have expanded in number and scope over the past 3 decades . the purpose of these programs is to foster economic development through increased trade with qualified beneficiary countries while not harming u.s. domestic producers . trade preference programs extend unilateral tariff reductions to over 130 developing countries . currently , the united states offers the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) and three regional programs , the caribbean basin initiative ( cbi ) , the andean trade preference act ( atpa ) , and the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ) . special preferences for haiti became part of cbi with enactment of the haitian hemispheric opportunity through partnership encouragement ( hope ) act in december 2006 . the regional programs cover additional products but have more extensive criteria for participation than the gsp program .