gao 06-618 . washington , d.c.: september 6 , 2006 . aviation security: tsa oversight of checked baggage screening procedures could be strengthened . gao - 06-869 . washington , d.c.: july 28 , 2006 . i for a list of participants. ) recognizing that risk management helps policymakers make informed decisions , congress and the administration have charged federal agencies to use a risk - based approach to prioritize resource investments . nevertheless , federal agencies often lack comprehensive risk management strategies that are well integrated with program , budget , and investment decisions . to provide a basis for analyzing these strategies , gao has developed a risk management framework based on industry best practices and other criteria . this framework , shown in figure 1 , divides risk management into five major phases: ( 1 ) setting strategic goals and objectives , and determining constraints ; ( 2 ) assessing risks ; ( 3 ) evaluating alternatives for addressing these risks ; ( 4 ) selecting the appropriate alternatives ; and ( 5 ) implementing the alternatives and monitoring the progress made and results achieved . our work has indicated that while dhs is making progress in applying risk management principles to guide its operational and resource allocation decisions , challenges remain . gao has assessed dhs's risk management efforts across a number of mission areas — including transportation security , port security , border security , critical infrastructure protection , and immigration enforcement — and found that risk management principles have been considered and applied to varying degrees . for example , in june 2005 we reported that the coast guard had developed security plans for seaports , facilities , and vessels based on risk assessments . however , other components had not always utilized such an approach . as we reported in august 2007 , while the transportation security administration has developed tools and processes to assess risk within and across transportation modes , it had not fully implemented these efforts to drive resource allocation decisions . moreover , in february 2007 , we reported that dhs faced substantial challenges related to strengthening its efforts to use information on risk to inform strategies and investment decisions , for example , by integrating a consideration of risk into annual budget and program review cycles . we also reported that while integrating a risk management approach into decision - making processes is challenging for any organization , it is particularly difficult for dhs given its diverse set of responsibilities . the department is responsible for dealing with all - hazards homeland security risks — ranging from natural disasters to industrial accidents and terrorist attacks . the history of natural disasters has provided experts with extensive historical data that are used to assess risks . by contrast , data about terrorist attacks are comparatively limited , and risk management is complicated by the asymmetric and adaptive nature of our enemies .