irs . to further identify tax - filing characteristics associated with tax - time financial product use and trends , we also used data from a probability sample of 2 percent of all electronically filed tax returns from irs for tax years 2014 , 2015 , and 2016 . in 2016 , the sample size was 2,952,418 , representing a population of 147,625,598 tax returns . according to irs , the sample is representative of all electronically filed tax returns for the relevant tax years . in this sample , irs provided data on the following variables: tax filing method , including online ( self - filed using tax software ) or through a paid practitioner ( including tax preparers with physical storefronts ) . taxpayer used free filing services from irs , including the free file program and free fillable forms . tax filing status , including single , married , and head of household . disbursement options for tax refunds ( direct deposit or paper check ) or tax balance due . tax refund amount . tax year . tax - time financial product use , including refund anticipation loans , refund anticipation checks , or no tax - time financial products . in tax year 2016 , we estimated that about 18 percent of taxpayers used a tax - time financial product , plus or minus less than 1 percentage point . we also used irs data from the statistics of income division for tax year 2016 to assess the geographical concentration of product use at the zip - code level . zip code data from the irs statistics of income division are based on population data that was filed and process by irs in tax year 2016 . due to some data suppression from irs for privacy purposes , zip codes with less than 100 tax returns are excluded from the data . as a result , in 2016 the total returns represented in the irs zip code data are 145,302,140 and the number of tax returns with a tax - time financial product was 21,654,760 , meaning about 15 percent of tax filing units in these data used a tax - time financial product . regression analysis using fdic data . using fdic data , we conducted a multivariate regression analysis to examine the relationship between each explanatory variable and tax - time financial product use . specifically , we estimated multivariate logistic regression models . regression models allow us to test significant relationships between economic and demographic variables and the likelihood of using tax - time financial products , while controlling for other factors . we used logistic regression models because our dependent variable is binary . the dependent variable represents whether a household used tax - time financial products . we collapsed “no” and “did not know / refused” into a single category for our regression analysis , so that the dependent variable is equal to 1 if the household used tax - time financial products and 0 otherwise . logistic regressions allow the relationships between various characteristics and tax - time financial product usage to be described as odds ratios .