iii. ) australia was the only country to export milk protein concentrates in each of the 10 years . figure 2 shows the growth in imports for each major exporter and other countries from 1995 to 1999 . the share of imports among the six largest exporting countries rose from 75 to 95 percent during this 5-year period . although the u.s. customs service does not categorize its data on milk protein concentrate imports according to the manufacturing process used , representatives of australian and new zealand exporters assured us that their milk protein concentrate exports were all made using ultra filtration . conversely , canadian government officials said all of their country's milk protein concentrate exports to the united states are made by blending milk proteins . u.s. and foreign industry executives told us that u.s. milk protein concentrate imports rose rapidly in recent years primarily because of ( 1 ) the relationship between the u.s. and international prices of milk protein , especially nonfat dry milk , and ( 2 ) the growth of the u.s. nutritional foods industry and many other new products using milk protein concentrates . according to these executives , international milk prices were below u.s. milk prices in recent years , giving u.s. dairy food manufacturers a financial incentive to substitute imported milk protein concentrates for domestic milk in products such as nonstandardized cheese . this price differential primarily stimulated u.s. imports of milk protein concentrates having lower percentages of protein — between 40 and 56 percent . more recently , u.s. demand for these milk protein concentrates has decreased , according to an australian exporter , because the international price of milk protein is near the u.s. price . the strong growth of the u.s. nutritional foods industry has created new demand for high - protein milk protein concentrates that are 70- to 85- percent protein . representatives of australia and new zealand exporters told us that this industry grew out of extensive research and development to create nutritional supplements for athletes , the elderly , and health conscious individuals . ( see app . because high - protein milk protein concentrates are often customized for use in specific end products , their producers and exporters can sell them at higher prices than the equivalent amount of domestic milk protein , the exporters said . despite their higher prices , the demand for these specialized high - protein products in the united states is strong . industry executives noted that high - protein milk protein concentrate imports have not displaced domestic milk supplies because they are filling the growing demand for new nutritional products . in addition , a trade association representative and an academic expert noted that economic disincentives have prevented u.s. production of dry milk protein concentrates . federal agencies and industry trade associations do not collect data on u.s. companies' use of imported milk protein concentrates because this information is considered proprietary . according to milk protein concentrate exporters , u.s. cheese , frozen dessert , bakery , and nutritional foods industries primarily use the dry milk protein concentrate imports .