359 of pub . 106-346 in october 2000 , which provides the current mandate for telework in the executive branch of the federal government by requiring each executive agency to establish a policy under which eligible employees may participate in telework.in this law , congress required each executive branch agency to establish a telework policy under which eligible employees of the agency may participate in telework to the maximum extent possible without diminishing employee performance . the conference report language further explained that an eligible employee is any satisfactorily performing employee of the agency whose job may typically be performed at least 1 day per week by teleworking . in addition , the conference report required the office of personnel management ( opm ) to evaluate the effectiveness of the program and report to congress . the legislative framework has provided both the general services administration ( gsa ) and opm with lead roles for the governmentwide telework initiative — to provide services and resources to support and encourage telework , including providing guidance to agencies in developing their program procedures . in addition , congress required certain agencies to designate a telework coordinator to be responsible for overseeing the implementation of telework programs and serve as a point of contact on such programs for the committees on appropriations . gsa and opm provide services and resources to support the governmentwide telework implementation . opm publishes telework guidance , which it recently updated , and works with the agency telework coordinators to guide implementation of the programs and annually report the results achieved . gsa offers a variety of services to support telework , including developing policy concerning alternative workplaces , managing the federal telework centers , maintaining the mail list server for telework coordinators , and offering technical support , consultation , research , and development to its customers . jointly , opm and gsa manage the federal web site for telework , which was designed to provide information and guidance . the site provides access for employees , managers , and telework coordinators to a range of information related to telework including announcements , guides , laws , and available training . although agency telework policies meet common requirements and often share some common characteristics , each agency is responsible for developing its own policy to fit its mission and culture . according to opm , most agencies have specified occupations that are eligible for telework and most apply employee performance - related criteria in considering authorizing telework participation . in addition , opm guidance states that eligible employees should sign an employee telework agreement and be approved to participate by their managers . the particular considerations concerning these requirements and procedures will differ among agencies . in our 2003 study of telework in the federal government , we identified 25 key practices that federal agencies should implement in developing their telework programs . among those were several practices closely aligned with managing for program results including developing a business case for implementing a telework program ; establishing measurable telework program goals ; establishing processes , procedures , or a tracking system to collect data to evaluate the telework program ; and identifying problems or issues with the telework program and making appropriate adjustments .