documentation requirements . some states we reviewed had guidance outlining the specific documentation needed to verify actual hours for each work activity and specified when the documentation must be obtained and the hours recorded in the state's database . monthly audits . officials in some states we reviewed told us they conduct monthly audits of all cases sampled for reporting to acf to verify that hours reported were actually worked . if there is not adequate support showing that hours reported were actually worked , the data are not reported to acf , according to state officials . state officials cited challenges to obtaining support for hours of participation in unsubsidized employment . for some states , the standard process for obtaining hours of unsubsidized employment occurs every 6 months when local staff reverify a recipient's income and benefit eligibility . income is typically verified with a recent pay stub , which is then used to project the hours the recipient will be working for the next 6 months . some officials told us that trying to obtain documentation for actual hours of unsubsidized employment from recipients or employers monthly would be onerous for case workers and recipients . officials said they feared that contacting employers frequently to verify a recipient's employment could jeopardize the recipient's job . in states requiring monthly documentation , such as pay stubs , for hours of work reported to hhs , state officials told us they were likely underreporting hours because of the difficulty local staff face in obtaining the required documentation . a new effort on the part of acf may provide states with additional options for obtaining information on hours recipients spend in unsubsidized employment . acf recently began an initiative using the national directory of new hires ( ndnh ) to help states identify whether or not recipients are eligible for tanf benefits . if a state chooses to participate , hhs will conduct data matches comparing ndnh employee data against the state's list of tanf recipients . if the data matches identify recipients who are working and are still eligible for tanf , the data may provide states with a starting point for obtaining more complete work participation data , according to an acf official . because the ndnh does not contain hours worked , states would need to contact employers or recipients to obtain information on the actual hours the recipient worked , according to an acf official . hhs has provided minimal oversight of how states define work activities . further , hhs has limited guidance for states on reporting the appropriate hours of work activities . hhs does not have a sufficient mechanism to identify data not in accordance with acf guidance . under prwora , hhs has authority to regulate states' definitions of work activities . however , hhs has chosen not to issue regulations for this purpose in order to promote the flexibility prwora provided states and in response to calls from states for as much flexibility as possible in designing their tanf programs , according to hhs officials . the current tanf regulations only repeat the 12 categories of work activities that are included in prwora and do not further specify activities that can and cannot be included under the 12 categories .