v ) . to determine the reliability of irs's data , we interviewed irs officials who developed the transcription priority listing , reviewed related documentation , and reviewed the data for obvious errors . we found these data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we shared our calculations with irs officials in service and enforcement who agreed with our approach . irs has not completed such an analysis . irs has taken some steps , such as developing priority lists of additional lines to transcribe , but has not quantified the costs or benefits of transcribing each line . also , these listings were developed in different business operating divisions and are not integrated across divisions , so there is no ranking of the agency's transcription priorities as a whole . ranking transcription priorities could have benefits because the cost of transcription varies by line . we used irs data to develop calculations to illustrate the potential variability of transcription costs across different tax return lines that irs included in its priority listing . we estimated the costs of transcribing different lines from all paper tax returns submitted during a filing season , and found that costs varied from less than $1,000 to more than $500,000 . we illustrate the variability of transcription costs by presenting averages for all lines on selected forms . for example , if irs were to transcribe an average line on form 1040 schedule c from all paper tax returns for a filing season , it would cost $123,400 . costs for different lines on schedule c would vary substantially around this average . table 2 illustrates some of the average costs for lines on high - volume forms and schedules . ( more details on our calculations are in app . v. ) because an increasing percentage of returns are e - filed , irs could be at the tipping point where the service and compliance benefits of digitizing additional data from paper returns are greater than costs . given today's tight budget environment , additional resources for transcription would likely have to be moved from other areas within irs . in deciding on whether to transcribe more lines , irs would have to balance the benefits of additional transcription against the value of the work foregone . we interviewed 26 prepare who were members of national preparer groups . their views are not parers , but they provide representative of the entire population of pre some examples of preparer experiences . five of the 26 preparers we interviewed had not previously e - filed , and they provided a variety of examples of how the mandate affected them . one preparer noted that her software provider charged an addit to e - file returns . another preparer stated he hired an additional administrative employee to help manage requirements that were new to him when e - filing , such as form 8879 , “irs e - file signature authorization.” several preparers told us that it took them several ho make changes to rejected returns — a step that may not occur until months later , if at all , when filing a paper return . companies and preparers were identified through referrals from industry groups .