fps agreed with this recommendation . we have reported that fps is limited in its ability to assess the effectiveness of its efforts to protect federal facilities . to determine how well it is accomplishing its mission to protect federal facilities , fps has identified some output measures . these measures include determining whether security countermeasures have been deployed and are fully operational , the amount of time it takes to respond to an incident , and the percentage of fsas completed on time . as we reported in 2010 , while output measures are helpful in assessing performance , outcome measures can provide fps with broader information on program results , such as the extent to which its decision to move to an inspector - based workforce will enhance security at federal facilities . outcome measures could also help identify the security gaps that remain at federal facilities and determine what action may be needed to address them . in addition , we reported in 2010 that fps does not have a reliable data management system that will allow it to accurately track these measures or other important measures such as the number of crimes and other incidents occurring at gsa facilities . without such a system , it is difficult for fps to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of its efforts to protect federal employees and facilities , allocate its limited resources , or make informed risk management decisions . for example , weaknesses in one of fps's countermeasure tracking systems make it difficult to accurately track the implementation status of recommended countermeasures such as security cameras and x - ray machines . without this ability , fps has difficulty determining whether it has mitigated the risk of federal facilities to crime or a terrorist attack . fps concurred with our recommendations and states that its efforts to address them will be completed in 2012 when its automated information systems are fully implemented . fps has begun several initiatives that , once fully implemented , should enhance its ability to protect the more than 1 million federal employees and members of the public who visit federal facilities each year . since 2008 , we have made 28 recommendations to help fps to address its challenges with risk management , strategic human capital planning , oversight of its contract guard workforce , and its fee - based funding structure . dhs and fps have generally agreed with these recommendations . as of july 2011 , as shown in table 1 , fps was in the process of addressing 21 of them , although none were fully implemented . of the remaining 7 , 5 were recommendations from our may 2011 report , and we would not necessarily expect them to be fully implemented yet . according to fps officials , the agency has faced difficulty in implementing many of our recommendations because of changes in its leadership , organization , funding , and staffing levels . in addition , fps officials stated that its progress in implementing our recommendations has been affected by delays in developing several new management systems , such as ramp . chairmen lungren and bilirakis , ranking members clarke and richardson , and members of the subcommittees , this completes my prepared statement .