iii. ) in addition , the agency funds specialized , multidisciplinary research centers on alternative medicine in such areas as cardiovascular disease , neurological disorders , aging , and arthritis . fda has taken enforcement actions against firms selling anti - aging products alleged to be dangerous or illegally marketed . it has taken actions to remove from the market anti - aging products that the agency found were actually unapproved new drugs or medical devices and actions against firms that promoted their dietary supplements for the treatment or cure of a disease . although dshea allows fda to remove from the market dietary supplements that the agency can prove are dangerous , the agency has not prohibited the marketing of any specific substances using its administrative rulemaking authority . however , the agency has taken steps to identify for consumers and industry ingredients it deems to be unsafe and unlawful . the agency has then pursued cases against specific manufacturers and products when the ingredients continued to be marketed in dietary supplements despite the agency's warnings . fda's efforts in this regard have been unsuccessful , and many of these products remain on the market and are still available to consumers . most of the responses we received concerned potential problems with dietary supplements ( both herbal and specialty supplements ) , and occasionally some potentially harmful devices . we did not hear widespread concerns regarding alternative medical services . therefore , our work focused principally on those herbal and specialty supplements and devices that address health conditions related to aging , such as heart disease , memory loss , fatigue , joint health , and cancer . we reviewed scientific literature and talked with medical and scientific experts , trade association representatives , consumer group representatives , individual practitioners , and researchers . our investigation of adverse effects , contraindications , and interactions focused primarily on those supplements that were most commonly used by seniors to address issues of aging as identified in a recent survey by prevention magazine . we conducted analyses of the data from this survey to focus on the use of dietary supplements by people aged 65 years or older . we also interviewed officials and reviewed documents from the food and drug administration ( fda ) , federal trade commission ( ftc ) , and national institutes of health ( nih ) . from fda , we obtained all adverse event reports from 1994 through 2001 reported by people over 65 years old , as well as all reports for most of the dietary supplements mentioned in our report . we examined other fda and ftc documents to identify warnings that the agencies have issued against certain products because of concerns about safety , labeling , or advertising . we obtained case information from ftc and fda to determine estimates of economic harm , as well as to review the agencies' enforcement efforts . we also interviewed state attorneys general and public health officials in 14 states to examine enforcement efforts at the state level . these states were selected because they were identified by experts as being the most active in their efforts to curb the marketing and sale of health products making questionable claims . ( table 1 lists the organizations we consulted. )