this report contains recommendations to you . as you know , 31 u.s.c . irs agreed to implement these recommendations and is in the process of doing so . although irs has made progress in implementing information security for its financial and tax processing systems and information by addressing many of its previously identified security weaknesses , significant weaknesses in electronic access and other information security controls continue to threaten the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of those systems and information . a primary reason for these weaknesses is that irs has not yet fully implemented its information security program . as a result , weaknesses in controls over its key financial and tax processing systems could impair irs's ability to perform vital functions and increase the risk of unauthorized disclosure , modification , or destruction of taxpayer data . a basic management objective for any organization is to protect the resources that support its critical operations from unauthorized access . organizations accomplish this objective by designing and implementing controls that are intended to prevent , limit , and detect unauthorized access to computing resources , programs , and information . electronic access controls include those related to network management , user accounts and passwords , user rights and file permissions , and logging and monitoring of security - relevant events . we discussed the results of our review with irs officials . irs has made progress toward implementing more effective information security controls over key financial and tax processing systems that are located at two critical data processing sites , and has corrected or mitigated 41 of the 81 specific technical weaknesses that we reported as unresolved at the time of our last reviews at the selected sites . actions have been taken to address weaknesses related to electronic access , physical access , and software change controls , among others . for example , irs has implemented controls to protect mainframe system files that contain embedded user accounts and passwords ; improved the security of authentication data for network devices , such as routers and switches ; securely configured certain vulnerable network services to help prevent implemented procedures for periodically reviewing employee access to ensured that its software change control process includes the submission of documented test plans . additionally , irs addressed critical mainframe weaknesses . in 2005 , we reported that irs had not implemented effective electronic access controls over its mainframe computing environment to logically separate its taxpayer data from the financial crimes enforcement network's bank secrecy act data , which include information related to financial crimes , terrorist financing , money laundering , and other illicit activities . these two types of data have different security requirements , and , accordingly , we made specific recommendations to correct these access control weaknesses . since our last report , irs has taken action to mitigate these weaknesses . although irs has taken steps to strengthen its information security controls , it had not completed actions to correct or mitigate the remaining 40 previously reported technical weaknesses as illustrated in figure 1 .