( recommendation 2 ) . our prior work found that placing an agency into an organization that has a similar mission may help ensure that the agency's mission receives adequate funding , attention , visibility , and support . one of dhs's goals — as noted in its strategic plan covering fiscal years 2014 to 2018 — is to reduce risk to the nation's critical infrastructure . in addition , nppd's mission is to lead the national effort to protect and enhance the resilience of the nation's physical and cyber infrastructure . the shortage is exacerbated by the time it takes to vet applicants and process new staff through background checks and security clearances , according to the officials . see appendix i for more details on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from june 2017 to january 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . while its core mission of protecting federal facilities has remained constant as fps moved from one agency to another , its responsibilities have changed . while in gsa's pbs , fps was responsible for protecting gsa held - or – leased facilities , providing both physical security and law enforcement services . to protect buildings , fps officers developed physical security risk assessments , installed security equipment , and oversaw contract guard services . as a part of its law enforcement services , among other duties , fps officers enforced laws and regulations aimed at protecting federal facilities and the persons in such facilities and conducted criminal investigations . following the september 11 , 2001 attacks , the homeland security act of 2002 was enacted ; it created dhs and moved fps from gsa to the new department , effective in march of 2003 . within dhs at ice , fps's responsibilities grew beyond solely protecting gsa buildings to include homeland security activities such as implementing homeland security directives and providing law enforcement , security , and emergency - response services during natural disasters and special events . in 2009 , dhs proposed transferring fps from ice to nppd . in explaining the proposed transfer in dhs's fiscal year 2010 budget justification to congress , dhs noted that this move would allow ice to focus on its law enforcement mission of protecting the american people by targeting the people , money , and materials that support terrorist and criminal activities relating to our nation's borders . dhs noted that fps should reside within nppd given that both agencies had responsibilities for implementing the national infrastructure protection plan . dhs further noted that fps would be able to gain synergy by working alongside nppd's office of infrastructure protection and that having fps and the office of infrastructure protection in the same organization would further solidify nppd as dhs's lead for critical infrastructure protection .