certification of schools offering flight training . ice's policies and procedures require flight schools to have federal aviation administration ( faa ) part 141 or 142 certification to be eligible for sevp certification ; however , ice has certified schools offering flight training without such faa certifications . as the federal agency responsible for regulating safety of civil aviation in the united states , faa administers pilot certification ( licensing ) and conducts safety oversight of pilot training . faa's regulations for pilot training and certification are found in three parts — parts 61 , 141 , and 142 . ice established a policy that requires part 141 and 142 for eligibility in sevp because faa directly oversees these flight schools and training centers on an ongoing basis . we reported identifying 434 sevp - certified schools that , as of december 2011 , offer flight training to foreign students . however , 167 ( 38 percent ) of these flight training providers do not have faa part 141 or 142 certification . sevp senior officials acknowledged that all sevp - certified schools offering flight training do not have faa part 141 or 142 certification even though the program requires it . ice indicated that in most of the cases , it may have initially certified flight schools with part 141 or 142 certification but the schools allowed their faa certification to expire , and ice did not identify or take compliance action against them . ice is taking actions to address noncompliant flight schools as of may 2012 , including notifying all sevp - certified schools that do not have the required faa certification that they must re - obtain the certification . moreover , sevp officials stated that they plan to coordinate with faa to determine which schools have not met the requirements and will take withdrawal actions against them . while these are positive steps , we reported that sevp had not yet established target time frames for implementing and completing these planned actions . because ice has certified or maintained certification of schools that provide flight training without the required faa certification and oversight , the program is vulnerable to security and fraud risks . thus , we recommended that ice establish target time frames for notifying sevp - certified flight schools that do not have the required faa certification that they must re - obtain faa certification . dhs concurred and stated that sevp is consulting with faa to develop target time frames . coordination among sevp , ctceu , and ice field offices . ice has not consistently followed the standard operating procedures that govern the communication and coordination process among sevp , ctceu , and ice field offices . specifically , these procedures delineate roles and responsibilities for criminal investigations and establish protocols for sevp taking administrative actions against schools during and following a criminal investigation . in some instances , sevp management has not followed ctceu requests to take or cease administrative actions and has not referred potentially criminal cases to ctceu in accordance with ice's procedures . initial verification of evidence submitted in lieu of accreditation .