i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . for more information about this testimony , please contact valerie c. melvin at ( 202 ) 512-6304 or by e - mail at melvinv@gao.gov . such an update could further improve the structure's effectiveness . in addition , as part of improving the governance strategy , the department has set targets by which the planning , architecture , technology , and services board is to review and make departmentwide recommendations for va's portfolio of investments . these targets call for the board to review major it projects included in the fiscal year budgets . for example , the board is expected to review 10 percent for fiscal year 2008 , 50 percent for fiscal year 2009 , and 100 percent for fiscal year 2011 . as a third step in establishing oversight , in december 2007 , va finalized an it strategic plan to guide , manage , and implement its operations and investments . this plan ( for fiscal years 2006-2011 ) aligns office of information and technology goals , priorities , and initiatives with the priorities of the secretary of veterans affairs , as identified in the va strategic plan for fiscal years 2006-2011 . in addition , within the plan , the it strategic goals are aligned with the cio's it priorities , as well as with specific initiatives and performance measures . this alignment frames the outcomes that it executives and managers are expected to meet when delivering services and solutions to veterans and their dependents . as we previously reported , it is essential to establish and track implementation goals and establish a timeline to pinpoint performance shortfalls and gaps and suggest midcourse corrections . further , the plan includes a performance accountability matrix that highlights the alignment of the goals , priorities , initiatives , and performance measures , and an expanded version of the matrix designates specific entities within the office of information and technology who are accountable for implementation of each initiative . the matrix also establishes goals and time lines through fiscal year 2011 , which should enable va to track progress and suggest midcourse corrections and sustain progress toward the realignment . as a fourth step , the department has completed multi - year budget guidance to improve management of its it portfolio . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: thank you for inviting me to participate in today's hearing on the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) fiscal year 2009 information technology ( it ) budget . as you know , the use of it is crucial to helping va effectively serve our nation's veterans , with the department's just - released budget proposal including approximately $2.4 billion to support it development , operations , and maintenance .