global aids coordinator . the report also will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3149 or gootnickd@gao.gov , or contact marcia crosse at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or crossem@gao.gov . ( see fig . by fiscal year 2012 , budgets in the other program area represented more than 21 percent of all program area budgets , up from about 15 percent in fiscal year 2008 . ogac officials told us that the current budgetary formula was developed based on ogac's interpretation of the intent of the treatment spending requirement . calculating the proportion of funds allocated to specific activities as a percentage of total country budgets allocated to the treatment , care , and prevention program areas — excluding budgets for the other program area — is consistent with the methods ogac used to track spending under the first pepfar authorization . ogac officials said that this approach allows ogac to isolate budgeted funds that support the direct services that pepfar delivers to patients at the facility level , consistent with pepfar's early focus on directly delivering treatment services as part of a broad emergency response . as pepfar's role in each country has evolved , the components of pepfar country team budgets that contribute to the hiv treatment and care services specified in the spending requirement have also evolved . however , some of those funds are not accounted for in the current budgetary formula . in particular , although budgets allocated to capacity building have increased , those funds are not accounted for in either component of ogac's budgetary formula: the budget for “treatment and care for people living with hiv” or the total budgets for the treatment , care , and prevention program areas . some capacity - building efforts , such as enhancements to drug supply chain systems that are budgeted under health systems strengthening , also contribute to hiv treatment and care services . other health systems strengthening activities may have a less direct effect on those services . moreover , ogac officials said that some funds budgeted for prevention activities — particularly funds for prevention of mother - to - child transmission of hiv that cover arv treatment and care services for hiv - positive pregnant and breastfeeding women — also contribute to hiv treatment and care services . those contributions are likewise not accounted for in the calculated budget for “treatment and care for people living with hiv.” ogac officials told us that they currently do not have an agreed methodology that would allow them to determine the extent to which funds for capacity building , or certain prevention activities , contribute directly to hiv treatment and care . as a result , it is currently not possible to determine accurately the proportion of total country budgets that support the services specified in the treatment spending requirement , if the contributions of pepfar country teams' capacity - building and prevention budgets are taken into account .