periodic monitoring . samhsa conducts four to five onsite monitoring reviews of state paimi programs each year , which officials told us means a given program would be reviewed approximately every 10 years . programs are reviewed on a rotating basis , but some may be reviewed more frequently if concerns have been identified , according to officials . the onsite monitoring process , which includes an onsite visit and review of program documentation , is intended to monitor program compliance and provide guidance on improving program effectiveness . samhsa has procedures for the scope and time frame of the reviews . the eight selected state paimi programs reported favorably resolving a majority of individuals' cases related to alleged abuse , neglect , or rights violations . in addition , these selected programs reported concluding a variety of systemic activities , with a significant focus on monitoring and addressing issues of abuse or neglect at facilities . through their work with individuals and completion of systemic activities , the selected programs reported meeting a majority of their priority goals and objectives . selected programs reported favorably resolving about 74 percent of individual cases related to alleged abuse , neglect , or rights violations in fiscal year 2016 , on average ( see table 3 ) . the remaining 26 percent of cases were reported as withdrawn by the client , closed due to lack of merit , or were not resolved in the individual's favor . across the programs there was variation in the percentage of cases resolved favorably , with two of the selected programs reporting half , or less than half , of their cases resolved favorably , and one program reporting nearly 100 percent of cases closed favorably . samhsa officials and ndrn staff cited a number of factors that could contribute to the variation , including complexity of the complaint , variation in the programs' criteria for accepting cases , program resources , or characteristics of the court or state mental health system . for example , samhsa officials told us that possible explanations for variation could include a program accepting particularly challenging cases , or a program obtaining additional funding from other nonfederal grants that could provide greater legal staff support in addressing complaints . all eight selected programs reported closing cases in each of the three categories of complaints: abuse , neglect , and rights violations during fiscal year 2016 . five of the eight programs reported that a majority of their cases were related to complaints about rights violations , which occurred in both facility - and community - based settings ( see fig . these complaints included denials of legal assistance or privacy rights , employment discrimination , or — the most frequently reported case complaint — failure to provide special education consistent with state requirements . issues of abuse and neglect of individuals with mental illness were also common . the most frequent complaint reported by the eight selected programs related to neglect was a lack of discharge planning for release from a facility , and for alleged abuse , it was failure to provide appropriate mental health treatment .