four vendors submitted proposals . the solicitation provided that the award would be made to the vendor that offered the best overall value to the government , considering nonprice and price factors . the proposals were evaluated based on several factors , including the vendors' demonstrated understanding of the solicitation's ( 1 ) technical requirements , including the ability to implement and maintain a web - based procurement system , and ( 2 ) business requirements . as part of their business plan , vendors were required to demonstrate their ability to deliver items within 24 hours of receiving an order , which is considered industry standard . other factors on which the proposals were evaluated , in descending order of importance , were the inclusion of a subcontracting plan demonstrating the vendor's commitment to use smw businesses , the ability to address environmental and energy conservation efforts . an explanation of the price discounts on items offered to the postal service , the ability to provide financial and purchasing reports that are integrated with the postal service's system , and the ability to provide postal service items , other than office supplies , that are used in an office setting . additional evaluation factors included past performance and javits - wagner - o'day act ( jwod ) compliance . the postal service awarded the contract to boise with a start date of april 3 , 2000 . the contract is a firm , fixed - price modified requirements contract for a 3-year base period , with up to three 2-year options . the contract requires , with a few exceptions , that the postal service order from boise all of the approximately 13,000 items in boise's postal service office supply catalog . exceptions to the mandatory requirement are where ( 1 ) the item can be found at a lower price ( and it is not a jwod item ) or ( 2 ) the requirement is urgent and the supplier cannot meet the required delivery date . the postal service has since exercised the first 2-year option . the jwod act requires the postal service to comply with its requirements . according to postal service and boise officials , boise has ensured through its ordering process that this compliance occurs . when postal service employees place an order with boise for an item that is also on the jwod procurement list , boise substitutes the ordered item with a jwod item that is essentially the same . the postal service has not been successful in implementing its national - level contract to purchase most office supplies from boise . as shown in figure 1 , during fiscal year 2001 less than 40 percent of the $125 million in office supplies was purchased from the contract . the postal service has not taken sufficient actions to ensure that the contract would be used as anticipated . while fiscal year 2001 data show an improvement over the 6 months that the contract was used in fiscal year 2000 , when about 75 percent of office supplies were purchased outside the contract , the postal service is concerned that its employees continue to spend a significant percentage of office supply dollars outside the contract .