( recommendation 4 ) . we provided a draft of this report to the department of veterans affairs ( va ) for comment . va also stated it plans to take additional steps to determine resource requirements for addressing workloads under both the legacy and new appeals process . for vba , va stated that it will continue to rely on ramp to project resource requirements , while acknowledging the need to augment its analysis of ramp data by adopting additional strategies to project resource requirements . va did not describe these strategies , but stated that it will share them with congress and gao in the near future . the three board options will be: 3 . request board review of existing record: the veteran appeals to the board and asks it to review only the existing record without a hearing . request board review of additional evidence , without a hearing . request board review of additional evidence , with a hearing . the act also requires va to submit to the appropriate committees of congress and gao , within 90 days of the date of enactment , a comprehensive plan for ( 1 ) processing appeals under the legacy process until there are no more to process , ( 2 ) implementing the new appeals process , ( 3 ) processing of claims under the new appeals process in a timely manner , and ( 4 ) monitoring implementation of the new appeals process . in addition to these four broad elements , the act lists 18 elements required to be included in the plan that relate to , among other things: staffing , it , and other resources required to implement the plan ; estimated timelines for hiring and training va employees ; and a description of risks associated with each element of the plan . the act also includes a provision for gao to assess the plan within 90 days after va submits it . the act also requires va to provide progress reports to the appropriate committees of congress and gao at least once every 90 days ( starting after va submits its plan ) , until the date the act's legal changes to the appeals process generally go into effect and then at least once every 180 days after this date for 7 years . the act also authorized va to carry out a program to test any assumptions relied upon in developing its comprehensive plan and test the feasibility and advisability of any facet of the new appeals process . in its appeals plan , va reported its decision to pilot test two of the five new options by allowing veterans with pending appeals in the legacy process ( known as legacy appeals ) to elect the vba higher - level review or vba supplemental claim options beginning in november 2017 . this program , which va refers to as ramp , is intended to reduce legacy appeals by providing veterans with a chance for early resolution of their claims within vba while the board focuses on reducing its inventory of legacy appeals , according to va .