stakeholders . the options that 4 of the 18 stakeholders who selected what they believe to be the top 3 options from among those suggested were to increase cargo preference on all government cargo to 100 percent ; increase funding for u.s. food aid programs ; increase marad's monitoring and enforcement of its statutory authority , and eliminate the 3- year waiting period imposed on foreign vessels that acquire u.s. - flag registry before they are eligible to carry preference food aid cargo . in addition , there were a number of options that 3 of the 18 stakeholders selected , including reforming tax law that may negatively affect the u.s. - flag fleet , improving the food aid procurement / supply chain process to include market efficiencies , eliminating cpfa and creating a dod program to provide military sealift capability , increasing the cpfa minimum requirement from 50 to 75 percent , increasing the cpfa minimum requirement from 50 to 100 percent , reinstating ofd and tpef reimbursements , subsidizing u.s. - flag fleet vessels , and reforming tort law that may negatively affect the u.s. - flag fleet . maritime industry stakeholders . the options that 3 of the 7 maritime industry stakeholders selected as being among their top 3 were to increase all cargo preference to 100 percent , increase funding for u.s. food aid programs , and increase marad's monitoring and enforcement of its statutory authority . comparing the average number of bids before and after the changes , we found that the overall number of bids increased from around 7 to around 10 bids ( see table 4 ) . the average number of bids from u.s. - flag bids remained roughly unchanged and the average number of bids from foreign - flag vessels increased from around 2 to around 5 . we also compared the characteristics of the solicitations lines before and after the changes in the cpfa requirements to describe how usda and usaid food aid programs may have changed . these included the composition of food aid by commodity type , the month of the solicitation line , the implementing partner , and the destination . we found few differences in the implementing partner and the type of commodity before and after the changes . however , we did find differences in the destination and the month of the solicitation line . for example , the percentage of solicitation lines destined for port - au - prince , haiti , decreased from 8 to 3 percent of solicitation lines after the changes in the cpfa requirements . the differences in these characteristics before and after the change emphasized the importance of controlling for these characteristics when comparing the number of bids before and after the changes . in our example of port - au - prince , a solicitation line with food aid destined there was correlated with a higher number of bids . and since the percentage of solicitation lines destined there decreased after the change , the number of bids may have decreased due to this . however , if we observed a decrease only in bids , one may have erroneously attributed the decrease to the changes in the cpfa requirements if we did not control for the destination .