, “partner agencies” ) . all 74 agencies responded to our screening question . agencies that met this criterion — 58 federal lmr users in all — were further surveyed about the types of equipment they use , interoperability needs , and procurement practices , among other topics . fifty - seven of the 58 agencies that we identified as federal lmr users responded to the full survey . we interviewed officials from federal agencies with responsibilities related to emergency communications and procurement of lmr equipment , including dhs ; the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) and the national institute of standards and technology within the department of commerce ; the federal communications commission ( fcc ) ; the general services administration ( gsa ) ; the office of management and budget ( omb ) ; and administrators of the ecpc . last , we reviewed omb initiatives for improving efficiency and cost - effectiveness in federal procurement and compared them to procurement practices reported by the agencies that responded to our survey . additional information about our scope and methodology is provided in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from july 2015 to october 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . public safety personnel across the nation — including first responders , law enforcement officers , and natural resource managers , among others — rely on lmr systems to gather and share information while conducting daily operations and to coordinate their emergency response efforts . these systems are intended to provide secure , reliable , mission - critical voice communications in a variety of environments , scenarios , and emergencies . we reported in 2012 that these public safety communications systems are fragmented across thousands of federal , state , and local jurisdictions and often lack “interoperability,” or the ability to communicate across agencies and jurisdictions . figure 1 displays the typical components of an lmr system , including handheld portable radios , mobile radios typically mounted in vehicles , base stations , and repeaters , which retransmit radio signals to extend the coverage area . handheld portable radios are typically carried by the lmr user and tend to have a limited transmission range . mobile radios are often located in vehicles and use the vehicle's power supply and a larger antenna , providing a greater transmission range than handheld portable radios . base station radios are located in fixed positions , such as dispatch centers , and tend to have the most powerful transmitters . a network is required to connect base stations to the same communication system . repeaters increase the effective communication range of handheld portable radios , mobile radios , and base station radios by retransmitting received radio signals . lmr networks connect different base stations to the same communications system and operate by transmitting voice and data through radio waves at specific frequencies and channels within the radio frequency portion of the electromagnetic spectrum .