completion of system . increment 9 marks the completion of the system as it moves into full operation and maintenance , which will include around - the - clock support and administration of the system , database , and network , among other things . system functionality to be achieved at revised schedule dates will be less than originally planned . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . increment 3 . this increment will provide for a functional system that will use a test simulator that will not be connected to an airline's reservation system . system hardware that includes the establishment of test and production environments will be in place and a facility capable of performing risk assessment will be established . integration of other system users . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . ( see app . i for a description of these increments. ) as each increment is completed , tsa plans to conduct tests that would ensure the system meets the objectives of that increment before proceeding to the next increment . the development of capps ii began in march 2003 with increments 1 and 2 being completed in august and october 2003 , respectively . however , tsa has not completely tested these initial two increments because it was unable to obtain the necessary passenger data for testing from air carriers . air carriers have been reluctant to provide passenger data due to privacy concerns . instead , the agency deferred completing these tests until increment 3 . tsa is currently developing increment 3 . however , due to the unavailability of passenger data needed for testing , tsa has delayed the completion of this increment from october 2003 until at least the latter part of this month and reduced the functionality that this increment is expected to achieve . increment 3 was originally intended to provide a functioning system that could handle live passenger data from one air carrier in a test environment to demonstrate that the system can satisfy operational and functional requirements . however , tsa officials reported that they recently modified increment 3 to instead provide a functional application of the system in a simulated test environment that is not actively connected to an airline reservation system . officials also said that they were uncertain when the testing that was deferred from increments 1 and 2 to increment 3 will be completed . tsa recognizes that system testing is a high - risk area and plans to further delay the implementation of the system to ensure that sufficient testing is completed . as a result , all succeeding increments of capps ii have been delayed , moving capps ii initial operating capability — the point at which the system will be ready to operate with one airline — from november 2003 to a date unknown . ( see app . ii for a timeline showing the original and revised schedule for capps ii increments. )