functions . the systems engineering discipline enables the product developer to translate customer wants into specific product features for which requisite technological , software , engineering , and production capabilities can be identified . once these capabilities are identified , a developer can assess its own capabilities to determine if gaps exist . it is critical for a developer to involve the right people — those with the affected areas of expertise — in this assessment . gaps identified between what the customer's wants are and what the developer possesses then become the focus of analysis . some gaps can be resolved by investments the developer makes , while others can be closed by finding technical or design alternatives . remaining gaps — those that represent capabilities the developer does not have or cannot get without increasing the price and timing of the product beyond what the customer will accept — must be resolved through trade - offs and negotiation . during systems engineering , a product design progresses through at least three iterations . the first is a notional design — a general concept of what the product will look like and what it might be capable of that is unconstrained by resources . the second iteration is the first detailed design that enables a developer to compare its capabilities with the demands of the product . the third iteration is the final design , which captures improvements to the design generated by testing , analysis , and other forms of learning . these iterations can be seen in figure 10 , which provides a general comparison of the amount of systems engineering accomplished in the successful and problematic cases prior to launching a product development program . in each successful case , the product developer worked closely with the customer to understand its wants , which were often articulated in a bottom - line metric , such as cost per passenger mile for a commercial airplane . by the time the developer had committed to a product development program , it was well into its systems engineering process and had developed a preliminary design of the product . this process identified the gaps between resources and expectations , which could be then addressed through investments , alternate designs , and , ultimately , trade - offs . the knowledge produced by the process put the developer in a good position to negotiate with the customer because consequences could be associated with attempts to meet those wants that exceeded the developer's capabilities . the process also involved the customer through periodic reviews and acceptance of the product's final design . according to some commercial representatives , systems engineering is a good investment to reduce risk , usually comprising a small percentage to the overall development cost of a new product . we found two commercial firms — caterpillar and bombardier aerospace — and two dod programs — the army's tactical unmanned aerial vehicle and the air force's global hawk unmanned aerial vehicle — that employed fairly extensive systems engineering before they committed to product development . in the problematic cases , product developers had not progressed as far into the systems engineering process at the time the program was launched .