we continue to believe our recommendations are valid . appendix i summarizes all 35 recommendations and dod's response to each recommendation at the time of our report and provides information , as of march 2019 , on dod's actions or planned actions to address each recommendation . in some instances dod had taken action or planned to take action on recommendations with which it had not concurred at the time of our report . we provided a draft of this report to dod for review and comment . dod concurred with the draft and had no technical comments . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and to the acting secretary of defense and the under secretary of defense for acquisition and sustainment . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or our staff have any questions about this report , please contact me , diana maurer , at ( 202 ) 512-9627 or maurerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs are listed on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . corrosion can be either readily visible or microscopic . to provide leadership on corrosion matters , including the development of policy guidance and oversight , consistent with section 2228 , dod has established an organizational structure that includes the corrosion office and corrosion executives . the director of the corrosion office is to provide oversight and coordination of corrosion control and prevention efforts for the department . the military departments have each assigned officials to serve as corrosion executives . the corrosion executives operate within the chain of command of their respective military departments , while also coordinating with the corrosion office . prior to august 2018 , the corrosion office reported directly to the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics . in 2018 the corrosion office was relocated within dod , after section 901 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 ( pub . 114- 328 , hereinafter referred to as the act ) required dod to restructure parts of the office of the secretary of defense . corrosion is defined in section 2228 of title 10 , u.s. code , as the deterioration of a material or its properties due to a reaction of that material with its chemical environment . corrosion can take varied forms , such as rusting , pitting , galvanic reaction , calcium or other mineral build - up , degradation due to ultraviolet light exposure , and mold , mildew , or other organic decay . in 2018 the corrosion office was relocated within dod , after section 901 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 ( pub . among other things , the act eliminated the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics , and it created: the under secretary of defense for research and engineering , who , among other things , serves as the principal advisor to the secretary of defense on all research , engineering , and technology development activities and programs in dod .