the analysis states its objective . the scope of the analysis is designed to address this objective . unless otherwise justified , the analysis focuses on economic effects that accrue to citizens and residents of the united states , and its time horizon is long enough to encompass the important economic effects of the action . key element: methodology — the methodology used to examine the economic effects . the economic analysis examines the effects of the action by comparing alternatives , using one of them as the baseline . these key elements are: 1 . we prepared this report under the authority of the comptroller general to answer the question: what are key methodological elements of an economic analysis that is intended to inform decision - makers and stakeholders ? we answered this question by reviewing economic elements and concepts that serve as the basis for sound economic analysis . we considered a wide range of economics documents prepared by various government agencies and institutions on how economic analysis should be performed . these documents included , among others , circulars released by the office of management and budget ( omb ) and handbooks for economic analysis from federal and international agencies , such as the u.s. environmental protection agency , the u.s. department of defense , the u.s. department of transportation , the organization for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) , and hm treasury government of the united kingdom . in addition , we consulted with experts on economic analysis of public actions . we synthesized economic concepts embodied in these documents into the present report for use by gao in assessing economic analyses . gao's commitment to informative and transparent economic analysis is in line with the office of management and budget's guidelines on achieving a high degree of transparency in data and methods in scientific information . an important benefit of transparency is that the public can assess the structure of an analysis and , in particular , how much of an analytic result hinges on the specific choices made by the authors . this transparency indicates the solidity of the analytic choices . for example , it allows the implication of these choices , related risks , and uncertainties to be readily assessed . this type of sensitivity analysis is regarded as an essential feature of high - quality analysis , and it cannot be undertaken without a high degree of transparency . the key methodological elements we identify in this report are not intended to be exhaustive and to supplant or alter relevant federal and agency requirements for economic analysis . they simply serve to establish a sound baseline framework for the assessment of an economic analysis . gao's assessment methodology examines the extent to which an economic analysis properly dealt with these key elements and , accordingly , informed decision - makers and stakeholders about the economic effects analyzed . we conducted our work from june 2017 to april 2018 in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that are relevant to our objectives . the framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work .