doi did not provide a number . instead , we determined an approximate number of doi facilities based on our analysis of data from the federal real property profile , a centralized real property database maintained by gsa that contains data on the federal government's real property inventory . we identified the number of buildings doi reported and then excluded categories of buildings that we thought likely did not meet isc's definition . we provided the number to doi for review . in addition , we reviewed and analyzed isc's risk assessment standards , which are outlined in isc's risk management process for federal facilities ( rmp ) standard . how does isc assist member agencies in developing risk assessment methodologies and monitor their compliance with these standards ? in addition , we describe in appendix ii several risk assessment approaches used by foreign governments and private entities that could inform federal agencies' risk assessment methodologies . to determine the extent to which selected isc member agencies' facility risk assessment methodologies align with isc's standards , we selected nine of the 53 isc member agencies that are required to comply with isc standards . we selected the nine agencies to achieve diversity with respect to the agencies' missions , number of facilities , and isc membership type ( primary or associate member agency ) . selected agencies are: the department of energy's office of health , safety , and security ( doe ) , the department of the interior's office of law enforcement and security ( doi ) , the department of justice's justice protective service ( doj ) , the department of state's bureau of diplomatic security ( state ) , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , the federal protective service ( fps ) , the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) , and the office of personnel management ( opm ) . we compared each selected agency's risk assessment methodology to isc's risk assessment standards , which are outlined in the rmp . these standards generally require agencies to consider , at a minimum , all the undesirable events in the rmp and assess the threat , consequences , and vulnerability to specific undesirable events . we also interviewed officials about their agencies' risk assessment methodologies and reviewed documentation . for more information about how we determined the extent to which agencies' methodologies align with isc's risk assessment standards , see appendix i . our findings from our review of the selected agencies are not generalizable to all isc member agencies , but provide insight into and illustrative examples about agencies' facility risk assessment methodologies . in addition , because isc is required to take such actions as may be necessary to enhance the quality and effectiveness of security in and protection of federal facilities government - wide , any recommendations we make will be to isc and not individual agencies . to determine how isc assists member agencies in developing risk assessment methodologies and monitors their compliance with its risk assessment standards , we reviewed documentation and interviewed isc officials about their efforts in these areas .