doing so is important for nasa . in 1999 , we reported that the agency lacked an effective agencywide security program and that tests we conducted at one of nasa's 10 field centers found that mission - critical information systems were vulnerable to unauthorized access . in addition , we have identified three major management challenges facing nasa: ( 1 ) correcting contract management weaknesses , ( 2 ) controlling international space station costs , and ( 3 ) effectively implementing the faster - better - cheaper approach to space exploration projects . ( app . ii contains nasa's comments on a draft of our report. ) gpra is intended to shift the focus of government decisionmaking , management , and accountability from activities and processes to the results and outcomes achieved by federal programs . new and valuable information on the plans , goals , and strategies of federal agencies has been provided since federal agencies began implementing gpra . the nasa advisory council's report indicated that the iss program had a “productive year” after the schedule slip caused by the russian proton rocket failures , but it did not provide further elaboration . in the fiscal year 2000 performance report , nasa identified reports that we and nasa's oig issued in fiscal year 2000 that addressed space station cost overruns and other issues . from the reports , nasa briefly summarized some of the concerns and corrective actions it agreed to take in relation to these issues , including space station cost growth . however , the agency did not set performance measures that more directly address cost growth , despite drastic increases in space station costs over the past several years and recent agency projections of potential cost overruns in excess of $4 billion . furthermore , the issue of space station growth has been a long - standing problem . although the nasa advisory council did not comment on the issue of cost - control measures for the space station in its evaluation of nasa's performance , we continue to believe — as we have reported in the past — that nasa should develop performance measures that directly address space station cost - control issues , including risk mitigation and contingency planning activities . nasa's strategies and time frames for achieving the unmet targets were reasonable . for example , as of april 2001 , nasa had launched four of the missions that were delayed in fiscal year 2000 . the other two unachieved missions are also anticipated for launch in 200l . for the one target that was affected by budget reductions , “complete the production of the x - 38 first space flight test article in preparation for a shuttle test flight in 2001,” the report stated that it would be achieved in fiscal year 2001 . the shuttle test flight that was planned for september 2001 was extended to mid - 2002 . for the selected key outcomes , this section describes major improvements or remaining weaknesses in nasa's fiscal year 2000 performance report in comparison with its fiscal year 1999 report . it also discusses the degree to which the agency's fiscal year 2000 report addresses concerns and recommendations by the congress , gao , nasa's oig , and others .