mississippi implemented its mmis in 2003 . the state requires its managed care organizations to report the same data that fee - for - service providers report on claims ; thus , the program integrity functionality implemented in the state's mmis subsystems could be among other uses , the state relies on used for both types of plans.surs to examine multiple claims submitted by a provider to identify those whom they suspect are submitting claims improperly . for example , the system can be used to identify patterns of providers' billing practices that may indicate that they are submitting claims to medicaid for mental health day treatment when they are actually providing day care services , which are not billable to medicaid . north carolina's medicaid administrators implemented their mmis in 2013 . the system includes an automated provider credentialing and enrollment function , along with claims processing functionality that integrates pre - payment edits , business rules , program logic , and other user - defined criteria to help identify potential improper payments in the state's fee - for - service plan . program integrity analysts who use the claims processing subsystem are able to select multiple provider - or claims - based criteria for suspending claims so that they can be reviewed prior to payment . without identifying and measuring the financial benefits ( i.e. , money saved or recovered ) that result from using their mmiss and other systems , cms and state medicaid administrators cannot be assured of the systems' effectiveness in helping to prevent and detect improper payments . moreover , without having required states to institute consistent and repeatable approaches for measuring and reporting such outcomes , cms medicaid officials lack an essential mechanism for ensuring that the federal financial assistance that states receive to help fund the operations and maintenance of these systems is an effective use of resources to support medicaid program integrity efforts . even as the selected states rely on their systems to help prevent and detect improper medicaid payments , five of the seven states in our study that administered medicaid as both fee - for - service and managed care — north carolina , texas , virginia , california , and maryland — faced challenges that were specific to the use of their systems for ensuring the these challenges introduced integrity of their managed care programs.limitations in the states' ability to use their systems to analyze managed care encounter data because of the ( 1 ) content of the data reported , ( 2 ) quality of the data submitted , or ( 3 ) inconsistencies between the ways managed care and fee - for - service data values are defined . in particular , the encounter data reported by managed care organizations often lack content needed for the states' systems to conduct analyses that help prevent or detect improper payments .