figure 1 provides a timeline . the marine corps forces special operations command is the marine corps service component to ussocom . the command is headquartered on marine corps base camp lejeune , north carolina . the marine corps special operations command has five major subordinate units . these units include two marine special operations battalions , the marine special operations advisor group , the marine special operations support group , and the marine special operations school . table 2 provides a description of each unit . by fiscal year 2011 , the command will be authorized 2,516 personnel — 2,483 military personnel and 33 civilians . with the exception of one marine corps reserve position , all of the authorized military personnel will be drawn from the military services' active components . the marine corps special operations component will be the smallest service component under ussocom . the other military services' special operations components include the following . the army component is the u.s. army special operations command . army special operations forces include special forces , rangers , special operations aviation , civil affairs , and psychological operations units . the navy component is the naval special warfare command . naval special warfare forces include seal teams , seal delivery vehicle teams , and special boat teams . the air force component is the air force special operations command . air force special operations forces include fixed and rotary wing aviation squadrons , a combat aviation advisory squadron , special tactics squadrons , and an unmanned aerial vehicle squadron . figure 2 shows the number of military personnel positions in fiscal year 2007 authorized for dod's special operations forces in the active component and reserve component . the authorizations include positions in special operations forces warfighter units , support units , and headquarters units such as ussocom and its service component commands . since fiscal year 2006 , the marine corps and ussocom have requested baseline and supplemental funding for the marine corps special operations command . in fiscal year 2006 , the marine corps and ussocom received $109.3 million in supplemental funds to establish the marine corps special operations command . in fiscal year 2007 , the marine corps and ussocom received an additional $368.2 million in baseline funds for the command , and $32 million in supplemental funding . as shown in table 3 , the marine corps and ussocom have projected military construction , operation and maintenance , and procurement funding for the command for fiscal years 2008 through 2013 . although the marine corps has made progress in establishing its special operations command , the command has not fully identified the force structure needed to enable it to perform its assigned missions . the marine corps has taken several steps to establish its special operations command , such as activating the command's headquarters , establishing marine corps special operations forces units , and deploying these units to conduct special operations missions ; however , dod did not use critical practices of effective strategic planning when developing the initial force structure plans for the command .