internet . the internet response option allows respondents to use an internet - based questionnaire — with screens designed to resemble the paper questionnaire — to respond to the census . respondents answer multiple - choice questions by clicking the appropriate buttons and checkboxes and text - entry questions by typing their answers into response fields . the bureau gave respondents the option to respond by internet in a 2000 experiment . some households in the test were given the choice of providing their census data via internet or a paper questionnaire . the experiment found that the internet response option resulted in a 2.46 percentage point increase in response . in 2003 , the bureau again tested allowing respondents the option of providing their answers via the internet by sending a paper questionnaire along with instructions for responding via the internet in the initial mailing . households that had a choice to respond by paper or the internet had a similar overall response rate to households that were provided only paper , with about 10 percent of respondents choosing to respond by internet . the bureau decided not to include the internet in the 2010 census , despite including it in the scope of the contract awarded in 2005 for the decennial response integration system . the bureau noted that this decision was based on a number of factors , including the bureau's underestimation of the contractor costs for the first 3 years of the contract , as well as test results that indicated that the internet would not increase the response rate and concerns about the security of respondents' data prior to the bureau receiving it . communications campaign . census 2000 included a greatly expanded outreach and promotion campaign — including , for the first time , paid advertising — in an attempt to increase public awareness of and promote positive attitudes about the census . this program , called the partnership and marketing program , was considered a success after the bureau reversed the trend of declining mail response rates , and the bureau made plans to continue the program for 2010 . bureau officials stated that the 2010 campaign consolidates all census communications under a single communications contract . this integrated communications campaign aims to motivate the entire populations of the 50 states , the district of columbia , puerto rico , and other u.s. territories to participate in the census through partnerships ( with community groups , businesses , colleges , faith - based organizations , and other targeted groups ) ; public relations ; events ; census in schools ; and paid advertisements in broadcast , print , and online media . bureau officials noted that the advertising campaign would not be included in the dress rehearsal because the bureau's experience including the advertising campaign in the 1998 dress rehearsal did not provide the feedback needed to revise the creative aspects of the campaign . to refine the communications campaign , the bureau conducted an audience segmentation analysis to identify how to best reach people with the paid advertising campaign . replacement mailing . the bureau plans to include the replacement mailing in the 2010 census design .