we provided a draft of this report for review and comment to doe . in written comments , reproduced in appendix i , doe agreed with our recommendation . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or neumannj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to the report are listed in appendix ii . in addition to the contact named above , christopher murray , assistant director ; pamela davidson ; ellen fried ; daniel semick ; alexandra stone ; and barbara timmerman made key contributions to this report . doe has identified resources for potentially using the enhanced procurement authority but has not examined whether these resources are adequate . doe officials described two types of resources that were in place and that could be important in using the authority: ( 1 ) information on doe , nnsa , or m&o contractor procurements and potential suppliers for those procurements that are gathered from open or classified sources or solicited from potential suppliers , and ( 2 ) trained personnel who can evaluate supply chain risks based on that information . if doe determines that some circumstances warrant using the enhanced procurement authority , examining whether its resources are adequate could help ensure that the department can support using the authority in accordance with any processes that it develops . doe has taken several steps in recent years to increase its focus on managing supply chain risk . however , 2 years after congress provided the secretary with enhanced procurement authority to help manage supply chain risk doe has not used and has not developed processes for using the authority . while doe officials expect that instances under which the authority would be useful would be infrequent , given other options doe and its m&o contractors have to manage risks , doe has not fully assessed the circumstances where the authority could be useful , consistent with federal standards that call for management to periodically review control activities for relevance and effectiveness . without assessing the circumstances under which the enhanced procurement authority could be useful , doe will not know how , if at all , the authority could help it achieve its objective of managing supply chain risk and will not be able to provide information about the relevance of the authority to support congressional decision - making about whether to extend the authority beyond its current termination date . further , because doe has not developed processes for using the authority , doe also has not assessed whether adequate resources — trained personnel and information — are in place to support such processes . examining whether adequate resources are in place , consistent with internal control standards , could help provide assurance that the resources are available to support using the authority in accordance with any processes that doe develops .