ondcp had no comments . hhs provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of transportation , the director of the white house's office of national drug control policy , the secretary of health and human services , interested congressional committees , and other interested parties . the report also is available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or flemings@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . the senate report accompanying the transportation and housing and urban development , and related agencies appropriations bill , 2014 requires us to conduct a study on the strategies that nhtsa , ondcp , and states have taken to address drug impairment and assess the challenges they face in detecting and reducing drug - impaired driving . pursuant to that mandate , we reviewed the actions of relevant federal agencies and selected states as well as relevant literature to identify actions taken to address drug - impaired driving and associated challenges . specifically , we analyzed ( 1 ) what is known about the extent of drug - impaired driving in the united states ; ( 2 ) what challenges , if any , exist for federal , state , and local agencies in addressing drug - impaired driving ; and ( 3 ) what actions federal and state agencies have taken to address drug - impaired driving and what gaps exist , if any , in the federal response to drug - impaired driving . this review defines drug - impaired driving as driving while impaired by illegal drugs or prescription and over - the - counter ( legal ) medications . this review does not include impaired driving among commercial motor carriers , for which different laws and regulations apply than for members of the general public . to describe what is known about the extent of drug - impaired driving in the united states , to identify challenges to addressing drug - impaired driving , and to identify actions federal and state agencies have taken to mitigate those challenges , we conducted a literature search to identify sources of data on the extent of drugged and drug - impaired driving in the united states and studies on the issue of drug - impaired driving , including challenges and strategies for addressing the problem . we identified existing studies from peer - reviewed journals , government reports , and conference papers based on searches of various databases , such as proquest and transportation research international documentation . search parameters included international studies , studies across the u.s. and in specific states , and research on drug - impaired - driving challenges and countermeasures .