pub . 104-330 , 110 stat . 4016 ( 1996 ) ( codified , as amended , at 25 u.s.c . ยง 4101 et seq .

 ) in our prior work on the mtw and fss programs , we concluded that hud could take additional steps to understand program outcomes . we made eight recommendations in our april 2012 report on the mtw program , seven of which have been implemented . we made two recommendations to hud concerning fss in a july 2013 report on self - sufficiency programs.recommendations . the following discussion addresses selected recommendations from these reports that focus on improving program assessment . ( see app . i for a full list of the recommendations from these reports and their status. ) in our april 2012 report on the mtw program , we identified a number of weaknesses that limited hud's ability to determine program outcomes as they related to statutory purposes . first , we found that guidance on reporting performance information did not emphasize the importance of accurate outcome - oriented information . we noted that phas participating in mtw ( mtw agencies ) reported annually on their activities , including efforts to reduce administrative costs and encourage residents to work . but the usefulness of this information was limited because it was not consistently outcome oriented . for example , for similar activities designed to promote family self - sufficiency , one mtw agency reported only the number of participants , which is generally considered an output , and another agency did not provide any performance information . to be consistent with the gpra modernization act of 2010 ( gprama ) , we noted that hud's guidance on reporting performance information should indicate the importance of outcome - oriented information . second , we reported in 2012 that hud had not identified the performance data needed to assess the results of similar mtw activities across phas or of the program as a whole . obtaining performance information from demonstration programs is critical , because the purpose of a demonstration is to test approaches to identify those that provide positive results . since 2009 hud had been requiring agencies to provide information on the impact of mtw activities , including benchmarks and metrics , in their annual mtw reports . we found that while these reports were informative , they did not lend themselves to quantitative analysis because the reporting requirements did not call for standardized data , such as the number of residents who found employment . further , we found that hud had not established performance indicators for mtw . according to gprama , federal agencies should establish efficiency , output , and outcome indicators for each program activity as appropriate . federal internal control standards also require the establishment of performance indicators . as we noted in 2012 , specific performance indicators for the mtw program could be based on the three statutory purposes of the program . for example , agencies could report on the savings achieved ( reducing costs ) .