team leads and nonmanagement employees . to encourage the candor o the individuals who participated in the small group interviews , we did n record their names in our notes from those interviews and agreed not to share our notes with atsdr management . additionally , at the conclusion of each of the six small group interviews we administered a short questionnaire to the participants to collect additional information about their perspectives on the policies and procedures that guide their work , and on improving public health product quality at the agency . of the 33 questionnaires we distributed , we received 30 completed questionnaires . the views expressed by these employees cannot be generalized to all employees working within these divisions or in these roles . we also conducted six on - site small group interviews . we interviewed employees in 3 of atsdr's 10 division of regional operations ( dro ) offices , and employees in 3 of 30 cooperative agreement partner offices . we chose the three regions that issued the greatest number of public health assessments and health consultations in fiscal year 2008 . those regions were region 5 ( illinois , indiana , michigan , minnesota , ohio , and wisconsin ) , region 10 ( alaska , idaho , oregon , and washington ) , and region 4 ( alabama , florida , georgia , kentucky , mississippi , north carolina , south carolina , and tennessee ) . we interviewed the three cooperative agreement partners that were located in the same states as our selected regional offices — the washington state department of health , the illinois department of public health , and the georgia division of public health . we also conducted interviews with officials , experts , and researchers outside atsdr to gain an understanding of atsdr's relationship with other agencies , to get their perspectives on atsdr's work , and to learn about the policies and procedures used by other prominent scientific research organizations . we conducted interviews with federal officials from the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) ; the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , which atsdr advises about the health aspects of hazardous waste sites or spills ; and the national institutes of health's ( nih ) national institute of environmental health sciences ( niehs ) , with which atsdr collaborates on various matters related to environmental health science . we also conducted interviews with officials from two national scientific research organizations , the national academies and the national science foundation . we interviewed two experts in environmental health science who had experience working with atsdr , and we spoke with two advocacy organizations that work with communities that have been affected by environmental health problems . we conducted this performance audit from april 2009 to april 2010 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .