market access . the united states viewed attaining additional market access as an important objective in the negotiations . u.s. and cairns group negotiators proposed a harmonizing formula for tariff reduction known as the swiss formula that would subject the higher tariffs to larger cuts . other members , including the eu , japan , and korea , favored an across - the - board average cut and a minimum cut per product ( tariff line ) . as illustrated in figure 2 , this approach would generally result in less liberalization than if the harmonizing formula were used . many developing countries , and the cairns group , proposed substantially less liberalizing developing country tariff reductions , in part to counter continued use of subsidies in developed countries . the cancun ministerial conference highlighted the challenge of meeting the high and sometimes competing expectations created at doha of both developing and developed countries , particularly with respect to negotiations on critical agricultural issues . while the issue has been contentious for many years , the cancun experience demonstrates that forward movement on agriculture is central to the possibility of making further progress in the doha development round . although the cancun meeting ended because of the lack of consensus on negotiating the singapore issues , what many developing nations wanted from the developed world were concessions on agriculture , in particular dramatic reductions in export subsidies and domestic support . at this point , it is difficult to predict how the setback at cancun will ultimately affect the doha development round negotiations . there are some signs that both developed and developing countries are rethinking their positions . the united states and the european union have shifted away from taking an active leadership role , but have recently signaled some willingness to engage in further negotiations . although a number of g - 20 members have abandoned the group or made statements undercutting its unanimity of views , the group's founders still appear intent to play a leadership role in pushing for global agriculture reform . while progress remains possible , political events scheduled to occur over the next year may add uncertainty to the negotiating process . for example , in the united states , the 2004 presidential and congressional elections are looming , and protectionist pressures are rising along with the u.s. trade deficit . elections in europe and in one of the largest developing countries , india , may also have an impact on the negotiations . finally , how wto members handle long - simmering disputes on such topics as corporate tax subsidies and steel could also affect the negotiating climate . in this regard , president bush's recent decision to lift safeguard tariffs on steel may be viewed as an important development . as we have noted in previous reports , the wto has often found it difficult to achieve consensus and bridge its members' strongly held , disparate views on politically sensitive issues , in part because it is an ever - growing , more complex , and diverse organization . various devices , such as interim deadlines , were put in place for the first stage of doha negotiations to redress these significant organizational challenges , but they fell short of achieving desired progress .