developing data standards . the specific objective was to draft the seven nsdi framework standards . drafts of these seven framework standards , as well as five transportation subthemes and a base standard have now been completed . project officials plan to submit these drafts to the american national standards institute by the end of september 2003 . creating an inventory of federal data holdings . to meet this objective , metadata for all relevant federal data sets must first be collected and made available in the nsdi clearinghouse . deploying an internet portal . this task was to design and implement an internet portal to serve as a one - stop interface for users seeking links to geospatial data that were already available and cataloged in the nsdi clearinghouse . a demonstration version of the portal has been developed , and the first publicly available version is expected to be implemented by the end of june 2003 . plans are to begin adding new data to the portal , now that it has been developed . project officials are also considering future enhancements to the functionality of the portal ; however , no milestones have been set for any specific enhancements . users need metadata to determine whether a data set is useful for their purposes and to be aware of any special stipulations about processing and interpreting the data . accordingly , omb circular a - 11 required that all federal data sets with a replacement value exceeding $1 million be documented in fgdc metadata and the metadata be accessible and searchable in the nsdi clearinghouse network by february 10 , 2003 . encouraging greater coordination among federal , state , and local agencies . to support this objective , a process has been established to coordinate geospatial one - stop's activities across these various government levels . according to the project's cooperating states coordinator , eight federal agencies are participating in developing and implementing the initiative . in addition , an intergovernmental board of directors was established with two - thirds of the vote held by state , local and tribal representatives . the purpose of the board was to help ensure collaboration among potential stakeholders from all government sectors . according to the national states geographic information council's ( nsgic ) representative , state , county , and municipal levels of government are well represented and play a useful role in providing alternative views about the direction of the initiative . while geospatial one - stop's objectives are important , they do not represent a significantly new or different approach to the gis integration problem that the government has been struggling with for more than a decade . first , while developing and implementing an internet portal may offer users additional functionality over the existing clearinghouse , unless the underlying geospatial data offered through the portal are standardized across data providers , the additional functionality offered by the portal may be of limited value . second , the objective of finalizing the seven framework standards , while important , is limited . as i discussed earlier , a total of 34 data themes was identified in omb circular a - 16 as a necessary foundation for the nsdi .