pirate attacks . the total number of reported pirate attacks increased from 30 in 2007 to 219 in 2010 . ( see figure 4 in appendix i. ) since 2007 , there have been at least eight reported attempted attacks on u.s. - flagged vessels , two of which involved pirates successfully boarding or hijacking vessels — the attacks on the mv maersk alabama and sv quest . although we reported in september 2010 that total attacks in the first half of 2010 had declined as compared with the same period in 2009 , since the issuance of our report , total attacks in 2010 reached levels similar to 2009 . additionally , while we previously reported the rate of successful attacks had dropped from 40 percent in 2007 to 22 percent in 2009 , the rate had rebounded to almost 30 percent at the end of 2010 . pirates have maintained the same success rate of attacks for january and february 2011 . hostages captured . somali pirates captured more than six times the number of hostages in 2010 than in 2007 . ( see figure 5 in appendix i. ) such data show that piracy remains a persistent problem . moreover , in a february 2011 meeting of agency and international partners , officials stated that , since the time of our report , the level of violence has increased , the average length of time hostages spend in captivity has grown , and more incidents of hostage abuse have been reported . agencies could enhance collaboration by developing joint guidance to implement and coordinate actions on several action plan tasks . effective joint guidance also addresses how agency activities and resources will be aligned to achieve goals . in the absence of clearly identified roles and responsibilities and joint implementation guidance , agencies involved in countering piracy have made comparatively more progress in implementing those action plan tasks that fall firmly within one agency's area of expertise , such as coast guard's enforcement of u.s. - regulated commercial - vessel compliance with maritime security requirements and dod's interdiction efforts . in contrast , there are several tasks in the action plan for which multiple agencies have relevant authorities , capabilities , or interests , and on which less progress has been made . the nsc has not identified roles and responsibilities for implementing these tasks , and officials have acknowledged that the agencies have not developed joint guidance to ensure their efforts work together efficiently and effectively . for example: strategic communication . multiple agencies are responsible for communicating with various audiences about piracy , but there is no governmentwide strategic communication plan in place to guide agency efforts . according to state officials , state has drafted a governmentwide counterpiracy strategic communication plan for interagency review but as of march 2011 , the department had not finalized this plan . disrupting pirate revenue . multiple agencies collect or examine information on pirates' financial activities , including dod , justice , state , and the treasury . however , officials agree that information their agencies gather on pirate finances is not being systematically analyzed , and it is unclear if any agency is using it to identify and apprehend pirate leaders or financiers .