gao - 10-935 . washington , d.c.: september 30 , 2010 . ( see fig . the ehcpm is used to estimate needed resources based on the total cost of providing each health care service . va officials said this total cost reflects direct patient costs as well as costs associated with management , administration , and maintenance of facilities . the ehcpm's estimates are based on three basic components: the projected number of veterans who will be enrolled in va health care , the projected utilization of va's health care services — that is , the quantity of health care services enrollees are expected to use — and the projected unit cost of providing these services . ( see fig . each component is subject to a number of complex adjustments to account for the characteristics of va health care and the veterans who access va's health care services . the ehcpm makes these projections 3 or 4 years into the future for budget purposes based on data from the most recent fiscal year . for example , in 2009 , va used data from fiscal year 2008 to develop its health care budget estimate for the fiscal year 2011 request , including the advance appropriations request for fiscal year 2012 . to project the expected number of veterans who will be enrolled in va health care , the ehcpm relies on a combination of va and other federal data to identify current enrollees and to estimate how many eligible , nonenrolled veterans will choose to enroll . the ehcpm uses va data to identify the number of current enrollees in va health care and to calculate historical enrollment rates by various characteristics , including age , gender , priority level , and geographic location . in addition , the ehcpm uses data developed by va that combine federal census data on veterans and department of defense data on service members separated from active duty since the last decennial census to identify the number of eligible veterans not currently enrolled in va health care . the data developed by va also incorporate department of defense estimates of how many service members will separate from active duty each year into the future . the ehcpm uses these data to estimate how many eligible veterans will choose to enroll in va health care by applying va's historical enrollment rates to this population . to project the utilization or the quantity of va's health care services veterans will use and the unit costs of va's health care services , va groups these services into two major categories in the ehcpm: ( 1 ) those services that va provides in a manner comparable to other providers , whose services are paid for by medicare and private health insurers ; and ( 2 ) those services that are unique to or are provided in a different manner by va. for example , va provides services , such as emergency room visits and physician office visits , in a manner comparable to other providers . in contrast , va provides rehabilitation services to homeless veterans and certain types of prosthetic services that va officials said are not generally offered by other providers .