hud . at hud headquarters , the office of community planning and development , office of special needs assistance programs , carries out hud's brac process responsibilities . hud field offices provide technical assistance to lras and homeless assistance providers throughout the planning process . hud's role is to review the redevelopment plan and homeless assistance submission that the lra submits to hud and dod . hud may also negotiate and consult with the lra before or during its preparation of its plan . lras . the lra is any authority or instrumentality established by state or local government and recognized by the secretary of defense through the office of economic adjustment as the entity responsible for developing the redevelopment plan or for directing implementation of the redevelopment plan . lras are required to perform certain steps to allow the community input during its deliberations . the communities in the vicinity of a base are defined by brac regulation as the political jurisdiction or jurisdictions , other than the state , that include the lra for the base . homeless assistance providers . homeless assistance providers , also called “representatives of the homeless,” may include state or local government agencies or private nonprofit organizations that provide or propose to provide assistance to homeless persons and families . homeless assistance providers seek buildings and properties that may provide supportive services , job and skills training , employment programs , shelter , transitional housing , permanent housing , food and clothing banks , treatment facilities , or other activities that meet an identified need of the homeless or fill a gap in the local continuum of care . under the brac statute as revised by the redevelopment act and its implementing regulations , lras are required to accept and consider notices of interest from homeless assistance providers . in this process , the lra prepares a redevelopment plan after consulting with homeless assistance providers and other community groups affected by the base closure , and hud assesses the plan to determine whether it appropriately balances the needs of the community for economic and other development with the needs of the homeless . subsequent to hud approval and other procedural steps , dod may transfer properties for homeless assistance purposes . figure 1 shows the homeless assistance process for brac surplus property under the redevelopment act . pursuant to the brac statute as amended by the redevelopment act , the military departments are required to determine whether other dod components or federal agencies have a use for property at the brac base , then notify the lras of any surplus property available for reuse and publish that information in the federal register . the lra then must advertise the surplus property availability in a newspaper of general circulation within the vicinity of the base . the advertisement must include the period , required to be between 90 and 180 days following the advertisement , during which it will receive notices of interest from homeless assistance providers . the lra must also conduct outreach with homeless assistance providers , including holding a workshop and tour of the properties . when the lra completes its outreach process , it has up to 270 days to generate a redevelopment plan and a homeless assistance submission .