sbrefa does not require agencies to maintain this information . because msha was the only agency that could identify the number of enforcement actions against small entities that did not result in some type of penalty relief , it was also the only agency that could identify the number of such actions that involved a paperwork requirements . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . ( see table 4. ) the msha data indicated that , in each year , less than 9 percent of the enforcement actions without some type of penalty reduction involved paperwork requirements . msha said that most of these actions imposed single $55 fines that were required by regulation or involved more serious violations that could have an impact on the health and safety of employees . msha provided the following examples of what they considered to be “serious” paperwork - related violations: msha regulations require that all electrical equipment must be frequently examined , tested , and properly maintained by a qualified person to ensure safe operating conditions , and that a record of such examinations must be kept and made available to miners and representatives of the secretary of labor . failure to keep such records , although technically a “paperwork” violation , may represent failure to maintain the equipment in the specified manner . msha regulations also require that self - propelled mobile equipment to be used during a shift must be inspected before being placed in operation on that shift . any defects on the equipment that are not corrected immediately must be reported to and recorded by the mine operator . therefore , an msha inspection that discovers defects in self - propelled equipment may also be recorded as a paperwork - related violation . fcc and ins officials said they could not provide data on enforcement actions involving small entities because their agencies do not distinguish between large and small entities . fcc provided information on certain enforcement actions involving paperwork requirements , but the data were for all enforcement actions , not just those against small entities . epa officials said the agency does not maintain data on paperwork - related enforcement actions . osha officials said that there are no enforcement actions involving small entities that do not receive some form of penalty relief under the agency's section 223 policy . therefore , there are no examples of such actions that involve paperwork requirements . congress provided agencies with substantial discretion in developing their section 223 civil penalty relief policies . not surprisingly , the agencies used that discretion and developed policies that vary substantially . for example , some of the agencies' policies cover all civil penalty enforcement actions involving small entities , but other policies cover only some such actions . similar legislation was introduced in the senate but was not enacted . in commenting on this proposed legislation , epa and other agencies indicated that information collection requirements are the foundation of many health and safety statutes , and that violations of those requirements should not automatically be treated as a minor infractions meriting a waiver of civil penalties .