over time , the bay's ecosystem has deteriorated . eleven key federal agencies ; the states of maryland , pennsylvania , and virginia ; and the district of columbia provided almost $3.7 billion in direct funding from fiscal years 1995 through 2004 to restore the bay . federal agencies provided a total of approximately $972 million in direct funding , while the states and the district of columbia provided approximately $2.7 billion in direct funding for the restoration effort over the 10-year period . of the federal agencies , the department of defense's army corps of engineers provided the greatest amount of direct funding — $293.5 million . of the states , maryland provided the greatest amount of direct funding — more than $1.8 billion — which is over $1.1 billion more than any other state . typically , the states provided about 75 percent of the direct funding for restoration , and the funding has generally increased over the 10-year period . as figure 2 shows , the largest percentage of direct funding — approximately 47 percent — went to water quality protection and restoration . sound land use ( $1.1 billion ) water quality protection and restoration ( $1.7 billion ) ten of the key federal agencies , pennsylvania , and the district of columbia provided about $1.9 billion in additional funding from fiscal years 1995 through 2004 for activities that indirectly affected bay restoration . these activities were conducted as part of broader agency efforts and / or would continue without the restoration effort . federal agencies provided approximately $935 million in indirect funding , while pennsylvania and the district of columbia together provided approximately $991 million in indirect funding for the restoration effort over the 10-year period . of the federal agencies , the u.s. department of agriculture provided the greatest amount of indirect funding — $496.5 million — primarily through the natural resources conservation service . of the states , pennsylvania provided the greatest amount of indirect funding — $863.8 million . this assessment is scheduled to be completed by late summer . about $3.7 billion in direct funding was provided for the restoration effort by 11 key federal agencies ; the states of maryland , pennsylvania , and virginia ; and the district of columbia from fiscal years 1995 through 2004 . an additional $1.9 billion was provided for activities that had an indirect impact on bay restoration . the bay program did not have a comprehensive , coordinated implementation strategy that would allow it to strategically target limited resources to the most effective restoration activities . recognizing that it could not manage all 102 commitments outlined in chesapeake 2000 , the bay program had focused its efforts on 10 keystone commitments . although the bay program had developed numerous planning documents , some of the documents were inconsistent with each other and some of the plans were perceived to be unachievable by stakeholders . moreover , the program invested scarce resources in developing and updating certain plans , even though it knew that it did not have the resources to implement them .