ssa did not have any comments . dot's director of audit relations , office of the secretary of transportation , provided technical comments on the report , which have been incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of transportation , the commissioner of the social security administration and other interested parties . in addition , this report is also available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or berrickc@gao.gov . he suffered from seizures and unconsciousness . for example , according to ssa documentation he passed out while driving a truck and awoke while walking in the street with no recollection of what had occurred . ssa documents included a physician's note stating that the driver was medically disabled from any form of gainful occupation due to a diagnosis of intractable seizure disorder . despite his medical history , he was issued a first - time cdl in 2005 , which was renewed in 2009 . when applying for his cdl , he certified to the state driver's licensing agency that he did not have a condition that could cause a loss of consciousness . he continues to receive ssa disability benefits for seizures . we did not receive a medical examination form or certificate for this individual from the state that issued his cdl and thus were unable to determine whether a medical examiner considered or was aware of the driver's condition or whether a medical examination occurred . cdl issued despite drug dependence . in 2005 , this individual's personal driver's license was suspended for 12 months after a driving while intoxicated ( dwi ) conviction . according to ssa documentation , in 2007 he was diagnosed with psychosis , a history of alcohol abuse , and cannabis abuse following a mental - health hospitalization . he stated that his illness began to interfere with his work in 2006 and that he became unable to work in 2009 . he began receiving ssa disability benefits the following year for functional psychiatric disorders . drug dependency was also noted in his file . ssa documentation states that in january 2009 , a physician noted that this individual was unable to participate in employment or training activities in any capacity due to paranoid schizophrenia . however , this individual obtained a cdl from virginia in june 2010 . we did not receive a medical examination form or certificate for this individual from the state that issued his cdl and thus were unable to determine whether a medical examiner considered or was aware of the driver's condition or whether a medical examination occurred . in october 2010 , he refused to submit to an alcohol test while operating a commercial motor vehicle . this refusal led to a dwi conviction and permanent cdl suspension in february 2011 .