these responsibilities are consistent with leading practices . according to the fraud risk framework , agency managers can show commitment to combating fraud by creating a structure with a dedicated entity to lead fraud risk management activities and coordinate antifraud initiatives across the agency . in addition , leading practices call for the designated antifraud entity to , among other things , serve as the repository of knowledge on fraud risks and controls and lead or assist with trainings and other fraud - awareness activities . since the oafp was established , the office has performed several of these activities . for example , the oafp has taken steps to coordinate antifraud initiatives across ssa by gathering information about progress on the initiatives , and has helped create antifraud training materials for the agency . in addition , the oafp formed a committee in 2015 , made up of associate commissioners from across the agency , to work on antifraud initiatives . ssa's acting commissioner has reinforced ssa's commitment to combating fraud by communicating the importance of antifraud efforts in multiple ways . for example , the acting commissioner highlighted ssa's antifraud efforts in a march 2015 virtual town hall meeting , which more than 27,000 ssa staff participated in by video or in person , and issued a “commissioner's broadcast” to all employees , encouraging staff to provide suggestions for combating fraud via an e - mail box launched in march 2014 . from march 2014 through the end of december 2016 , ssa received 399 suggestions and implemented 8 of them by , for example , adding examples and a cross - reference in ssa's operations manual to help employees identify potential beneficiary fraud . in addition , the acting commissioner included preventing waste , fraud , and abuse as a guiding principle in ssa's strategic plan and supported the launch in early 2015 of ssa's antifraud website , which includes a link for the public to report suspected fraud to the oig . although these steps are generally consistent with leading practices in fraud risk management , the oafp faced challenges during its first 2 years to fully establish itself within the agency . specifically , the oafp faced challenges related to a lack of consistent leadership and established institutional relationships . however , recent actions may help to address these challenges: lack of consistent leadership: until recently , the oafp had not had a permanent leader who provided accountability for the agency's antifraud initiatives . when the oafp was established , ssa designated the oafp associate commissioner as the agency's chief fraud prevention officer . according to ssa officials , from the summer of 2015 until september 2016 , two senior executive service ( ses ) candidates served successive 6-month periods as the oafp's acting associate commissioner . without developing and documenting an antifraud strategy that considers the likelihood and impact of fraud risks along with its tolerance for these risks and its existing activities to mitigate them , as called for in leading practices , ssa cannot ensure that it has a coordinated approach to address the range of fraud risks in its disability programs and appropriately target the most significant risks .