into electrical energy . the two main types of batteries are primary ( non - rechargeable ) and secondary ( rechargeable ) . primary batteries , which are discarded after their charge has been depleted , are the most common battery type for soldier - carried applications . a subclass of primary d batteries called thermal batteries is used for short - term , high - power applications ( eg , missiles ) . while primary batteries typically self - discharge available energy when not in use , thermal batteries have a longer shelf life because they remain inert until activated . secondary batteries , which can be reenergized after their charge has been depleted , are less commonly used by deployed units than primary batteries . however , the army has undertaken educational campaigns to increase their use in light of some cost efficiencies and operational advantages — including overall weight reduction of soldiers' equipment . further , the military services are interested in transitioning from non - rechargeable batteries to secondary batteries because their use by deployed units may decrease the number of vehicle convoys needed to supply batteries in war zones . dod is also interested in limiting the proliferation of battery types to reduce the number of different battery types the soldiers have to carry and limit soldier confusion over which battery is required to operate a device — thus simplifying operations and resupply . see figure 1 for a sample of dod's power source inventory . in general , fuel cells and capacitors are less mature technologies than batteries with respect to defense applications . fuel cells are electrochemical devices that convert the chemical energy in a fuel , such as hydrogen , into electrical energy . fuel cells look and function very similar to batteries . for the purpose of this report , we define coordination as any joint activity by two or more organizations that is intended to produce more public value than could be produced when the organizations act alone . as we have previously reported , interagency coordination is important to avoid carrying out programs in a fragmented , uncoordinated way in areas where multiple agencies address a similar mission . standardization , which is a form of coordination , includes efforts to expand the use of common or interchangeable parts by developing and agreeing on compatible standards . with respect to power sources , this may include developing standard shapes to facilitate the use of common , nonproprietary power sources in a range of weapon systems and equipment . dod lacks comprehensive , departmentwide data for its total investment in the power sources area and no single dod office aggregates these data across all investment categories . further , availability of complete data varies across the three investment categories: s&t , logistics support , and acquisition programs . we determined that dod invested at least $2.1 billion in power sources from fiscal year 2006 through fiscal year 2010 . while dod appears to have adequate departmentwide data on s&t efforts , it does not have departmentwide data for all logistics support investments . dod has limited data on its investments in power sources when they are developed or purchased for acquisition programs .