washington . d.c.: september 30 , 2013 . prescription drugs: overview of approaches to control prescription drug spending in federal programs . gao - 09-819t . reviewed the methodology for both of these estimates . for the purpose of this report , dod's estimate that was developed prior to the start of the pilot will be referred to as the “projected cost savings.” esi's estimate will be referred to as the “estimate of cost savings for the first year of the pilot.” to determine the extent to which dod has prepared for the expansion of the pilot requirements to all eligible tricare beneficiaries , we interviewed dod officials and requested documents evaluating the pilot and planning documents for the expansion . we also reviewed dod's contract with esi to determine if it included requirements specific to the expansion . for each of our research objectives , we interviewed dod officials and , as appropriate , esi officials . these interviews included discussion about how dod assessed the quality of the data and about the data systems that generate the reports provided to dod . based on our review of the information describing the data collection , analysis , cost saving estimates , and systematic checks of the data provided by dod and esi , we determined the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . in addition , we reviewed the relevant standards for internal control in the federal government . we conducted this performance audit from march 2015 to september 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in february 2014 , dod began mailing notices to tricare for life beneficiaries eligible for the pilot informing them of the pilot requirements for filling covered medications through mail order or mtf pharmacies , rather than retail pharmacies . in its contract with dod , esi is responsible for implementing the mail - order component of the pilot , which includes operating a call center through which beneficiaries may ask questions about the pilot and transfer prescriptions from a retail pharmacy to mail order . according to dod officials , individual mtf pharmacies are responsible for implementing the mtf pharmacy component of the pilot . dod's defense health agency's pharmacy operations division is responsible for monitoring both the mail - order and mtf - pharmacy components of the pilot . after receiving dod's notice , beneficiaries are allowed two 30-day supply refills at a retail pharmacy as a courtesy . the courtesy refills give beneficiaries time to transfer their prescriptions to mail order or an mtf pharmacy , according to dod officials . after each of these two refills , esi contacts the beneficiary by letter to remind them about the options for obtaining future refills — either through mail order , through an mtf pharmacy , or by paying 100 percent of the cost at a retail network pharmacy . requests for coverage for a third refill at a retail pharmacy are denied .