pub . 101-510 , title xxix ( 1990 ) ( 10 u.s.c . 2687 note ) . throughout this report , we will refer to the defense base closure and realignment act of 1990 ( as amended ) as “the 1990 brac statute.” department of defense , the report of the department of defense on base realignment and closure , april 1998 . 2013 , the acting deputy under secretary again testified that brac 2005 reduced capacity only by about 3 percent and that excess capacity remains . such preliminary estimates of excess infrastructure capacity , which dod has developed outside the brac process primarily to support the need for future brac rounds , differ from the data - intensive process , supplemented by the use of military judgment that dod has used to formulate the recommendations for specific base closures and realignments that it has proposed to the brac commission within the brac process . for example , to develop recommendations for the 2005 brac round , dod collected an estimated 25 million pieces of capacity and military value data from dod databases and from hundreds of defense installations . these data were certified as to their accuracy by hundreds of persons in senior leadership positions across the country . the dod inspector general and the services' audit agencies also played an important role in ensuring that the data used in the brac analyses were accurate . in our march 2013 report , military bases: opportunities exist to improve future base realignment and closure rounds , we provide a detailed assessment of that process . in senate report 112-173 accompanying the senate armed services committee's version of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 , we were directed to review the systems and processes that dod uses to identify the extent to which bases or facilities are excess to needs . the objective of this report is to discuss how dod has estimated the amount of its excess infrastructure or capacity , outside of the brac process . to determine how dod developed its preliminary estimates of excess capacity , we reviewed excess capacity estimates for the military services , the defense logistics agency , and dod as a whole . specifically , we obtained and reviewed ( 1 ) the written march 14 , 2013 testimony by the acting deputy under secretary of defense ( installations and environment ) and transcript from the hearing , and ( 2 ) the written march 8 , 2012 , testimony by the deputy under secretary of defense ( installations and environment ) and the transcript from that hearing , to identify applicable estimates of excess capacity . we also reviewed dod's 1998 and 2004 reports to congress on excess capacity and we analyzed the data used in dod's analyses , along with other supporting documentation , and we assessed the underlying assumptions and limitations , if any , of dod's analysis to identify the basis upon which dod made those excess capacity estimates . based on our review of the documentation provided , we determined that the data was sufficiently reliable to facilitate our analysis of the assumptions and potential limitations within dod's method for estimating excess capacity .