, program effectiveness . lexington , mass . : july 23 , 2004 . marker , david and others . what are the nonenergy benefits , such as improved air quality or employment impacts ? program officials indicated that they had conducted a great deal of planning and discussion with their stakeholders over the past 5 to 6 months and expect to conduct five or six studies to meet those needs . the part review process has stimulated agencies to increase their evaluation capacity and available information on program results . the systematic examination of the array of evidence available on program performance has helped illuminate gaps and has helped focus evaluation questions . the public visibility of the results of the part reviews has brought management attention to the development of agency evaluation capacity . evaluations are useful to specific decision makers to the degree that the evaluations are credible and address their information needs . agencies are likely to design evaluations to meet their own needs — that is , in - depth analyses that inform program improvement . if omb wants evaluations with a broader scope , such as information that helps determine a program's relevance or value , it will need to take steps to shape both evaluation design and execution . because agency evaluation resources tend to be limited , they are most usefully focused on illuminating important areas of uncertainty . while regular performance reporting is key to good program management and oversight , requiring all federal programs to conduct frequent evaluation studies is likely to result in many superficial reviews that will have little utility and that will overwhelm agency evaluation capacity . in light of our findings and conclusions in this report , we are making the following recommendations to omb reiterating and expanding on recommendations in our previous report: omb should encourage agencies to discuss their plans for program evaluations — especially those in response to an omb recommendation — with omb and with congressional and other program stakeholders to ensure that their findings will be timely , relevant , and credible and that they will be used to inform policy and management decisions . omb should engage in dialogue with agencies and congressional stakeholders on a risk - based allocation of scarce evaluation resources among programs , based on size , importance , or uncertain effectiveness , and on the timing of such evaluations . omb should continue to improve its part guidance and training of examiners on evaluation to acknowledge a wide range of appropriate methods . we provided a draft of this report to omb and the agencies for review and comment . omb agreed that evaluation methodology should be appropriate to the size and nature of the program and that randomized controlled trials may not be valuable in all settings . it noted its intent to provide additional guidance in this area . omb disagreed with the reference to the part as a checklist . this view was not ours but the view of agency officials who expressed concern about the focus of the assessment process . omb also provided a number of technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate throughout the report . omb's comments appear in appendix iii .