gao - 06-29r . washington , d.c.: october 25 , 2005 . washington , d.c.: february 25 , 2000 . military training: potential to use lessons learned to avoid past mistakes is largely untapped . gao / nsiad - 95-152 . washington , d.c.: august 9 , 1995 . the study was completed in early 2005 . according to dod officials , while the study results have helped to inform the process , the detailed training and facility requirements contained in the study have not been formally adopted because there was not enough agreement among the services as to the usefulness or veracity of the identified urban operations training requirements in that study . consequently , in may 2005 joint forces command convened a working group to develop joint urban operations training and facilities requirements on which to base a joint urban operations training strategy . in the committee report accompanying the fiscal year 2006 national defense authorization act , the senate armed services committee directed dod to complete its efforts to establish the requirements for facilities and also directed it to establish , by november 1 , 2005 , a training requirements baseline against which the ability to train for urban operations within the services and across dod could be measured . in the report , the committee expressed concern that the services would otherwise continue to address urban operations training requirements and expend resources independently with minimal coordination and that a critical opportunity to develop capabilities for joint training in urban operations was not being effectively pursued . in response to congressional direction , joint forces command began working with the services to develop an overall strategy for joint urban operations and related facility and training requirements . according to dod , this effort is intended to meet the congressional directive for a requirements baseline . to date , the draft joint urban operations training strategy , as currently drafted , primarily focuses on the need to enhance training facilities to accommodate larger , more realistic joint urban operations training events . the current draft strategy's focus is to identify the necessary locations for joint urban operations training for two audiences: ( 1 ) troops executing urban operations at the tactical level and ( 2 ) officers serving on the staffs of commanders conducting urban operations . as envisioned , the troops that execute the operations would undergo training that places members of different services together to learn to operate together and to overcome differences in standard practices , terms , and organizational cultures that can limit the effectiveness of operations . the draft strategy also envisions using three training range complexes comprised of existing training facilities in the western , central , and eastern united states , as well as improvements and expansions planned for some of these training facilities . for its second audience , the strategy suggested building new facilities in order to train staff officers in the skills associated with serving on a joint staff of a commander conducting urban operations .