programs . as we reported in 2018 , doe has not established a program management policy . however , nnsa issued its own program management policy in february 2019 . the policy applies to all nnsa elements and requires them to establish additional program management requirements for respective nnsa programs based on needs , risk , complexity , and stakeholder involvement , among other things . the nnsa policy defines a program in part as an organized set of activities directed toward a common purpose or goal , undertaken or proposed in support of an assigned mission area . in addition , some nnsa offices have issued their own program management directives that are more specific than the nnsa policy . for example , nnsa's office of defense programs — which is responsible for , among other things , weapon modernization programs , including leps , and associated materials and components , such as microelectronics — issued a program management directive in june 2019 that establishes requirements and processes for managing the office's programs . this directive establishes four program management categories and execution requirements for these categories . these management categories are risk - based and apply different execution requirements commensurate with program risk . in response , sandia submitted a proposal to nnsa in 2012 to construct a new , multibillion - dollar microelectronics production facility , called the center for heterogeneous integration , packaging , and processes ( chip2 ) . the sandia proposal estimated that chip2 would take 14 years to design and build at an estimated cost of $2.5 billion . the proposal indicated that the facility would increase microelectronics functionality and trustworthiness by creating a trusted supply chain into the future for design , fabrication , testing , and packaging activities . as a result of the time needed to design and construct chip2 , investment would still be needed to sustain the mesa sifab facility through 2025 . nnsa commissioned two studies by the aerospace corporation , a federally funded research and development center sponsored by the air force , to help the agency evaluate sandia's chip2 proposal against other potential alternatives , such as contracting with commercial entities to produce microelectronics . these studies , completed in august and september 2014 , generally ranked the chip2 proposal at or near the top of the alternatives but also stated that chip2 did not stand out as a decidedly better option . nonetheless , in early 2015 , nnsa's deputy administrator for defense programs issued a memorandum recommending that nnsa pursue the chip2 proposal as a formal capital asset project , subject to doe's project management order on acquisition of capital assets . in 2016 , in accordance with doe's project management order , nnsa developed two key documents during the initiation phase of its capital asset project supporting the chip2 proposal , which nnsa referred to as the trusted microelectronics capability ( tmc ) project . nnsa first developed a mission need statement , which is a formal document that identifies a credible performance gap between current capabilities and those needed to achieve the goals stated in the agency's strategic plan . the mission need should be stated in a way that is solution - neutral .