servicer . fha - approved , mortgage servicer . loan - to - value ( ltv ) ratio category . value of the property relative to the outstanding unpaid balance on the loan at matching . loan origination . year of the loan's origination . we excluded modification status from the matching criteria . while there is some indication that loans that have been modified once are more likely to redefault in the future , this is largely dependent on the quality of the modification . however , modification quality could not be determined based on the fha data we received . our analysis did not seek to conduct a definitive evaluation of the causal effects on outcomes of being sold through dasp . instead we sought to improve on simple comparisons of outcomes between sold and unsold loans by constructing a comparison group of unsold loans that were similar to sold loans on loan - level characteristics known to affect the likelihood of foreclosure . for example , matching sold and unsold loans by location minimized variation in neighborhood characteristics and local housing markets that could be associated with a higher or lower likelihood of foreclosure . we selected these factors based on our previous work on foreclosure mitigation and on consultations with subject - matter experts within gao . see appendix v for more information on our statistical matching analysis . to compare outcomes for sold and unsold loans , we identified outcomes using postsale reporting data dictionaries in fha's purchaser agreements as well as fha's status codes used in its default monitoring system and integrated database data dictionaries . we grouped the outcomes into six outcome categories . to assign sold loans to a category , we used fha's postsale reporting data , and to assign unsold loans to a category , we used fha's default monitoring system and integrated database data . the outcome categories were as follows: foreclosure . loans terminated with foreclosure . reperforming . loans restored to performing status either under the original mortgage terms or through a permanent modification . in this outcome , the borrower retains ownership of the home . temporary action . loans with temporary action that allow the borrower to retain ownership of the home — for example , an agreement for paying the loan balance or restoring it to performing status has been reached but has not met fha's time requirement to meet fha's definition of performing . this category may also include other interventions that have the intent of keeping the borrower in the home , such as forbearance . short sale / deed - in - lieu of foreclosure . loans that avoid foreclosure through short sales and deeds - in - lieu of foreclosure . in this outcome the borrower loses ownership of the home . unresolved . loans remaining in default status and whose outcomes were unresolved . loans whose outcomes do not fit into these other categories . a number of sold loans were reported by purchasers as resold , with no further outcome updates , and we decided to categorize these separately .