( app . i illustrates where the offices we selected are in education's principal office structure. ) we interviewed the directors and other supervisory staff involved in grant monitoring in these 12 offices and held discussions in each office with groups of program specialists ranging from 4 to 10 program specialists . in offices with large numbers of program specialists , we interviewed random samples of program specialists . in smaller offices , we interviewed all the program specialists who were available to meet with us . ( 3 ) to what extent is information shared and used within education to ensure the effectiveness of grant monitoring ? to answer these questions , we used information collected from current and past gao engagements related to grant monitoring , and held additional discussions with department officials to gain an understanding of grant monitoring at education . we documented our understanding of education's grant monitoring process and asked department officials to review the document and provide comments . they confirmed that our understanding was consistent with their grant monitoring practices and procedures . we based our evaluation of education's grant monitoring process on gao's standards for internal control in the federal government . we selected 12 of the department's 34 program offices from which to obtain more detailed information about their grant monitoring activities ( see table 1 ) . we selected these program offices because they encompass a wide variety of grant programs and they administer approximately 91 percent of grant funds in the department . nine of the 12 program offices reside in four of the principal offices , which collectively administer the department's largest grant programs in terms of total funding . to ensure that we included programs from all seven of the principal offices administering grants to entities that provide education or education - related services to students , we also selected the program offices that administered the largest amount of grant funds in the other three principal offices . from these interviews , we obtained information on how grant monitoring was implemented by program office staff , which monitoring activities staff considered to be reasonably effective in ensuring compliance with federal requirements , and where improvements in the grant monitoring process were needed . we corroborated the information from the interviews and small group discussions with review and analysis of plans , guidance , and protocols used by each program office to conduct its monitoring , as well as documentation concerning monitoring outcomes , interviews with officials from department management , and the results of outside evaluations or audits . we conducted this performance audit from november 2008 to november 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the department of education's mission is to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access . toward this end , education distributes federal grant funds to applicants throughout the nation to improve access to and the quality of education .