mandatory . budget authority provided through laws other than appropriations acts , and the outlays that result from such budget authority . sequestration status . omb's designation of the authority for purposes of sequestration , which is the cancellation of budgetary resources under a presidential order . we defined the status categories as follows: exempt . accounts for which budgetary resources are exempt from cancellation under budget enforcement sequestration procedures . sequestrable . accounts for which budgetary resources are subject to cancellation under budget enforcement sequestration procedures . partially sequestrable . accounts for which certain budgetary resources specified by law within the account are not subject to cancellation under budget enforcement sequestration procedures . in addition to the contact named above , susan e. murphy ( assistant director ) , katherine d. morris ( analyst in charge ) , alicia cackley , janice ceperich , jacqueline chapin , steven cohen , michael collins , james cosgrove , robert dacey , karin fangman , paul foderaro , carol henn , james a. howard , susan j. irving , charles jeszeck , kenneth john , heather krause , natalie logan , scott mcnulty , john mingus , sally moino , tracie sanchez , lori rectanus , frank rusco , dawn simpson , frank todisco , peter verchinski , and alicia white made key contributions to this report . discretionary . budget authority provided in and controlled through appropriations acts . special fund . analogous to a non - revolving trust fund but not classified as a trust fund in name . for example , the universal service fund subsidizes telecommunication carriers that provide telecommunications services to all consumers , including low - income consumers , schools and libraries , and those who live in rural or high - cost areas . when the general fund receives the cash , the trust fund or other dedicated fund records an asset for these collections and the general fund records a liability to the fund , which essentially means the trust fund has “lent” money to the general fund . as cash is disbursed , these asset and liability accounts are reduced . from the government - wide perspective , the trust fund or dedicated fund asset and general fund liability accounts eliminate with each other in consolidation . some trust funds and other dedicated funds have the legal authority to invest their balances , most of which are held in u.s. treasury securities . the value of the securities held is recorded as “debt held by government accounts” and represents debt owed by one part of the government to another ( i.e. , intragovernmental debt ) . in many ways , the special u.s. treasury securities held by government accounts are indistinguishable from the marketable government debt sold to the public . a maturity date is set , interest is accrued at established market rates , and the securities count as part of the total federal debt . generally , these securities are not traded in the financial markets and are able to be redeemed on demand by the government account . the interest they earn is credited to the fund accounts in the form of additional treasury securities or is used to pay current expenses or benefits .