this is incorrect . we clearly stated on page 26 that 31 nuclear facilities do not have safety bases that meet current requirements . what is the hazard category of ? what is the current safety basis approval status of ? safety basis is under development q5 . if the safety basis is under development , does have an approved preliminary safety basis under 10 cfr 830 ? since january 2007 , were there any potential inadequacies in the safety analysis ( pisas ) identified for ? if yes , how many pisas were identified ? how many of these pisas resulted in a positive usq ? of the positive usqs that resulted from pisas , how many resulted in justifications for continuing operation ( jcos ) ? of the positive usqs that resulted from pisas , how many are: q11a . number that are currently unresolved q12a . number resolved through revisions to the safety basis q12b . number resolved through amendments to the safety basis q12c . number resolved through permanent exemptions . number resolved through temporary exemptions q12e . number resolved through other actions q12g . number resolved through jco q13 . is currently operating under a jco ? if yes , how many jcos are currently in place ? difference between jco approval date and jco expected end date - in months q15b . length of time jco has been in place from end of survey field period - in months q16 . does currently have any approved exemptions under 10 cfr 830 ? if yes , how many of these exemptions are temporary exemptions ? for the general survey , more than one respondent from a site office responded to our survey . in some cases , not all respondents from the same site office necessarily provided the same response to the questions . as a result , if at least one site office respondent responded yes to a question , we coded the response from that site office as yes . hazard category 1 hazard category 2 hazard category 3 below hazard category 3 other don't know q3 . what is the operational status of ? aggregate results from the 16 site offices are presented below . at the request of the congress , the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) is examining the effectiveness of the department of energy's ( doe ) office of health , safety and security ( hss ) in its independent oversight of nuclear safety at doe facilities . as part of this review , we have prepared two surveys for doe officials who oversee nuclear safety at sites that contain these facilities . this survey includes a short set of general questions regarding safety basis guidance and approval authority . has your headquarters line management issued any guidance on safety basis requirements that is supplemental to the guidance issued by hss ? has your site office issued any guidance on safety basis requirements that is supplemental to the guidance issued by hss ? does your site office have the authority to approve initial safety basis requirements at hazard category 2 and 3 facilities ? yes , for both category 2 and 3 facilities q4 .