the corps . under section 404 of the clean water act , operations that discharge dredged or fill material into u.s. waters are required to obtain a permit from the corps . discharges under this permit must have a state certification to ensure the discharge meets water quality standards . in addition , under section 10 of the rivers and harbors act of 1899 , the corps has regulatory authority to oversee construction activities within the navigable waters of the united states , and applicants may be required to obtain a permit from the corps . environmental protection agency ( epa ) . applicants may be required under the clean air act ( caa ) to receive air permits for the construction and operation of lng facilities . state environmental agencies generally issue these permits , but epa can issue the permits if a state is not authorized to issue permits , or under other limited circumstances . epa also comments on the ferc draft and final eis , as required by the caa . applicants may also be required by law to consult with these and other federal agencies , such as the national oceanic and atmospheric administration and the fish and wildlife service , to ensure their applications comply with federal laws such as the endangered species act , the migratory bird treaty act , the magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management act , and the fish and wildlife coordination act . in addition to federal permits and consultations , applicants may also be required to obtain other permits under state and local law . because of the wide variety of projects , locations , and state and local laws , permitting requirements vary by project . the applicant is responsible for identifying the necessary permits and consultations and reporting these to ferc as part of the pre - filing process . in addition to issuing most air permits and water quality certifications , states and local agencies have other permitting and consultation responsibilities , such as to consult with applicants to ensure compliance with the coastal zone management act and the national historic preservation act . we provided a draft of this product to ferc and the doe for their review and comment . doe and ferc provided technical comments , which we incorporated throughout the report as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 5 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the chairman of ferc , the secretary of energy , and other interested parties . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii .