epa has established principles for its enforcement and compliance program . state guidance , providing the framework for state / epa enforcement agreements , has been in place since 1986 . according to epa , this state guidance , together with statute - specific guidance , is the blueprint for both epa and state enforcement and compliance programs and serves as the basis for both authorizing and reviewing state programs . oeca expects the regions to take a systematic approach to administering and overseeing the enforcement programs among delegated and nondelegated programs and , in doing so , to follow the policies and guidance issued for this purpose . while federal and state enforcement officials agree that core enforcement requirements should be generally implemented consistently , according to epa some variation is to be expected — and , in some cases , encouraged . for example , epa expects some variation in how regions target resources to the most significant compliance issues in different regions and states , the level of enforcement activity — which should vary with the severity of the problem , and the level of regional oversight of state enforcement programs — with the greater oversight provided for weaker programs . as we noted in our 2000 report on the consistency of epa's regions in enforcing environmental requirements , some variation in environmental enforcement is necessary to take into account local conditions and local concerns . at the same time , epa enforcement officials readily acknowledged that core enforcement requirements must be consistently implemented , and to ensure fairness and equitable treatment , similar violations should be met with similar enforcement responses , regardless of geographic location . however , when we reviewed epa's enforcement efforts we found that variations among epa's regional offices had led to inconsistencies in the actions they take to enforce environmental requirements . for example , we found that inspection coverage by epa and state enforcement staff varied for facilities discharging pollutants within each region , the number and type of enforcement actions taken by epa's regions also varied , the size of the penalties assessed and the criteria used in determining penalties assessed varied by region , and the regions' overall strategies in overseeing the states within their jurisdiction varied , which may have resulted in more in - depth reviews in some regional programs than in others . epa headquarters officials responsible for the water program explained that such variation was fairly commonplace and has posed problems . the director of oeca's water enforcement division , for example , said that in reacting to similar violations , enforcement responses in certain regions were weaker than in others , and that such inconsistencies had increased . the agency still needs comprehensive , accurate , and reliable data that would allow it to better target limited resources to those regions and potential pollution problems of the greatest concern . the agency still needs better processes to plan and allocate resources to ensure that the greatest risks are being addressed . finally , the agency needs accurate and transparent measures to report on whether the clean water act is being consistently implemented across the country in all regions and that like violations are being addressed in the same manner .