the department of transportation did not have any comments on the report . we are sending copies of this report to the administrator of fta , the secretary of the department of transportation , and interested congressional committees . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or any of your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or wised@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . to determine what is known about how rural transit services , ridership , and costs have changed since 2009 , we analyzed data from the rural national transit database ( rural ntd ) for fiscal years 2009-2012 . we selected this time frame because 2009 is the first year the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to conduct this analysis , we first assessed the appropriateness and sufficiency of the data by determining the completeness of rural ntd reporting for each year and the reasonableness of certain measures over the 4 year period as well as by interviewing fta officials on their data validation process and state transportation agency officials on their data collection processes . after determining that the data were sufficiently reliable at the national level for our purposes , we analyzed specific measures including: fleet size and age , type and amount of transit services provided , passenger trips taken , and operating and capital expenditures by funding source . our review included both annual analyses for each year as well as assessing changes over the 4-year period . we did not analyze ntd data at the provider level or for tribal grantees specifically due to concerns over data reliability within smaller subsets of transit provider groups . to identify the challenges that rural transit providers face and any actions that could address these challenges , we reviewed relevant academic literature pertaining to rural and tribal transit in the u.s. and interviewed two national stakeholder groups — the community transportation association of america ( ctaa ) and the american association of state highway and transportation officials ( aashto ) — that , respectively , work closely with rural and transit providers and state transportation agencies . literature and interviewees identified some solutions to challenges faced , and we summarized these challenges . to assess challenges related to tribal transit program funding , after determining these data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes , we analyzed fta award data from 2009 through 2014 to calculate changes in funding levels experienced by tribal transit providers . to address all three of our objectives , we conducted interviews with 15 state transportation agencies as well as 30 rural transit providers , 8 of which were tribal systems . some of these interviews included site visits and some were teleconferences . we nonstatistically selected state transportation agencies to provide a range of the number of rural or tribal transit providers in the state , total state grant amounts , and fta regions .