vha defined same - day services . we provided a draft of this report to va for review and comment . vha updated certain mental health policies to facilitate the implementation of the same - day services initiative . specifically , in april 2016 va issued a memo updating its mental health policy to require that any veteran new to mental health services requesting or referred for care in person be seen the same day by a licensed independent provider to screen for and address immediate care needs . this was a change from the previous timeframe of 24 hours for an initial evaluation . the memo also created new processes for va medical centers to assess same - day services in mental health care clinics , including a medical chart review and a one - time review of standard operating procedures to ensure that the new guidelines are being followed . vha also distributed other memos that either sought to clarify existing guidance or expand same - day services into other areas of mental health care , such as substance abuse . additionally , vha provided a memo to va network directors and mental health leads about scheduling models for mental health care that all va medical centers needed to implement for the same - day service initiative . vha provided training on the same - day - services initiative . vha provided voluntary training for same - day services some of which discussed the solutions from the guidebook and the updated mental health policy . the trainings began in february 2016 for primary care and in may 2016 for mental health . the trainings consisted of national telephone calls ( often with slide presentations ) that any va medical center staff member could join , and the presentation materials were posted to vha's internal website . the telephone trainings generally occurred twice a month in primary care and every week in mental health care . vha assessed va medical center same - day service readiness . beginning in january 2017 , vha provided technical assistance around same - day services to va medical centers . vha reviewed several aspects of same - day services , including how va medical centers were able to provide same - day services and identified any approaches that may have needed improvement . specifically , officials at five of the six medical centers and two of the four visns we visited stated that it is difficult to measure same - day services ; which in turn makes assessing the initiative's impact on veterans' access to care difficult . officials at one medical center explained that the challenge stems from the fact that that vha has not defined what outcome it wants to achieve . in addition , officials at another va medical center stated that they have a number of access measures available to them , but it was unclear to them which measures they should be prioritizing as part of their oversight of the same - day services initiative . further , absent performance goals , we found that visns and medical centers , which operate in a decentralized environment , varied in their oversight strategies .