we are making 10 recommendations to va . va should assign the role of cao to a non - career employee , as required by statute . if va maintains its view that it cannot meet this requirement without congressional action , then va should request the specific congressional action that va believes is necessary . va provided technical comments on the draft report , which we incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of veterans affairs , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or by email at oakleys@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . you requested that we examine the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) transition to the medical surgical prime vendor - next generation ( mspv - ng ) program and the extent to which the department contracts for good and services on an emergency basis . this report addresses the extent to which: ( 1 ) va's implementation of mspv - ng was effective in meeting program goals , and ( 2 ) veterans health administration ( vha ) awards contracts on an emergency basis for routine supplies and ongoing services , and what impact , if any , these awards have on vha's acquisition function . to review the extent to which implementation of mspv - ng was effective , we reviewed policy and guidance related to the program . we obtained and analyzed the mspv - ng program's formulary development plan , which explained the program's rationale for pursuing its initial requirements development approach . we also obtained and reviewed additional program documentation , including communications to medical centers and other stakeholders , briefings , and training and tools provided to medical centers . we interviewed leaders in the vha procurement and logistics office and healthcare commodity program executive office ( the program office for mspv - ng ) , as well as other staff involved in planning and executing aspects of mspv - ng . we also interviewed va's chief acquisition officer during the development of mspv - ng , cognizant office of general counsel staff , and others regarding the program . we also interviewed supply chain managers from four leading hospital networks regarding their medical supply management practices . we selected the hospital networks because they were identified by an industry study as having leading supply chain practices . during interviews , we asked each of these supply chain managers a standard set of questions about processes followed to standardize their hospital networks' supply chain .