working with trusted partners . irs could partner with organizations it trusts that are accessible to taxpayers and enable the partners to identity - proof and authenticate taxpayers . trusted partners could include tax preparers , financial institutions , or other federal or state agencies . in the course of our work , irs officials stated that they had been exploring such options with both the social security administration and the u.s . postal service ; however , at the time of our report , the agencies had not yet made decisions about next steps . expanding existing irs services to further protect taxpayers . irs could expand the functionality of its online account to further protect taxpayers from idt refund fraud . for example , irs could develop additional functionality that allows the taxpayer to designate a bank account or a preference for a paper check for receiving a tax refund . if a fraudster filed a return with different information , the return would be automatically rejected . irs officials told us the agency continually researches new identity assurance processes and technologies and has talked with other agencies , industry groups , and vendors to better understand how particular technology solutions could apply to irs's environment . however , during the course of our work , irs could not provide us evidence of a repeatable , comprehensive process to identify and evaluate available authentication technologies and services . such a process could compare options for in - house authentication solutions with off - the - shelf solutions based on estimates of cost , schedule , and benefits , as applicable . to this end , we recommended that irs develop a process to identify and evaluate alternative options for improving taxpayer authentication , including technologies in use by industry , states , or other trusted partners ; and based on this approach , include and prioritize these options , as appropriate , in its roadmap . irs agreed with these recommendations , but did not provide additional details on how it plans to address them . in conclusion , irs's authentication environment is one component of a broad , complex information technology infrastructure , and we have previously reported on the many challenges the agency faces as it modernizes its tax systems . the roadmap identifies seven supporting activities for this foundational initiative . one is to provide taxpayers with greater control over their online accounts . another supporting activity is to determine methods for sending notifications to taxpayers about activity on their account . however , irs has not identified the resources required to complete these activities , and the roadmap notes that six of the seven activities will take between 6 months to 3 years to complete . in december 2017 , irs officials stated that they had developed business requirements for the foundational initiative to give taxpayers greater control over their online accounts . however , irs has not identified funding for the initiative's other supporting activities — such as developing requirements to send push notifications to taxpayers — and implementation will depend on the availability of future resources .