gao - 11-880t . washington , d.c.: september 8 , 2011 . the thresholds do not vary geographically . we calculated standard errors for our estimates using the census generalized variance functions , as published in the cps january 2010 displaced worker , employee tenure , and occupational mobility technical documentation . ” and “did you exhaust your eligibility for unemployment benefits ? ” we analyzed data from the displaced worker supplement to estimate the percentage of displaced workers who received ui and the percentage who exhausted ui . we also used the data to examine the characteristics and labor force statuses of ui exhaustees specifically , in particular their ages , employment status at the time they were surveyed , and for those employed , their earnings at their new job compared to their previous job . given the structure of the displaced worker supplement , the survey captures the experiences of workers who lose jobs earlier in the 3-year period of the survey more fully than those who lost jobs later in the period , since more time would have elapsed between when they lost their job and when the survey was conducted . more specifically , the estimate of the number of displaced workers who exhausted ui does not include workers who may have exhausted ui at some point after january 2010 . ( 3 ) to what extent do state ui agencies refer exhaustees to support programs ? to address these questions we used several different research methods . to identify the number of displaced workers who received and exhausted ui , referred to as “exhaustees” in this report , we analyzed data from the 2010 displaced worker supplement to the january 2010 current population survey ( cps ) conducted by the census bureau , which surveyed individuals who lost jobs from 2007 to 2009 . we also compared some results from the 2010 displaced worker supplement to data from the 2008 supplement , which surveyed individuals who lost jobs prior to the recession , from 2005 to 2007 . using data from the displaced worker supplements allowed us to examine the experiences of a cohort of workers who lost jobs in the recession years and compare them to workers who lost jobs before the recession , but our results are as of january 2010 when the 2010 displaced worker supplement was conducted . to examine ui exhaustees' economic circumstances and determine how many exhaustees received supports from tanf and other federal income support programs , we analyzed data from the 2010 displaced worker supplement , merged with data from the annual social and economic supplement of the 2010 cps . merging these two data sets allowed us to identify ui exhaustees as of january 2010 ( using data from the displaced worker supplement ) and examine their household incomes in 2009 ( using data from the annual social and economic supplement ) . we also interviewed officials from 16 state tanf agencies , selected to reflect a range of changes in unemployment rates in recent years , and we analyzed data on the ui and tanf programs from the department of labor ( labor ) and the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .