table 5 . selected risk factors and corresponding variables in the 2016 national postsecondary student aid study data set description indicates student has some type of disability or condition . includes some students who were determined by a professional to be homeless ( via the free application for federal student aid or fafsa ) , but predominantly measures student - determined “risk of homelessness.” this is not a direct measure of homelessness . indicates student is an orphan , ward of court , emancipated minor , or in legal guardianship . indicates whether any member of the student's household received food stamp ( snap ) benefits during the 2013 or 2014 calendar year . identifies independent students who were single parents / caretakers during the 2015-2016 academic year . indicates total 2014 income as a percentage of the federal poverty level thresholds for 2014 . for our purposes , low income is defined as having a household income level at or below 130 percent of the federal poverty level . indicates the highest level of education achieved by a parent , stepparent , or guardian of the student . per previous department of education studies , we define first generation as college students whose parents' maximum educational attainment was a high school diploma or less . note that students who did not know their parent's highest education were not counted as first generation students . the data are self - reported . the student may not be eligible for or receiving federal disability benefits . the data are reported by the student and their family on the fafsa or during the student interview . national level , individual snap enrollment data are not available to verify this variable , as states provide aggregate statistics to fns . because our analysis does not include some of the risk factors for food insecurity listed in table 4 , our findings may underestimate the number of college students who have a risk factor for food insecurity . for example , we heard in some of our interviews with researchers and in our discussions with students that being an undocumented or an international student was a risk factor for food insecurity . such students are generally ineligible for federal financial aid and are restricted in the type of other federal aid they can receive . educating the campus community . however , npsas does not contain detailed data about undocumented or international students , so we could not include this risk factor for food insecurity in our analysis . the risk factors for food insecurity we included in our analysis may also be correlated with one another and can co - occur . for example , youth who were formerly in foster care are more likely than other youth to be low - income . indeed , the prevalence of additional risk factors for food insecurity is higher among low - income than wealthier students . we did not analyze the extent to which some risk factors are more strongly associated with food insecurity than others or attempt to rank or weight the relative importance of risk factors .