we present this analysis in appendix i . appendix ii provides additional information on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from june 2016 to december 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we also sent a draft of this product to ntsb for their review and comment . the departments and ntsb also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . the department of homeland security concurred with our recommendation to ensure that the data the coast guard collects during commercial fishing incident investigations , including the fishery in which the vessel is involved , is accurately captured . it noted that the coast guard will reemphasize the need to collect fishery data as part of its training programs and qualification requirements of its investigators . additionally , it stated that the coast guard will consider adding additional data fields within its marine information for safety and law enforcement database to improve the accuracy of the data collected . the departments of homeland security , health and human services , and commerce concurred with our recommendations directed to them to form a working group to establish a reliable estimate of the population of commercial fishing vessels , the fishery in which the vessel operates , and key vessel characteristics . the department of homeland security noted that neither the coast guard nor the national marine fisheries service have access to data for fisheries within economic zones managed by the states . as such , the department of homeland security recommended that the ( 1 ) working group be established at the regional level and ( 2 ) regional fisheries management councils coordinate with individual states to collect needed data and , in turn , provide that data to the coast guard and the national marine fisheries service . additionally , the department of health and human services stated that niosh will assist in identifying ways to establish comprehensive vessel counts , which could include engaging state agencies . the agencies' comments reflect the complexity of and need to capture reliable data of the size and characteristics of the commercial fishing vessel fleet . determining the working group's membership , structure , roles and responsibilities is an essential first step to doing so . regardless of the working group's structure , it will be important to ensure that the data collected is done in a manner that allows it to be aggregated and analyzed in various ways , including at the national level . the department of homeland security did not concur with our recommendation that the coast guard assess the rates of commercial fishing vessel accidents , injuries , and fatalities to determine whether certain factors — such as vessel length and region of operation — affect these rates .