who votes now ? demographics , issues , inequality , and turnout in the united states . princeton , new jersey: princeton university press , 2013 . ( study 2 ) mcdonald , michael p. ; enrijeta shino ; and daniel a. smith . “convenience voting and turnout: reassessing the effects of election reforms.” prepared for the new research on election administration and reform conference at mit , june 8 , 2015 . ( studies 5 and 6 ) springer , melanie j . “state electoral institutions and voter turnout in presidential elections , 1920-2000.” state politics & policy quarterly , vol . ( study 3 ) vonnahme , greg . “registration deadlines and turnout in context.” political behavior , vol . ( studies 1 and 4 ) . what is known about the costs of elections ? in addition , we reviewed information related to the use of provisional ballots . this information can be found in appendix i . to address these questions , we reviewed and analyzed relevant literature from scholarly and peer reviewed publications ; government reports ; dissertations ; conference papers ; books ; association , think tank , and other nonprofit organizations' publications ; working papers ; and general news articles published from 2002 through 2015 to identify publications that were potentially relevant to the topics in question . the literature search produced over 1,000 publications related to the topics in our three questions . ( studies 2 and 4 ) burden , barry c. ; david t. canon ; kenneth r. mayer ; and donald p. moynihan . “election laws , mobilization , and turnout: the unanticipated consequences of election reform.” american journal of political science , vol . ( studies 12 , 16 , and 25 – 27 ) fitzgerald , mary . “greater convenience but not greater turnout: the impact of alternative voting methods on electoral participation in the united states.” american politics research , vol . ( studies 8 and 15 ) fullmer , elliott b . “early voting: do more sites lead to higher turnout.” election law journal , vol . ( studies 10 and 14 ) hanmer , michael j . discount voting: voter registration reforms and their effects . new york , new york: cambridge university press , 2012 . ( studies 6 , 24 , 28 and 29 ) keele , luke and william minozzi . “how much is minnesota like wisconsin ? assumptions and counterfactuals in causal inference with observational data.” political analysis , vol . ( studies 30 and 31 ) larocca , roger and john s. klemanski . state election reform and turnout in presidential elections.” state politics & policy quarterly , vol . ( studies 21 – 23 ) leighley , jan e. and jonathan nagler . who votes now ? demographics , issues , inequality , and turnout in the united states . princeton , new jersey: princeton university press , 2013 . ( study 3 ) mcdonald , michael p. ; enrijeta shino ; and daniel a. smith . “convenience voting and turnout: reassessing the effects of election reforms.” prepared for the new research on election administration and reform conference at mit , june 8 , 2015 . ( studies 17 and 18 ) neiheisel , jacob r. and barry c. burden .