tpas . officials from both tpas also told us that they initially underestimated the workload associated with scheduling choice program appointments , and they brought on additional staff , including sub - contractors , to better manage their workloads as utilization of the program increased . one tpa opened eight operations centers in addition to the two it already had when the choice program was initially implemented . ineffective mechanisms for vamcs to resolve problems . vamc managers and staff we interviewed also said they lacked useful mechanisms and points - of - contact when they needed to resolve issues and problems they were having with referral and appointment scheduling processes . vha established a web - based choice program “issue tracker” system for vamcs to report problems to vha's office of community care . however , staff at four of the selected vamcs told us they rarely used the tracker and some had stopped using the tracker altogether because it took too long for vha's office of community care or the tpas to respond and resolve the issues ( if they responded at all ) , and they did not see the value in taking the time to report them via this mechanism . managers at one of the vamcs also told us about a phone line that their tpa had established to escalate and resolve urgent issues , but the tpa told the vamc only to use it for emergencies . vha's untimely communication of choice program policy and process changes . according to managers and staff at the six selected vamcs , va and vha have issued numerous contract modifications and policy changes with little advanced notice throughout the choice program's implementation . according to these vamc managers and staff , the untimely communication of changes created confusion at the vamc level that affected veterans' access to choice program care . we reviewed documentation showing that from october 2014 ( when it modified the tpas' contracts to add responsibilities related to choice program administration ) until july 2017 , va modified each tpa's contract about 40 times . many of these contract modifications — along with other legislative and regulatory changes that va implemented during this period — changed vamc or tpa processes related to choice program referrals and appointment scheduling . many of the vamc managers and staff we interviewed said they struggled to keep up with the contract modifications and policy changes , that vha's office of community care did not always leave adequate time to prepare for them , and they felt they were never really able to become proficient at new processes before additional changes occurred . this meant that training sometimes happened after the contract modifications or vha policy changes had already gone into effect . for example , managers and staff at three of the selected vamcs told us that they were not informed in advance about a june 2016 contract modification that required the tpas to return choice program authorizations to vamcs if they failed to schedule appointments within required time frames . this contract modification had the potential to significantly increase vamcs' workloads , because they would have to arrange veterans' care through other means once the authorizations were returned .