iii ) . we also received oral comments from external reviewers representing seven industry organizations . they included the advanced medical technology association ( advamed ) , which represents manufacturers of medical devices , diagnostic products , and medical information systems ; the american hospital association ( aha ) ; the association of american medical colleges ( aamc ) , which represents medical schools and teaching hospitals ; the association of community cancer centers ( accc ) ; the biotechnology industry organization ( bio ) , which represents biotechnology companies and academic institutions conducting biotechnology research ; the federation of american hospitals ( fah ) , which represents for - profit hospitals ; and the pharmaceutical research and manufacturers of america ( phrma ) . in commenting on a draft of this report , cms stated that it has continued to review and refine its opps data collection and analysis . in responding to our recommendation that cms gather the necessary data and perform an analysis comparing the types and costs of services on single - service claims to those on multiple - service claims , cms stated that it is searching for ways to use more data from multiple - service claims , and it has made efforts in recent rate - setting analyses to include data from more of these claims . we noted these efforts in the draft report . cms noted that there are continuing challenges and costs , to both the federal government and hospitals , to expanding its efforts in this area . in its comments , cms suggested that an analysis could be done using an algorithm to allocate charges among multiple - service claims , but noted that such an approach could create further distortions in the relative weights . our recommendation to cms , however , is that the agency should gather additional data on the relative costs of services on single and multiple - service claims , rather than continuing to analyze existing data . in response to our recommendation that cms analyze the effect of hospital charge - setting practices on the opps rate - setting methodology , cms stated that we should recognize that its rate - setting methodology that converts hospital charges to costs using a cost - to - charge ratio does so at the level of an individual hospital department . the draft report noted the fact that cms generally calculates cost - to - charge ratios on a department - specific basis ; however , we have revised the report to highlight that information throughout . cms also said that the application of cost - to - charge ratios to charges of a hospital has long been the recognized method of establishing reasonable costs for hospital services and was an important component of the cost - based reimbursement system that was used by medicare to pay for hospital outpatient services before opps was implemented . while we agree that it was an important component of the prior payment system , we believe the implementation of the current payment system has changed the relevance of applying cost - to - charge ratios to determine hospitals' costs .