there are only a few rules to follow . please use your mouse to navigate by clicking on the field or check box you wish to answer . to select a check box , simply click on the center of the box and an ‘x' will appear . of the types of overflights that you checked in question 1 , which one or two types of overflights have same types of overflights as having both positive and negative effects. ) * the number of responses for question 2 is greater than 112 because the respondent could provide up to two answers . the responses included military – 44 , general aviation – 56 , commercial air tours – 33 , high - elevation commercial – 17 , other – 22 , none – 6 . of the types of overflights that you checked in question 1 , which one or two types of overflights have same types of overflights as having both positive and negative effects. ) * the number of responses for question 3 is greater than 112 because the respondent could provide up to two answers . the responses included military – 4 , general aviation – 11 , commercial air tours – 9 , high - elevation commercial – 4 , other – 30 , none – 29 , uncertain / don't know – 2 . since april 2000 , has your park unit received written complaints from visitors about any type of overflights ? n=26 yes ....................... . that flexibility currently does not exist in the act . please go to question 5 . please go to question 6 . furthermore , we agree that in amending the act congress should not arbitrarily exclude park units from the atmp process solely on the basis of their level of air tour activity . we believe that such an exclusion would be an oversimplification of a complex issue , and we did not imply such a solution in this report . we disagree that programmatic approaches taken by the agencies could provide the same flexibility as a legislative amendment . as interior acknowledges in its comments , the act does not give the agencies the authority to exclude any park unit from the atmp process . in the matter for congressional consideration , we offer the point that congress may wish to give the agencies such authority . we disagree with interior's characterization of our survey results as “anecdotal.” we surveyed all 112 park units that were expected to develop atmps as of july 2005 , and we received a 100 percent response rate . per our instructions , the survey was to be completed by park service officials with the most knowledge of the subject area . we believe that our methodology was sound and that we gathered the most authoritative data currently available from park service officials with first - hand knowledge of the different causes of noise at their respective park units . however , since only a small number of park units have completed sound monitoring studies as part of the development of an atmp , we acknowledge that the responses provided were generally based on the survey respondents' first - hand knowledge and years of experience rather than scientific data .