us should do the same . type of commenter ( level of agreement ) expert ( strongly agree ) without the ability to impact the bottom line , the fcc is less effective than otherwise . however if the incumbents write the legislation as is the current practice , it will come out that the fcc will have the power to fine the little guys and the big guys will have many loopholes and time wasters . if , however , the fcc were to work with the ntia , dod , and dhs regarding criteria for imposing fees so that the fcc could shape the behavior of the huge incumbents in a meaningful way without accidentally or unfairly penalizing the smaller entrepreneurs , then the public interest would be served . expert ( strongly agree ) it is ridiculous to give some spectrum away and charge for others . for example , in order for spectrum to be “utilized,” it should be used in a meaningful way to serve the public or the intended government / business use ; this is far different from just testing whether signal is being transmitted to preserve the license , as can be the case with wireless spectrum . in the public safety context , spectrum can be used if it is unused but available for use during the next public emergency . in the context of broadcast spectrum , the question of whether spectrum is being used might even consider whether the station is being operated in a manner that serves the public interest . mobile satellite services company ( strongly disagree ) … this is impossible without drastically increasing the number of government employees and the number of regulated company employees who would have to monitor and report . this cannot be done in any reasonably efficient manner . there would never be agreement on what to measure and how . wireless device manufacturer ( somewhat disagree ) usage is only one consideration ; the main consideration is the roi . wireless service provider ( somewhat agree ) the key is to measure in spectrum bands where there are no market incentives to efficiently use spectrum , eg , government and restricted use bands . wireless service provider ( somewhat agree ) very complex subject ; spectrum use varies by time of day , weather , events , etc . such results can be misused so measuring methods needs to be carefully developed and results properly calibrated and interpreted . wireless service provider ( somewhat disagree ) it depends what is meant by “utilization” data . if it means only transmissions using spectrum , it would be relatively useless . such data would only be relevant if it included data regarding the economic value of the spectrum use at issue , the amount of time that has passed since the relevant rules were put in place , the applicable of secondary markets rules , and potential alternative uses . in the national broadband plan , fcc presented its estimate that it would cost approximately $10 million to $15 million to deploy measurement equipment nationally . fcc also stated in the plan that one way these measurements could be accomplished is by frequency scanners installed on a fleet of vehicles .