congressional directives . the current focus on the number and amount of earmarks overshadows the current focus on the number and amount of earmarks overshadows the limited information available about the agency role in this aspect of the limited information available about the agency role in this aspect of the appropriations process . fhwa uses an electronic system to track congressional directives . fhwa's office of the chief financial officer and program offices collaborate to track most congressional directives . staff in fhwa's office of the chief financial officer enter projects into the tracking system after receiving requests from program offices for project identification numbers . once congressional directives are entered into the system , they are not tracked separately from other projects , such as those funded by formula . the program offices then send memorandums to fhwa division offices to notify them of the total amount of funds available for each project . officials from fhwa division offices and state departments of transportation with whom we spoke have access to fhwa's system and may also track congressional directives using their own systems . officials in these offices said that they also maintain their own tracking systems to improve their staff's and the public's access to data and to corroborate data in the federal tracking system . was added to the system in 2006 , in part , to track what they described as the growing number of congressional directives . fhwa and fta do not typically implement congressionally directed projects . rather , they provide funds through grants , and state and local agencies generally implement the highway and transit congressional directives in carrying out their programs . specifically , fhwa division offices and fta regional offices administer and obligate funds for projects , including congressionally directed projects , to grant recipients and respond to questions from recipients on issues related to eligibility and transferability , among other things . in turn , the grant recipients implement congressional directives . figure 3 illustrates the processes used by fhwa and fta to identify , track , and implement congressional directives . “clarification letters” that are periodically sent to dot from congressional committees . these letters are jointly signed by the house and senate appropriations subcommittees and provide clarification on how congress would like to see directed funds used . dot provides the responsible operating administrations , such as fhwa or fta , with these letters and coordinates responses on whether the operating administration can comply with the request . in addition to responding to specific requests from congressional committees , dot also communicates some general funding information on congressional directives to congress . for example , as required by law , dot notifies the relevant house and senate committees prior to announcing a discretionary grant , letter of intent , or full funding grant agreement totaling $1 million or more . in addition , fta reports to congress at the end of each fiscal year on all projects with unobligated funds that have reached the end of their availability period .