each grantee has initiatives in rural and tribal areas . additional federal funding , such as community development block grants , is also available to grantees for capacity building and technical assistance . ncdi in 1991 started with seven large national foundations and a major insurance company and was administered by lisc and enterprise . this consortium of funders believed cdcs could achieve greater and more lasting success if they could count on a significant reliable commitment of multiyear operating support , project financing , technical assistance , and training . to date , ncdi has had four phases ( rounds ) of funding . in the first phase ( 1991-93 ) , ncdi funders pledged $62.9 million ( see table 1 ) . with the enactment of section 4 , hud joined phase ii of ncdi , which also included 12 private foundations and financial institutions , as an equal partner . congress' goal in authorizing hud to participate in ncdi was to develop the capacity and ability of cdcs to undertake community development and affordable housing projects and programs . hud's involvement resulted in some changes to the way funds were disbursed . while the foundations provided funding through living cities ( ncdi ) , which in turn distributed grant funds to lisc and enterprise , hud distributed its funding directly to lisc and enterprise . similarly , ybusa staff told us that they monitor affiliates by telephone as well as through on - site technical assistance . lisc , enterprise , and ybusa require each subrecipient to submit a monthly activity report , semiannual project reports and narratives , and final reports . however , the grantees have different procedures , forms , and checklists that guide their monitoring activities . operating support collaboratives aid lisc and enterprise in their oversight through proposal reviews , organizational assessments , work plan reviews , on - site reviews , quarterly report reviews , and annual and 3- year evaluations . the lisc and enterprise local offices use the collaboratives' monitoring information when making their section 4 funding decisions . affiliates are monitored and supported by hfhi staff across the country . hfhi currently has over 1,669 affiliates , and in 27 years has built over 150,000 houses worldwide , including more than 40,000 homes in the united states . figure 2 shows the 526 cities where hfhi affiliates have directly received section 4 funds . ybusa was founded in 1990 and is headquartered in somerville , massachusetts . it is a national nonprofit organization that provides capacity - building grants on a competitive basis to support the efforts of organizations that are planning to or are operating youthbuild programs in their communities , many of which are funded by the hud youthbuild grant program . however , hud relies primarily on its grantees to make certain that this responsibility is carried out at the subrecipient level . we found that grantees generally had good management systems and controls in place to monitor their subrecipients and to ensure that they carried out their work plans , met their objectives , and used federal funds legally and responsibly . however , even with good controls , problems can still occur , as we found at one cdc .