audit requirements . while dhs's management directive covers comptroller general access to contractor records under certain conditions , the directive does not address audits by other entities or specify other circumstances when audits of other transactions agreements may be needed to protect the government's interest . for example , audits may be needed in certain other transactions agreements to help ensure that payments to contractors are accurate . dod's policy for auditing prototype other transactions projects , by contrast , provides more complete guidance on audits of other transactions agreements . for example , the dod policy states that contracting officers should include information on the frequency of audits , scope of audits , and the means by which audits are to be performed . dod's policy also recognizes the flexibility in negotiating other transactions agreements by allowing the contracting officer , in certain circumstances , to waive the inclusion of audit provisions if it would adversely affect the execution of the agreement . we have previously reported on the importance of training and reported that leading organizations usually prioritize key processes , identify staff needing training , and establish requirements to ensure that the appropriate staff are trained . furthermore , because s&t's technical program personnel serve on details from other government agencies and have varying levels of experience with other transactions , appropriate training is key to help ensure that such staff uniformly and effectively use other transactions . dhs's draft lessons learned report on other transactions states that it is critical to train contracting officers on aspects such as ( 1 ) the flexibilities associated with other transactions to help ensure the proper and optimal use of the authority , and ( 2 ) negotiating intellectual property ( ip ) rights , which can vary from project to project . the s&t directorate plans an increasing number of mission programs that could use its other transactions authority , but dhs's current contracting workforce may not be sufficient to manage this workload . dhs has relied on a small number of key s&t program personnel , who are experienced other transactions practitioners , to develop or approve solicitations . in fiscal year 2004 , two of the s&t directorate's programs resulted in other transactions awards — counter - manpads and chem - bio . in fiscal year 2005 , the s&t directorate could award other transaction agreements for at least eight additional programs , which could significantly increase its contracting workload because some programs could include multiple other transactions awards . ( one s&t program could result in multiple awards using other transactions , contracts , grants , or cooperative agreements as the acquisition vehicle. ) for example , s&t's ongoing chem - bio project has resulted in 17 other transactions awards as of august 2 , 2004 . figure 8 depicts the s&t directorate's project workload that could involve other transactions and the corresponding cpo in - house contracting support . dhs is currently developing a plan to address contracting workforce issues . senior dhs officials told us that their strategy is to generally have in - house contracting staff award and administer all of the s&t directorate's other transactions and r&d projects by fiscal year 2006 .