( see fig . in commenting on a draft of our report , vha confirmed that they measure wait times from preferred date to when the appointment occurs . however , they disagreed with our calculations of the overall wait time for veterans to receive full mental health evaluations , noting that these calculations do not capture situations outside of their control , such as when a veteran wants to delay treatment . our calculations illustrate that the use of the preferred date does not always reflect how long veterans are waiting for care or the variation that exists not only between , but within , vamcs . during the period of time prior to establishing the preferred date , we found instances of veterans' requests or referrals for care being mismanaged or lost in the system , leading to delays in veterans' access to mental health care . our current and previous work , along with the work of va oig , highlights the limitations of vha's current scheduling practices , including wait time calculations . in december 2012 , we recommended that vha take actions to improve the reliability of wait - time measures by clarifying the scheduling policy or identifying clearer wait - time measures that are not subject to interpretation or prone to scheduler error . vha has not yet implemented this recommendation , and we continue to believe that implementation of this recommendation would improve the reliability of wait time measures . vha monitors access to mental health care , but the lack of clear policies may contribute to unreliable wait - time data and precludes effective oversight . among other reasons contributing to the potential unreliability of vha wait - time data , we found vha's wait - time data may not be comparable over time or between vamcs . data may not be comparable over time . vha has changed the definitions used to calculate various mental health wait - time measures , and a number of vha officials we interviewed , including vamc and visn officials , told us they were not sure which definitions for new mental health patients were in effect for calculating wait - time measures or gave conflicting answers about which definitions were being used . vha has not clearly communicated the definitions used or changes made to these definitions used in its wait - time calculations , which is contrary to federal internal controls standards that call for management to communicate reliable and relevant information in a timely manner . this limits the reliability and usefulness of these data in determining progress in meeting stated objectives for veterans' timely access to mental health care . as a result , we recommended that vha issue guidance about the definitions used to calculate wait times , such as how a new patient is defined , and communicate any changes in wait - time data definitions within and outside vha . vha concurred with our recommendation and stated that it plans to publicly provide an updated data definition document in october 2015 and will issue an information letter in november 2015 that contains sources where both internal and external stakeholders can locate the definitions used to calculate wait times , including how a new patient is defined .