posts . training officials we interviewed at 12 posts cited varied support and resources for training . while several posts said they had enough funding for training , other posts said funding was insufficient or had fluctuated in recent years . further , officials at most of the posts we interviewed said finding time for training can be a challenge at post . we still believe that gaps exist in guidance available for the foreign service , as well as for civil service and locally employed staff , because key tools used to provide employees with information on training are not comprehensive . specifically , we found that documents for employees on training — known as training continuums — that fsi developed do not include complete and accurate information . c. are agency managers responsible for reinforcing new behaviors , providing useful tools , and identifying and removing barriers to help employees implement learned behaviors on the job ? d. how does the agency select employees ( or provide the opportunity for employees to self - select ) to participate in training and development efforts ? e. what options has the agency considered in paying for employee training and development and adjusting employee work schedules so that employees can participate in these developmental activities ? f. does the agency take actions to foster an environment conducive to effective training and development ? g. what steps does the agency take to encourage employees to buy in to the goals of training and development efforts , so that they participate fully and apply new knowledge and skills when doing their work ? h. does the agency collect data during implementation to ensure feedback on its training and development programs ? to what extent does the agency systematically plan for and evaluate the effectiveness of its training and development efforts ? b . does the agency use the appropriate analytical approaches to assess its training and development programs ? c. what performance data ( including qualitative and quantitative measures ) does the agency use to assess the results achieved through training and development efforts ? d. how does the agency incorporate evaluation feedback into the planning , design , and implementation of its training and development efforts ? e. does the agency incorporate different perspectives ( including those of line managers and staff , customers , and experts in areas such as financial , information , and human capital management ) in assessing the impact of training on performance ? f. how does the agency track the cost and delivery of its training and development programs ? g. how does the agency assess the benefits achieved through training and development programs ? h. does the agency compare its training investments , methods , or outcomes with those of other organizations to identify innovative approaches or lessons learned ?