, regions ) . question 6b: if yes , how helpful are they to furthering coordination on air / maritime missions ? for those used , please additionally click one "helpfulness" button . [table ii.6 answers to survey question 6] question 7: if yes to any guidance: if an electronic copy of the guidance is available , please upload that file ( s ) by browsing to its location on your computer , using the box below . please only upload files under 2mb in size . [open - ended answers not displayed] question 13: in your opinion , should there be more , less , or about the same amount or frequency of coordination on air / maritime missions , activities , or resources between oam and uscg at or near your location in each of the following ways ? if there is currently no coordination in a particular way , and that is the appropriate level , click "about the same" for that row . if other: [open - ended answers not displayed] question 18: overall , considering the number , availability , and qualifications of personnel at your location , how satisfied or dissatisfied are you with the extent to which you have adequate personnel to effectively meet mission needs ? [table ii.15 answers to survey question 18] question 19: do you have any additional explanations of your answers or comments on any of the issues in this questionnaire ? [open - ended answers not displayed] question 20: are you done with this questionnaire ? clicking "yes" below tells gao that your answers are final . we will not use your answers unless the "yes" button is checked when you last exit the questionnaire . figure 14 displays the number of air and marine assets assigned to oam's regions , which include its 23 branches and 6 national air security operations centers ( nasocs ) . in this appendix , survey responses from questions 16 and 17 are presented . only office of air and marine ( oam ) air and marine units were surveyed about their satisfaction with aircraft and marine vessels ( uscg was not ) respectively . not all eligible respondents answered all parts of each question . respondents who did not report performing a specific type of mission or who answered “don't know” to a question about that type of mission were not included in the response counts . uscg guidance - used ? mou - used ? other guidance - used ? for a more detailed discussion of our survey methodology see appendix i and for complete survey responses , see appendix ii . rebecca gambler , ( 202 ) 512-8777 or gamblerr@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , cindy ayers ( assistant director ) , chuck bausell , alexander beata , richard d. brown , frances a. cook , jeff r. jensen , nancy kawahara , stanley kostyla , linda s. miller , carl m. ramirez , richard m. stana , clarence tull , jonathan tumin , and johanna wong , made significant contributions to this report . enter text or numbers in each of the spaces below .