passengers with disabilities . representatives we interviewed from almost all network and low - cost airlines ( 8 of 9 ) reported taking actions intended to improve services for passengers with disabilities . these actions included programs to replace damaged or misplaced wheelchairs or other assistive devices ( 3 of 9 ) ; improving seating and access to lavatories in the aircraft ( 1 of 9 ) ; and using rfid technology to track wheelchairs ( 1 of 9 ) . for example , representatives from one airline told us they have retrofitted their larger single aisle aircraft lavatories to be wheelchair accessible . two airlines also reported changing policies pertaining to emotional support animals . for example , one airline has an online registration for emotional support animals where passengers must submit all documentation at least 48 hours in advance of the flight ; according to representatives , the process allows the airline to validate the required paperwork , while providing relevant information to passengers with emotional support animals and ensuring the safety of everyone onboard the aircraft . involuntary denied boardings . representatives we interviewed from network and low - cost airlines ( 9 ) reported taking steps to reduce or eliminate involuntary denied boardings . representatives from three airlines said they have reduced or stopped overbooking flights , and other representatives ( 5 of 9 ) said their airlines have begun soliciting volunteers to be “bumped” off a flight ( i.e. , give up their seat ) earlier in the process . two conduct reverse auctions where they ask passengers what compensation they would accept to take an alternative flight . airlines are also offering additional incentives to encourage passengers to voluntarily switch to flights with available seats ( 5 of 9 ) — including travel vouchers with fewer restrictions or that cover ancillary fees , gift cards for amazon and other retailers , or large travel credits of up to $10,000 . while dot has solicited some input from stakeholder groups such as those representing passengers with disabilities , dot has not solicited feedback directly from passengers to understand what they know about their rights . dot officials said they have not sought such feedback because they have not identified a method for doing so that would be statistically generalizable and not cost prohibitive . while costs are always an issue when considering budget priorities , we have previously reported on other agencies' direct consumer outreach efforts that while not statistically generalizable were nonetheless useful for understanding the effect of the agencies' efforts . for example , the bureau of consumer financial protection has used focus groups to understand its outreach efforts . bureau of consumer financial protection officials previously told gao that while obtaining information through such efforts was resource intensive , it allowed them to assess the performance of their outreach activities . in another case , an agency surveyed users that access its website to help it understand whether its outreach efforts were effective . obtaining input from passengers directly on what information they want or what they know about their rights would provide dot with greater assurance that educational materials are appropriately tailored to meet a wide range of passengers' needs .