( recommendation 1 ) . we provided a draft of this report to the department of defense for review and comment . in its written comments , reproduced in appendix ii , dod concurred with the recommendation . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . what is a global positioning system ( gps ) satellite orbital plane and how many are there ? the gps constellation availability performance standards commit the u.s. government to at least a 95 percent probability of maintaining a constellation of 24 operational gps satellites to sustain the positioning services provided to both civilian and military gps users . therefore , while the minimum constellation consists of satellites occupying 24 orbital slots — 4 slots in each of the six orbital planes — the constellation actually has 31 total satellites , generally with more than four in each plane to meet the 95 percent probability standard . these additional satellites are needed to provide uninterrupted availability in case a satellite fails . the constellation includes three generations of satellites with varying capabilities and design lives . an orbital plane is an imaginary flat disc containing an earth satellite's orbit . one orbital plane , as is shown above , represents the trajectory a gps satellite follows as it circles the earth in space . the gps constellation has six orbital planes . each contains at least 4 satellites that allow the constellation to meet the minimum requirement of 24 satellites . we found in 2010 and 2015 that gps satellites have proven more reliable than expected , greatly exceeding their initially predicted life expectancies . nevertheless , the air force must regularly replace satellites to meet the availability standard , since operational satellites have a finite lifespan . excluding random failures , the operational life of a gps satellite tends to be limited by the amount of power that its solar arrays can produce . this power level declines over time as the solar arrays degrade in the space environment until eventually they cannot produce enough power to maintain all of the satellite's subsystems . consequently , the air force monitors the performance of operational satellites in order to calculate when new satellites need to be ready to join the constellation . the 10 gps iii satellites currently under contract and in production with lockheed martin will provide a range of performance enhancements over prior gps satellite generations . the gps iii satellites were designed to provide a longer life than previous generations , greater signal accuracy , and improved signal integrity — meaning that the user has greater assurance that the broadcast signal is correct . when they are eventually controlled through the ocx ground control system , the satellites will also offer a stronger m - code signal strength than prior gps satellite generations . they will also include an additional civilian signal known as l1c , which will permit interoperability with european , japanese , and other global navigation satellite systems for civilian users . figure 3 describes the evolution of gps satellite generations , including capabilities and life - span estimates .