this concludes my prepared statement . for further information about this testimony , please contact susan ragland , director , financial management and assurance at ( 202 ) 512-8486 , or raglands@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . major contributors to this testimony included kimberley mcgatlin , assistant director ; f. abe dymond , assistant general counsel ; lauren s. fassler ; bernice m. lemaire ; mitch owings ; and carrie wehrly . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . feedback to grantees was often slow . as of september 2007 , lsc had not yet issued reports to grantee management for almost 19 percent ( 10 out of 53 ) of the 2006 site visits . without timely communications about the results of site visits , grantee management does not have information about deficiencies and the related corrective actions needed . in a grantee exit conference we observed , the lsc review team did not communicate a number of findings they had concluded were significant and in need of immediate attention . effective grantee monitoring is especially important for lsc because lsc has limited options for sanctioning poorly performing grantees due to the recurring nature of many of its grants . in the limited reviews we performed at 14 grantees , we identified internal control weaknesses at 9 grantees that lsc could have identified with more effective oversight reviews . while control deficiencies at the grantees were the immediate cause of the improper expenditures we found , weaknesses in lsc's controls over its oversight of grantees did not assure effective monitoring of grantee controls and compliance or prevent the improper expenditures . we also identified various weaknesses and improper expenditures at grantees we visited . these weaknesses and improper expenditures can result in a loss of credibility to the grantee and grantor and also allow instances of fraud to take place if not addressed . our december 2007 report recommendations to improve its internal control and oversight of grantees , along with our views on the status of lsc's efforts to implement those recommendations ( as of october 20 , 2009 ) are summarized in table 3 . as a result of our follow - up work conducted between may 2009 and october 2009 , we determined that lsc management had fully implemented two of the four recommendations we made to management . the remaining two , as well as the recommendation to the board were partially implemented . based on our evaluation , the following summary highlights lsc actions and work that remains to be done on the three recommendations that remain partially implemented .