communications . nnsa identified communications shortcomings throughout the project . for example , the contractor did not always provide timely notification to the nnsa project office of emerging concerns and did not engage nnsa in development of plans to address these concerns . nnsa found that there was reluctance on the part of the contractor to share information with nnsa without first fully vetting the information and obtaining senior management approval . in addition , nnsa found that a “chilled” work environment had developed within the upf contractor organization , and that , as a result , communications from the working level and mid - level managers up to senior management were limited because of concerns of negative consequences . furthermore , communications between the nnsa project office , the upf contractor , and nnsa headquarters were limited by a complex chain of command . according to nnsa officials , prior to 2013 , the upf project was managed by nnsa's y - 12 site office , and the upf federal project director reported to nnsa at a relatively low level . nnsa officials said that , as a result , any concerns with the upf project had to compete for attention with many other issues facing the y - 12 site as a whole . management processes and procedures . nnsa found that the contractor's management processes and procedures did not formally identify , evaluate , or act on technical concerns in a timely manner . in addition , nnsa found that the upf contractor's project management procedures had shortcomings in areas such as risk management , design integration , and control of the technical baseline documents . specifically , some of the contractor's procedures were not project - specific and could not be used for work on the upf project without authorizing deviations or providing additional instructions . according to nnsa , these shortcomings led in part to inadequate control of the design development process , as the contractor did not document interim decisions to deviate from the design baseline , adequately describe the design , or maintain it under configuration control . in response to nnsa's review of the factors that contributed to the space / fit issue , nnsa and the upf contractor have both taken some actions to address the factors identified by the review . in addition , nnsa has begun to share lessons learned from the upf project consistent with both doe's project management order , which states that lessons learned should be captured throughout the course of capital asset construction projects , as well as our prior recommendation to ensure that future projects benefit from lessons learned . the specific actions nnsa and the contractor have taken include the following: nnsa oversight . nnsa has taken actions to improve its oversight of the upf project to ensure that it is aware of emerging technical issues and the steps the contractor is taking to address them by , among other things , increasing staffing levels for the upf project office from 9 ftes in 2012 to more than 50 ftes as of january 2014 .