( see app . ii for more details on our survey methodology ) . to identify factors that have affected data quality , we analyzed 41 survey responses representing the views of all 44 members of three joint epa - state work groups that were created to address various aspects of data management . to examine the ways in which sdwis data quality could affect epa's management of the public water system supervision ( pwss ) program , we examined the importance of data quality for two aspects of epa's management of the pwss program . first , we examined the potential impact data quality could have on epa's enforcement response policy . this policy uses a targeting tool that assigns scores to community water systems that are a high priority for enforcement action because of unresolved violations . to demonstrate the effect that underreported health and monitoring violations can have on the enforcement targeting tool , we calculated two scores for each of the approximately 1,200 water systems audited by epa in 2007 , 2008 , and 2009 . one score was based on violations found in the data verification audits , and the second score was based on violations found in sdwis / fed . we then subtracted the two scores for each system to obtain a point difference , a result that we used to illustrate the impact of incomplete data on the scoring process . we used the same methodology epa uses to create the enforcement score: we assigned point values to unresolved violations ( acute health violations are worth 10 points , nonacute health violations and some monitoring violations are worth 5 points , and 1 point for all other monitoring and reporting violations ) and then added these points together to produce an overall score for each system . however , the enforcement scores we calculated cannot be considered a water system's actual score for three reasons: 1 . epa's targeting tool scores 5 years of violation data , whereas the audits that epa conducted reviewed state files to identify violations that had occurred in shorter periods of time . those time periods typically ranged from 1 to 3 years , depending on the drinking water regulation . due to limited data in epa's audit database , our enforcement scores only include underreported violation discrepancies and do not include any discrepancies related to accuracy . however , underreported violations accounted for nearly 97 percent of the discrepancies . epa's enforcement score includes an additional penalty that is tied to the year of the oldest unaddressed violation . for instance , if a violation is 5 years old , epa adds an additional 5 points to the score . because our analysis considered violations from a shorter period of time , we could not duplicate this additional penalty . while these three limitations prevent us from duplicating epa's exact targeting tool , our analysis presents a conservative estimate of the effect that poor data quality has on the enforcement scoring process . it is likely that additional years of underreported violations , plus other enforcement penalties , would reveal further distortions of the scoring process .