vi. ) dod concurred with our overall findings and provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense and appropriate congressional committees . the report is also available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or williamsonr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix vii . beginning in fiscal year 1991 , in an effort to control escalating costs , congress instructed the department of defense ( dod ) to gradually lower its reimbursement rates for individual civilian providers to mirror those paid by medicare . congress specified that reductions were not to exceed 15 percent in a given year . as of march 2011 , there were seven nonmaternity procedures or services for which reimbursement remains higher under tricare than medicare . ( see table 4. ) additionally , beginning in 1998 , the tricare management activity ( tma ) established a policy that its reimbursement rates for some maternity services and procedures must be set at the higher of the current medicare fee or the 1997 medicare fee . as a result , the tricare reimbursement rates for 36 maternity services and procedures are higher than medicare . ( see table 5. ) tma contracted with a health - policy research and consulting firm to conduct a number of studies about specific tricare reimbursement rates . some of these studies resulted in changes to the tricare reimbursement rates for certain procedures . a brief description of these studies is provided below . studies of reimbursement rates for specific maternity / delivery procedures , 2006 through 2011 starting in 2006 , tma's consultant has conducted annual comparisons of tricare's reimbursement rates for certain maternity / delivery procedures with medicaid reimbursement rates on a state - by - state basis . any reimbursement rates that were found to be below the medicaid level of payment have been increased . for 2006 , tma found that for at least one procedure , the medicaid rates in 12 states were higher than tricare reimbursement rates . tricare officials have identified this overall shortage of providers and providers' reluctance to accept tricare reimbursement rates as the main impediments to tricare beneficiaries' access to civilian providers in alaska — regardless of which option they use . the study also compared tricare's reimbursement rates to those of medicare and medicaid . for 2007 , tma found that for at least one procedure , the medicaid rates in 11 states were higher than tricare reimbursement rates . for 2008 , tma found that for at least one procedure , the medicaid rates in 18 states were higher than tricare reimbursement rates . each analysis is tailored to the specific concerns outlined in the waiver requests . once implemented , waivers remain in effect indefinitely or until tma officials determine they are no longer needed .