delayed responses . vsos said there sometimes are delays in receiving responses from regional offices , with staff taking different lengths of time to respond to an inquiry , or not responding at all . sometimes , once vsos receive a response , the claim is no longer being processed at the regional office they contacted , so the response is no longer useful . decreased notice of activity . vsos said that with the advent of electronic claims processing , they no longer receive paper copies of disability ratings and other documents that vba sends to the veteran . vsos have access to such information in vba's electronic claims management system , but the system does not notify them when vba has sent documents to the veteran , such as requests for information and evidence . vsos said it is time - consuming for them to proactively monitor a large number of veterans' electronic claims files for new documents . vsos may communicate with a regional office throughout the life of a claim for various purposes and , according to vba officials , regional offices generally have discretion in establishing local policies for handling vso questions or inquiries . one exception to this local discretion is during the 48-hour review period when vsos can review a completed disability rating before it is finalized . a november 2016 vba policy states that during the 48-hour review period , vsos may contact a regional office's change management agent . the policy also states that vsos should not contact the change management agent for claim status updates , evidence submission , or any other type of inquiry unrelated to a rating decision discrepancy . according to vba officials , the policy to contact the change management agent during the 48-hour review period was intended to streamline the inquiry process for vsos , provide consistent responses to them , and minimize disruptions for claims processors . the previous policy required vsos to first contact the rating veterans service representative before the change management agent during the 48-hour review period . vsos at three offices we visited reported contacting the change management agent for inquiries during the 48-hour review period , but also reported contacting the change management agent at other points during the claims process . vsos at all four offices we visited also reported contacting other staff , such as claims processors or their supervisors at their local regional offices , during the 48-hour review period , unrelated to the change management agent's availability or a particular type of claim , which vba officials stated were reasons for which vsos might contact an alternate vba official . federal standards for internal control state that an agency should externally communicate the necessary quality information to achieve an entity's objectives , for example , communicating with external parties using established reporting lines , and periodically evaluating its communication methods . vba officials told us that the november 2016 policy was intended to address communication during the 48-hour review period , and that regional office discretion for communication with vsos outside of this period was still in place , including contacting change management agents if regional offices determined this was best . however , regional offices and vsos do not consistently implement this policy .