( see app . iii for a more detailed summary of the 90 contracts. ) our further analyses of the 90 contracts found only one common characteristic as to whether surveillance was affected by other contractual factors . specifically , we found that of the 45 interagency contracts we reviewed where dod awarded them using gsa's multiple award schedules program , 25 had insufficient surveillance . gao has recently identified issues with dod's use of interagency contracts in general and reported that they were not being effectively managed . we also found that the contract award amount was not always a good indication of the total value of the services that needed to be surveilled . while the award amount of the 90 contracts we reviewed was $385.7 million in fiscal year 2003 , the amount of funds obligated on about one - half of these contracts had grown to about $1.5 billion as of november 2004 . we found that for some of the 15 contracts without surveillance personnel assigned , the contract amounts have more than tripled over the course of the contract . for example , one army contract for educational services was awarded for $271,690 but had increased to $900,125 . we did not find that the sufficiency of surveillance was related to other factors , including type of service contract ( fixed price or cost - reimbursable ) , type of services being procured , use of performance - based contract methods , or dollar value at award . of the 26 contracts we identified as having insufficient surveillance , 16 were army contracts , including 9 aca - north contracts . the air force requires a team be created prior to the award of service contracts . this team is comprised of at least the contracting officer , a representative from the buying entity , and the surveillance personnel who will be assigned to the contract . this policy helps assure that surveillance is given a higher priority because the contract cannot be awarded until the team has met . surveillance was not always given high priority by either the contracting or functional organizations , according to officials responsible for the contracts we reviewed . these officials told us getting the contracts awarded , and thus supporting the customer , takes priority over assuring trained surveillance personnel are assigned prior to contract award . the army , unlike the air force and navy organizations we visited , does not require surveillance personnel to be assigned to contracts prior to the contract award date . officials also told us almost all surveillance personnel are not evaluated on their surveillance responsibilities in their performance assessments because surveillance is considered a part - time or ancillary activity . also , some surveillance personnel feel they do not have sufficient hours during their normal workday to get the job done . federal and dod acquisition regulations do not require surveillance personnel to be assigned prior to contract award . contracting officials from all three service commands as well as osd and senior military acquisition policy officials stated that , in general , the priority of contracting offices is awarding contracts , not assuring that trained surveillance personnel are assigned early on so that surveillance can begin upon contract award .