it management . dhs has fully addressed 3 of the 6 it management outcomes , mostly addressed another 2 , and partially addressed the remaining 1 . for example , dhs has finalized a directive to establish its tiered governance and portfolio management structure for overseeing and managing its it investments , and annually reviews each of its portfolios and the associated investments to determine the most efficient allocation of resources within each of the portfolios . the department has also made progress in implementing its it strategic human capital plan for fiscal years 2010 through 2012 . however , in january 2015 dhs shifted its it paradigm from acquiring assets to acquiring services , and acting as a service broker ( i.e. , an intermediary between the purchaser of a service and the seller of that service ) . according to dhs officials in may 2015 , this paradigm change will require a major transition in the skill sets of dhs's it workforce , as well as the hiring , training , and managing of staff with those new skill sets ; as such , this effort will need to be closely managed in order to succeed . additionally , we found that dhs continues to take steps to enhance its information security program . however , while the department made progress in remediating findings from the previous year , in november 2015 , the department's financial statement auditor designated deficiencies in it systems controls as a material weakness for financial reporting purposes for the 12th consecutive year . this designation was due to flaws in security controls such as those for access controls , configuration management , segregation of duties , and contingency planning . thus , dhs needs to remediate this longstanding material weakness . information security remains a major management challenge for the department . financial management . dhs has fully addressed 2 financial management outcomes , partially addressed 3 , and initiated 3 . most notably , dhs received a clean audit opinion on its financial statements for 3 consecutive years , fiscal years 2013 , 2014 , and 2015 , fully addressing 2 outcomes . in addition , in november 2015 , dhs's financial statement auditors reported that one of four material weaknesses in its internal controls over financial reporting had been reduced to a significant deficiency in connection with its remediation efforts . however , the remaining material weaknesses reported by dhs auditors continue to hamper dhs's ability to establish effective internal control over financial reporting and comply with financial management system requirements . dhs continues to make progress on three multi - year projects to modernize selected components' financial management systems . according to its january 2016 strategy update , dhs has made the most progress on its u.s. coast guard modernization project ; whereas additional planning and discovery efforts need to be completed on its projects to modernize federal emergency management agency and u.s. immigration and customs enforcement financial management systems before dhs will be in a position to implement modernized solutions for these components and their customers .