we have not evaluated these actions . after reviewing the updated privacy policy on the department's web site , we agree that the agency has met the requirement , and we have modified table 2 in the final report to reflect that the department has updated its policy . we have not evaluated these actions . without a pia , the department may lack assurance that all potential privacy risks have been evaluated and that protections have been identified to mitigate them . the following are gao's comments to the department of state's letter dated may 31 , 2011 . after reviewing additional comments provided by department representatives , we updated our report to indicate that the department has plans to develop a pia for its use of youtube and twitter . we believe that conducting and documenting a risk assessment is necessary . although limiting the type of information that is processed on third - party systems can be an effective mitigating security control , without conducting and documenting a risk assessment , agency officials cannot ensure that appropriate controls and mitigation measures are in place to address potentially heightened threats associated with social media , including spear phishing and social engineering . the following are gao's comments to the general services administration's letter dated june 3 , 2011 . the following are gao's comments to the department of defense's letter dated may 27 , 2011 . we updated our report to indicate that the department asserted that it is taking actions to develop a pia for its social media use , although it has not yet been finalized . after reviewing the additional documentation provided , we agree that the department met the requirement of conducting and documenting a security risk assessment . we modified the report , as appropriate , and removed the recommendation . the following are gao's comments to the department of education's letter dated may 25 , 2011 . after reviewing the privacy policy on the department's web site , we updated our report to indicate that the department asserted that it is taking actions to develop privacy policies addressing the agency's use of pii made available through social media services . appendix ii contains these recommendations . we sent draft copies of this report to the 23 agencies covered by our review , as well as to the national archives and records administration . we received written or e - mail responses from all the agencies . a summary of their comments and our responses , where appropriate , are provided below . in providing written comments on a draft of this report , the archivist of the united states stated that nara concurred with the recommendation to develop guidance on effectively capturing records from social media sites and that the agency would incorporate best practices in this guidance . nara's comments are reprinted in appendix iii .