tsa revised air carrier security programs . effective october 1 , 2008 , several months prior to the first mandated deadline , tsa established a new requirement for 100 percent screening of nonexempt cargo transported on narrow - body passenger aircraft . narrow - body flights transport about 26 percent of all cargo on domestic passenger flights . according to tsa officials , air carriers reported that they are currently meeting this requirement . effective february 1 , 2009 , tsa also required air carriers to ensure the screening of 50 percent of all nonexempt air cargo transported on all passenger aircraft . although screening may be conducted by various entities , each air carrier must ensure that the screening requirements are fulfilled . furthermore , effective february 2009 , tsa revised or eliminated most of its screening exemptions for domestic cargo . as a result , most domestic cargo is now subject to tsa screening requirements . tsa created the certified cargo screening program ( ccsp ) . tsa also created a program , known as the ccsp , to allow screening to take place earlier in the shipping process and at various points in the air cargo supply chain . the results of this review will be issued later this year . to determine the progress tsa has made in meeting the 9 / 11 commission act mandate , and to identify any ongoing challenges , we reviewed tsa's air cargo security programs , and interviewed tsa air cargo program officials and representatives from various air cargo industry associations . we also conducted site visits to two large u.s. commercial airports that process domestic and inbound air cargo to observe screening operations and technologies , and interviewed local tsa officials and representatives from air carriers , freight forwarders , and shippers to obtain their views on tsa's system to implement the screening mandate . this issue regarding tsa's current air cargo security approach will be further explored during our ongoing review . lastly , tsa officials reported that cargo that has already been transported on one passenger flight may be subsequently transferred to another passenger flight without undergoing additional screening . according to tsa officials , the agency has determined that this is an approved screening method because an actual flight mimics one of tsa's approved screening methods . for example , cargo exempt from tsa screening requirements that is transported on an inbound flight can be transferred to a domestic aircraft without additional screening , because it is considered to have been screened in accordance with tsa screening requirements . according to tsa , this scenario occurs infrequently , but the agency has not been able to provide us with data that allows us to assess how frequently this occurs . tsa reported that it is exploring ways to enhance the security of cargo transferred to another flight , including using canine teams to screen such cargo . this issue regarding tsa's current air cargo security approach will be further explored during our ongoing review . although industry participation in the ccsp is vital to tsa's approach to spread screening responsibilities across the supply chain , it is unclear whether the number and types of facilities needed to meet tsa's screening estimates will join the ccsp .