iv ) . to address our objectives , we reviewed open world's organizational structure , operational policies and procedures , program documentation , and legislative history . we also observed selected program activities , including the vetting process and a predeparture orientation in moscow , as well as program orientation and other events in washington , d.c . in addition , we analyzed the results of program surveys that participants completed from 2000 to 2003 and supplemented this analysis with interviews of 56 program alumni during fieldwork in moscow , st. petersburg , petrozavodsk , and samara , russia . we assessed program and survey data that we obtained from open world for accuracy , and we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our study . we also met with open world's chairman of the board of trustees , executive director , and other staff and management ; state department officials ; major contractors , including the american councils for international education ; and representatives of national host organizations . in russia and ukraine , we met with the u.s. ambassadors , u.s. embassy officials , contractors , and representatives of nominating organizations . ( see app . ii for a list of national host organizations in 2003. ) the following chart illustrates open world's program operations and activities , as well as the entities involved in carrying out the program . congress appropriates an annual amount for open world , which has ranged from $8 million in fiscal year 2002 to $13.5 million in fiscal year 2004 . in addition , open world is authorized to seek and accept private donations and reports that it has received current gifts and pledges of about $2 million . figure 3 shows the program's total expenditures ( unaudited ) for fiscal years 1999-2003 and expenditures by major category during the same period . based on data for the program's expenditures and the number of participants for 2003 provided by open world , we estimated the average cost per participant , including facilitators , to be about $6,200 . when the program was established as an independent entity in december 2000 , congress provided the program with additional authority and support , including the authority to receive donations and appoint an executive director and to establish a trust fund in the department of the treasury to be credited with appropriations and donations approved by the program . in addition , congress authorized the library of congress to provide the program with support services , including the ability to disburse appropriated funds ; pay the program's personnel ; and provide administrative , legal , financial management , and other services . the library was also authorized to collect the full costs of the services from the program's trust fund . to formalize this arrangement , the library and open world entered into an interagency agreement . with regard to open world's financial management and accountability mechanisms , we discussed the program's related processes with open world officials and reviewed supporting documentation to gain an understanding of the operation of these processes . we did not conduct an audit of open world's financial reports or individual transactions . ( for a detailed discussion of our scope and methodology , see app .