irrigation . some produced water from coalbed methane is reused for irrigation in certain parts of wyoming and colorado because the water is generally of high enough quality that it does not require extensive treatment in order to avoid damage to the crops or soil . according to the national research council , about 13 percent of the produced water generated from coalbed methane producers in wyoming's powder river basin was reused for managed irrigation or subsurface drip irrigation . for example , a coalbed methane production operation we visited in wyoming disposes of almost all of its produced water from the powder river basin using a managed irrigation system , following minimal treatment of the water . because its wells produce more water than can be disposed of under its surface discharge permit , it is a fairly economical option , and is allowable under state regulations . while there are examples of irrigation with produced water occurring elsewhere , it is not a widely used management practice . according to netl , a significant challenge to using produced water for irrigation is the salt content of the water , which can decrease crop yields and damage the soil . in addition , the national research council reported that while reusing coalbed methane produced water for beneficial purposes such as irrigation would seem to be a desirable and relatively easy objective , in reality it is potentially economically and environmentally burdensome , complex , and challenging . the suitability of water for irrigation depends on a number of factors including the type of crops grown , the soil type , irrigation methods , and the types and quantity of salts dissolved in the water . in addition , the reliability of the produced water supply over time , proximity to the irrigation site , and costs also present challenges . hydraulic fracturing . in recent years , some shale gas producers have begun reusing produced water for hydraulic fracturing of additional wells at their operations . the water is typically treated first , either on - site or off - site , and then mixed with freshwater if salt concentrations remain high . although no national estimate of producers' use of this practice is available , a 2009 report on shale gas development reported that interest in this type of reuse for produced water was high . however , the report also noted that certain water treatment challenges needed to be overcome to make this type of reuse more widespread . according to netl , in order for reuse of produced water to become widespread , low - cost treatment technologies must be developed . in the last couple of years , reusing produced water for hydraulic fracturing has become more common among shale gas producers in pennsylvania , according to state regulators and producers we spoke with in the state . the shift was motivated , in part , by a change in the state's surface discharge standards that ultimately made treatment and discharge a comparatively more expensive practice . for example , one shale gas production site we visited in pennsylvania currently reuses all of its produced water for hydraulic fracturing , although it had used other practices in the past .