we reviewed va data as of january 2014 on each of these projects . we reviewed and analyzed the original cost estimate and completion date from when a project's prospectus was first submitted to congress and the project's current status . to examine specific outpatient projects in greater detail , we selected 11 clinic projects in 8 locations: ( 1 ) jacksonville , florida ; ( 2 ) baltimore , maryland ; ( 3 ) las vegas , nevada ( four facilities ) ; ( 4 ) austin , texas ; ( 5 ) mcallen , texas ; ( 6 ) corpus christi , texas ; ( 7 ) parma , ohio ; and ( 8 ) ft. wayne , indiana . we selected these projects and locations based on the following criteria: ( 1 ) projects status ; ( 2 ) project costs ; ( 3 ) scope and cost changes ; and ( 4 ) schedule delays . we reviewed va's leasing guidance and directives , va's strategic plan fiscal year 2011 to 2015 , and other relevant documents . in addition , we reviewed relevant prior gao reports , office of management and budget guidance on leasing practices , and relevant legislation pertaining to va's leasing authority and amounts appropriated for these projects . we interviewed va officials and representatives from private companies involved in va leasing projects . the work on which this statement is based was conducted from may 2013 to april 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the prospectuses for these projects were submitted to congress from 1997 to 2011 . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . for a more detailed explanation of our scope and methodology , see the april 2014 report . our april 2014 report noted that va has experienced substantial delays in executing new outpatient - clinic lease projects ; nearly all of the delays occurred in the planning stages prior to entering into a lease agreement with the developer . specifically , we found that 39 of the 41 outpatient - clinic projects for which a prospectus was submitted experienced schedule delays , ranging from 6 months to 13.3 years , with an average delay of 3.3 years , while 2 projects experienced schedule time decreases . our data analysis showed that 94 percent of these delays occurred in the planning stages prior to entering into the lease agreement . for all but one of the projects that experienced a delay , the delay occurred during the pre - lease agreement stage . we also compared the length of delays that occurred during the pre - lease agreement stage to the length of delays that occurred once a lease agreement was entered into with the development firm . we found that the average delay during the pre - lease agreement stages for all 41 projects totaled nearly 3.1 years . although the developer was ultimately successful in obtaining additional land for the project , this process led to delays .