imagery data to the warfighter in theater . to help address these issues , dod recently initiated an effort known as to help address these issues , dod recently initiated an effort known as operationally responsive space ( ors ) . the ors initiative encompasses operationally responsive space ( ors ) . the ors initiative encompasses several separate endeavors with a goal to provide short - term tactical several separate endeavors with a goal to provide short - term tactical capabilities as well as identifying and implementing long - term technology capabilities as well as identifying and implementing long - term technology and design solutions to reduce the cost and time of developing and and design solutions to reduce the cost and time of developing and delivering simpler satellites in greater numbers . more specifically , these delivering simpler satellites in greater numbers . more specifically , these include developing and launching small - size satellites , acquiring lower cost include developing and launching small - size satellites , acquiring lower cost launch systems , developing standardized satellite components , as well as launch systems , developing standardized satellite components , as well as exploring a variety of new common design techniques . though dod has exploring a variety of new common design techniques . though dod has tried to make space acquisition more responsive in the past , the current tried to make space acquisition more responsive in the past , the current ors initiative is a concerted effort to create an environment where new ors initiative is a concerted effort to create an environment where new concepts and ideas can be fostered and transitioned to users . concepts and ideas can be fostered and transitioned to users . we reviewed aspects of the ors initiative in 2006 and concluded that dod we reviewed aspects of the ors initiative in 2006 and concluded that dod needed a departmentwide strategy for pursuing low cost , responsive needed a departmentwide strategy for pursuing low cost , responsive tactical capabilities — both satellite and launch — for the warfighter , and to tactical capabilities — both satellite and launch — for the warfighter , and to identify corresponding funding . subsequently , the congress directed dod to submit a report that sets forth a plan for providing quick acquisition of low cost space capabilities . given the potential these efforts offer for changing the way dod acquires and fields space capabilities , you asked us to report on the status of dod's progress to date in implementing the program and assessing associated challenges . we also reviewed dod's development of a higher level strategy to guide the ors initiative , an action that we reported separately to you in march 2008 . further , we are reviewing ors' requirements setting process and its integration into warfighting concepts of operation , which we will report on later in june 2008 . to conduct our work for this report , we reviewed and analyzed ors documentation and interviewed officials representing the ors initiative as well as officials from the warfighting , acquisition , science , and technology communities and industry . we conducted this performance audit from may 2007 to february 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .