these comments are addressed below . cms commented that we mischaracterized the categories of dra funding by specifying them in the report as categories i , ii , iii , and iv . we developed these four descriptive categories , which were derived from provisions of the dra , in order to simplify report presentation . however , to respond to cms's comment , we included additional legal citations in the report to better link the statutory language of the dra with the categories of funding presented in this report . we did not , however , adopt all of cms's descriptions of dra provisions as cms presented some of the descriptions inaccurately . in particular , cms presented dra sections 6201 ( a ) ( 3 ) and 6201 ( a ) ( 4 ) as providing federal funding under an approved section 1115 demonstration project , but as stated in the report , such approval is irrelevant to this funding . cms also commented that the report was misleading because it did not fully describe the reconciliation process that will be used to allocate remaining and unused dra funds . specifically , the agency indicated that we did not explain that additional dra allocations would be made to states not only from the remaining $136 million in unallocated funds but also from any unspent funds already allocated to states . the draft report did contain a full explanation of the reconciliation process . however , to address cms's comment , we clarified this process in the report's highlights and results in brief . finally , cms disagreed with statements in the draft report that louisiana had not received the requested direction detailed in letters written to hhs on may 15 , 2006 , and cms on may 26 , 2006 . louisiana's letters included concerns and questions that arose after the state implemented its section 1115 demonstration project . cms indicated that it provided and continues to provide technical assistance to all states with section 1115 demonstration projects for hurricane katrina assistance beyond the states reviewed in this report . in particular , immediately following the hurricane cms provided guidance to states through a conference call and a september 16 , 2005 , letter sent to all state medicaid directors that explained the process of applying for the section 1115 demonstration project , the benefits and eligibility criteria for evacuees , the uncompensated care pool , and other pertinent information . we revised the report to reflect the guidance that cms provided to the states immediately following the hurricane . cms also commented that it worked with louisiana and the other hurricane - affected states on redetermining eligibility through a conference call , and provided information to louisiana several times regarding regulations that the state should follow for redetermining eligibility on an annual basis . further , cms indicated that it provided technical assistance to louisiana in its efforts to ensure program integrity and access to health care services . while cms may have provided such assistance , from louisiana's perspective , it was not sufficient to address the many issues the state is facing .