there are few , if any , substitutes for some of these metals . zirconium and zirconium base alloys . specialty metals and their potential applications in dod weapon systems include: steel alloys such as those used for ship hulls ; metal alloys consisting of nickel and iron - nickel ; certain cobalt base alloys such as samarium - cobalt alloy magnets used in radars ; titanium and titanium alloy used in aircraft engine parts ; and zirconium and zirconium base alloys used in gas turbine engines . in 2006 , congress passed the fiscal year 2007 ndaa which established specialty metals restrictions separate from the berry amendment . the provision generally requires dod and its contractors to procure specialty metals produced or melted in the united states unless an exception applies which then permits the specialty metals to be obtained from foreign countries . table 1 shows the federal regulations and dod guidance that govern the elements of planning , compliance , and domestic source restrictions when procuring specialty metals for major weapon systems . dod also has other exceptions available under the specialty metals restrictions , but they were beyond the scope of our review . as mandated , our review focused on national security waivers . appendix ii provides a list of the allowable exceptions to the specialty metals restrictions . some of these exceptions include: national security waivers: when the use of noncompliant specialty metals in a weapon system is identified after it has been fabricated , the secretary of defense may determine in writing that acceptance of such an end item is necessary to the national security interests of the united states . the secretary is allowed by statute to delegate this authority to the usd at&l . dod generally must notify congress in advance of making these written determinations except in the case of an urgent national security requirement . domestic non - availability: a domestic non - availability exception may apply if usd at&l or the secretary of the military service determines that compliant specialty metal of satisfactory quality , sufficient quantity , and in the required form , cannot be procured when needed at a fair and reasonable price . qualifying countries: this exception waives the requirement for procuring specialty metals produced in the united states if the acquisition relates to certain agreements with foreign governments , known as “qualifying countries.” under the qualifying country exception , manufacturers in these countries have greater flexibility when procuring specialty metals for dod procurements than u.s. manufacturers . specifically , they can procure specialty metals from any source — including non - qualifying countries — while a component manufacturer in the united states must procure specialty metals from a source in the united states or a qualifying country . to implement the specialty metals restrictions , dod established a clause in the dfars . generally dod must include this clause in weapon system solicitations and contracts to require that contractors deliver items incorporating specialty metals in compliance with statute and regulation . contractors are required to insert this clause , known as flow down , in their subcontracts that include items containing specialty metals , to the extent necessary to ensure compliance .