however , most states continue to have staffing concerns . mr. chairman , this completes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have at this time . for further information about this testimony , please contact janet heinrich at ( 202 ) 512-7119 . the federal government also supports preparedness efforts for an influenza pandemic . hhs's national vaccine program office is responsible for the development of federal plans for vaccine and immunization activities and coordinating these efforts among federal agencies . to foster state and local planning , hhs issued interim planning guidance for the states in 1997 that outlined general federal and state responsibilities during an influenza pandemic . hhs expects that if a pandemic occurs , both the vaccines that are used to prevent influenza and the antiviral drugs that are used to treat influenza will be in short supply . the guidance discussed certain key issues related to limited supplies of the influenza vaccine and antiviral drugs — for instance the amount of vaccine and antiviral drugs that will be purchased at the federal level ; the division of responsibility between the public and private sectors for the purchase , distribution , and administration of these supplies during a pandemic ; and priorities for vaccinating population groups , such as health workers and public health personnel involved in the pandemic response , and persons traditionally considered to be at increased risk of severe influenza illness and mortality . health care providers treat patients and limit the spread of infectious disease . all these response activities require a workforce that is sufficiently skilled and adequate in number . the federal government provides funding and resources to state and local entities to support preparedness and response efforts . for example , in fiscal year 2002 cdc's public health preparedness and response for bioterrorism cooperative agreement program provided approximately $918 million to states to improve bioterrorism preparedness and response as well as other public health emergency preparedness capacities . similarly , hrsa's bioterrorism hospital preparedness cooperative agreement program provided approximately $125 million to states in fiscal year 2002 to enhance the capacity of hospitals and associated health care entities to respond to bioterrorist attacks . hhs renewed these cooperative agreements for the period of august 31 , 2003 through august 30 , 2004 . for these renewed agreements , cdc's program and hrsa's program distributed about $870 million and about $498 million , respectively . among the other resources that the federal government provides is the strategic national stockpile , which contains pharmaceuticals and medical supplies that can be delivered to the site of a public health emergency anywhere in the united states within 12 hours of the decision to deploy them . states reported that as of the summer of 2003 they have made improvements in their preparedness to respond to major public health threats , but no aspect of preparedness has been fully addressed by all of the states .