while simplification can have benefits , it can also have drawbacks . enhancing information reporting can reduce complexity for taxpayers . it can also reduce the opportunities available for taxpayers to evade taxes by , for example , underreporting business income or filing fraudulent claims for tax credits . generally , new requirements on third parties to submit information returns would require statutory changes , whereas improvements to existing information - reporting forms may be done administratively by irs . the extent to which individual taxpayers accurately report the income they earn has been shown to be related to the extent to which the income is reported to them and irs by third parties or taxes on the income are withheld . for example , employers report most wages , salaries , and tip compensation to employees and irs through form w - 2 . multiple approaches are needed to reduce the tax gap . no single approach is likely to fully and cost - effectively address noncompliance since the noncompliance has multiple causes and spans different types of taxes and taxpayers . while the tax gap will remain a challenge into the future , the following strategies could help . one area where improved information reporting could help is higher - education expenses . eligible educational institutions are required to report information on qualified tuition and related expenses for higher education to both taxpayers and irs so that taxpayers can determine the amount of educational tax benefits that can be claimed . however , the information currently reported by educational institutions on tuition statements sent to irs and taxpayers ( on form 1098-t ) may be confusing for taxpayers who use the form to prepare their tax returns and not very useful to irs . irs requires institutions to report on form 1098-t either the ( 1 ) amount of payments received , or ( 2 ) amount billed for qualified expenses . irs officials stated that most institutions report the amount billed and do not report payments . however , the amount billed may not equal the amount that can be claimed as a credit . in order to reduce taxpayer confusion and enhance compliance with the eligibility requirements for higher - education benefits , in 2009 we recommended that irs revise form 1098-t to improve the usefulness of information on qualifying education expenses . another area where improved information reporting could improve compliance is rental income . in 2008 , we estimated that at least 53 percent of individual taxpayers with rental real estate misreported their rental real estate activities for tax year 2001 , resulting in an estimated $12.4 billion of net misreported income . irs enforcement officials cited limited information reporting as a major challenge in ensuring compliance because without third - party information reporting , it is difficult for irs to systematically detect taxpayers who fail to report any rent or determine whether the rent and expense amounts taxpayers report are accurate .