( see fig . since the act was passed , demand for helium has changed over time ( see fig . however , if the helium debt is paid off in 2015 as currently projected and the revolving helium fund is terminated , it is not clear how the operations of the helium program will be paid for . currently the helium program does not receive any appropriated funds for its operations . the revenues generated by the program go into the helium fund and the program has access to those funds to pay for its day - to - day operations . it is uncertain at this point how the helium program's operations will be funded after 2015 . at what price should blm sell its crude helium ? since the helium privatization act of 1996 was passed , blm has set the price for federal crude helium at the minimum price required by the act . however , because federal crude helium reserves provide a major supply of crude helium , we expect blm's prices will continue to affect private industry market prices for crude and refined helium . in addition , in recent years , the helium market has been influenced by other market forces as well as supply disruptions that have resulted in price increases . blm officials told us that the 1996 act sets a minimum selling price and that the secretary of the interior has the discretion to set a higher price . blm is planning to reevaluate its selling price , according to agency officials . for example , in 2006 , failure of a major crude helium enrichment unit process vessel led to unscheduled outages and eventually to a major plant shutdown . when blm first set its price after the 1996 act , its price was estimated to be significantly higher than the market price , but now the reverse is true — blm's price is estimated to be at or below the market price . on one hand , blm could consider raising its price to ensure that the federal government is getting a fair market return on the sales of its assets . on the other hand , raising the price could potentially further erode sales . furthermore , the 1996 act , like the helium act amendments of 1960 before it , tied the price to the program's operating expenses and debt . if the debt is paid off in 2015 as projected , the debt will no longer be a factor in setting helium prices . as a result , it is uncertain how blm will price its crude helium in the future . in conclusion , mr. chairman , there have been a number of changes in the market for helium since the congress passed the helium privatization act of 1996 . as the end point for the actions that were required to be taken under the act come upon us in the next 5 years , the congress may need to address some unresolved issues such as how to use the remaining helium in storage , how the helium program will operate once the helium fund expires in 2015 , and how to set the price for the helium owned by the federal government .