this is not our intent . we were simply stating as a matter of fact that the open - ended , nonspecific nature of many of the nep recommendations complicated our reporting on recommendation implementation status . with respect to nep report recommendation implementation , doe further commented that doe's own nep status report was not intended to be comprehensive and that supplementary material could be found in unidentified “budget documents and other means.” we recognize that status information may be available from a variety of sources , and we explored those sources in performing our analysis . however , in reviewing the status of efforts to implement the recommendations , we believe it was appropriate to focus on doe's most recent report on the status of these recommendations . in our view , it does not seem unreasonable to expect that congress and the american people could find relatively complete information on nep implementation status in a direct format through one centralized source , especially if that source is entitled nep status report . doe and other federal agencies provided numerous technical clarifications , observations , and editorial comments , and we have made changes to this report as appropriate . doe's written comments are reproduced in appendix vii . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of energy and other interested parties . we will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge at gao's web site at http:www.gao.gov . questions about this report should be directed to me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . key contributors to this report are james cooksey , nancy crothers , doreen feldman , mark gaffigan , michael gilbert , erica haley , elisabeth helmer , chir huang , arthur james , alan kasdan , frank rusco , john scott , karla springer , anne stevens , jena whitley , and monica wolford . we were asked to ( 1 ) identify the federal government's major energy - related efforts , ( 2 ) review the status of efforts to implement the may 2001 national energy policy ( nep ) report recommendations , and ( 3 ) determine the extent to which resources associated with federal energy - related efforts has changed since the release of the nep report . to identify the federal government's major energy - related efforts , we reviewed the federal agencies that have the most responsibility for implementing the recommendations of the nep report — the departments of energy ( doe ) , the interior ( doi ) , commerce , transportation ( dot ) , state , and agriculture ( usda ) and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) . we asked these key agencies , and other agencies as time allowed , to identify their energy - related work , and we developed an inventory of the energy - related programs that we identified .