council . under the executive order , this council is accountable to the president for driving implementation of the reform effort , including ensuring the alignment of security and suitability processes , holding agencies accountable for implementation , and establishing goals and metrics for progress . the order also appointed the deputy director for management at the office of management and budget as the chair of the council and designated the director of national intelligence as the security executive agent and the director of opm as the suitability executive agent . we have previously reported that , to safeguard classified data and manage costs , agencies need an effective process to determine whether positions require a clearance and , if so , at what level . last year we found , however , that the director of national intelligence , as security executive agent , has not provided agencies clearly defined policies and procedures to consistently determine if a civilian position requires a security clearance.for , among other things , developing uniform and consistent policies and procedures to ensure the effective , efficient , and timely completion of background investigations and adjudications relating to determinations of eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position , and gives the director authority to issue guidance to agency heads to ensure uniformity in processes relating to those determinations . further , the director also has not established guidance to require agencies to review and revise or validate existing federal civilian executive order 13467 assigns the director responsibility position designations . executive order 12968certain exceptions , eligibility for access to classified information shall only be requested and granted on the basis of a demonstrated , foreseeable need for access , and the number of employees that each agency determines is eligible for access to classified information shall be kept to the minimum required . the order also states that access to classified information shall be terminated when an employee no longer has a need for access , and prohibits requesting or approving eligibility for access in excess of the actual requirements . without such requirements , executive branch agencies may be hiring and budgeting for initial and periodic security clearance investigations using position descriptions and security clearance requirements that no longer reflect national security needs . says that , subject to in our july 2012 report , we found that department of homeland security and dod components' officials were aware of the need to keep the number of security clearances to a minimum , but were not always required to conduct periodic reviews and validations of the security clearance needs of existing positions . overdesignating positions results in significant cost implications , given that the fiscal year 2012 base price for a top secret clearance investigation conducted by opm was $4,005 , while the base price of a secret clearance was $260 . conversely , underdesignating positions could lead to security risks . in the absence of guidance to determine if a position requires a security clearance , agencies are using a tool that opm designed to determine the sensitivity and risk levels of civilian positions which , in turn , inform the type of investigation needed .