state . the bureau will generally no longer permit state governments to submit their own challenges . bureau officials stated that counties and cities are the most appropriate entities to submit a population challenge for their community because they have greater knowledge of their population . bureau officials also said that they want to avoid situations where a state may challenge estimates for communities where respective local governments disagree with such challenges . the bureau will allow states to submit challenges for counties or equivalents where there is no seat of government , such as in certain new england states and in parts of alaska , but will otherwise require all communities affected by a challenge to have their government communicate directly with the bureau . the changes to procedures are intended to improve the accuracy of revisions to population estimates stemming from challenges . the bureau modified procedures so that challenges by subcounty governments to the bureau's estimates of people living in traditional housing — not living in group quarters arrangements — will no longer affect county - level population estimates . previously , successful subcounty challenges were added to respective county - level populations . the bureau justifies the change with its research demonstrating that its method for estimating the county population that lives in housing is generally better than the method typically used to challenge subcounty estimates . according to bureau officials , the method used to challenge subcounty estimates introduced an upward bias for communities that were experiencing population decline or a slowing of population growth . subcounty . under the new rules , subcounty governments should use building , demolition , and mobile home permits , and group quarter counts to challenge population estimates . the bureau plans to reject challenges that rely solely on other types of data , except in cases where the data provide overwhelming evidence that the bureau's estimate of population growth is in error.research shows that public utility records can vary widely in their reliability to indicate population growth , as well as in their availability to the public . therefore , utility records will be treated as corroborating , or secondary , evidence to support other preferred data expected to be provided in support of challenges . utility records were ordinarily accepted as a basis for successful challenges in the past . for example , according to a senior bureau official , county and equivalent . under the changes , county governments and their equivalents should use birth and death records , immigration data , and group quarters counts to challenge population estimates — a significant reduction in the types of records from what the bureau has historically accepted . according to bureau officials , research conducted over the past several years has demonstrated that county - level estimation methods based on other data sources do not produce , on average , as accurate estimates of population . consequently , the bureau plans to reject county - level challenges relying on other data sources .