insurers . we selected insurers to achieve variation in size , as determined by the number of their enrollees ; the concentration of their health insurance business within the individual market ; whether they paid rebates based on their experience in 2011 or 2012 ; the number of states in which they operated ; and their not - for - profit status . however , these two years of data may not reflect future rebate patterns . our analysis of the data showed that rebates would have been reduced by about 75 percent if agents' and brokers' fees and commissions were excluded from the mlr and rebate calculations . cms defines non - claims costs for the following categories: ( 1 ) agents' and brokers' fees and commissions ; ( 2 ) cost containment expenses , which reduce the number of health services provided or the costs of such services , but are not related to an activity to improve health care quality ; ( 3 ) claims adjustment expenses , such as office maintenance and supplies costs , not classified as cost containment expenses ; ( 4 ) salaries and benefits that insurers pay to their employees who sell their plans ; ( 5 ) other taxes that may not be excluded from premium revenue ; ( 6 ) other general and administrative expenses , such as salaries and advertising ; and ( 7 ) community benefit expenditures , which include expenses for activities such as health educational campaigns that are available broadly to the public . the remaining amount of premiums that an insurer does not spend on the components of medical claims , qi activities , taxes and fees , and non - claims costs , will be referred to as the insurer's “premium surplus” in this report . premium surplus includes profit and other reserved capital . the ppaca mlr is generally calculated by dividing ( a ) the sum of an insurer's medical claims and expenses for qi activities ( the formula numerator ) by ( b ) the insurer's premiums , after excluding from them the amount of insurer's federal and state taxes and licensing or regulatory fees ( the formula denominator ) . ( see fig . some insurers , such as those with a small number of enrollees , are permitted certain adjustments to their mlrs . these adjustments are referred to as credibility adjustments , and they are added to , and thus credibility adjustments are provided to increase , the insurer's mlr.address the unreliability associated with calculating an mlr based on a small number of enrollees . insurers with a small number of enrollees calculated their mlrs for 2012 based on their 2011 and 2012 experience combined . all insurers will calculate their mlrs for their experience in 2013 and subsequent years based on data from a 3-year period . that is , insurers will add their data for the year for which the mlr is being calculated to their mlr data for the 2 prior years . for each insurer , separate mlrs are calculated for each state and market combination in which it does business and each mlr is used to determine whether an insurer must pay rebates .