( see fig 3. ) fisma requires agency inspectors general to perform an independent evaluation of the information security programs and practices of their agency to determine the effectiveness of such programs and practices . each evaluation is to include ( 1 ) testing of the effectiveness of information security policies , procedures , and practices of a representative subset of the agency's information systems and ( 2 ) assessing compliance ( based on the results of the testing ) with fisma requirements and related information security policies , procedures , standards , and guidelines . we have previously reported that the annual inspector general independent evaluations lacked a common approach and that the scope and methodology of the evaluations varied across agencies . we stated that there was an opportunity to improve these evaluations by conducting them in accordance with audit standards or a common approach and framework . the effective implementation of these recommendations will strengthen the security posture at these agencies . in addition , the white house , omb , and some federal agencies have continued or launched several governmentwide initiatives that are intended to enhance information security at federal agencies . they include the comprehensive national cyber security initiative , the information systems security line of business , the federal desktop core configuration , smartbuy , and the trusted internet connections initiative . we currently have ongoing work that addresses the status , planning , and implementation efforts of several of these initiatives . additionally , omb summarizes the information provided by the agencies and the inspectors general in its report to congress . we have previously made several recommendations to omb for improving this annual reporting . omb has required agencies to report systems information by risk category and reviewed its guidance to ensure clarity of instructions . in addition to the previously reported shortcomings , omb's reporting instructions for fiscal year 2008 did not sufficiently address several processes key to implementing an agencywide security program and were sometimes unclear . for example , the reporting instructions did not request inspectors general to provide information on the quality or effectiveness of agencies' processes for developing and maintaining inventories , providing specialized security training , and monitoring contractors . for these activities , inspectors general were requested to report only on the extent to which agencies had implemented the activity but not on the effectiveness of those activities . providing information on the effectiveness of the processes used to implement the activities could further enhance the usefulness of the data for management and oversight purposes . in addition , the guidance to inspectors general did not define or identify criteria for determining the level of performance in certification and accreditation for each rating . not all inspectors general considered the same aspects in reviewing the certification and accreditation process , yet all were allowed to provide the same rating . without clear guidelines for rating these processes , omb and congress may not have a consistent basis for comparing the progress of an agency over time or against other agencies . in its report to congress for fiscal year 2008 , omb did not fully summarize the findings from the inspectors general independent evaluations or identify significant deficiencies in agencies' information security practices .