airfield projects . similarly , airport officials from one medium hub airport explained that some of the airfield projects that they have planned , are eligible for aip discretionary funding , but are not considered “high priority” projects according to faa prioritization criteria . for example , they currently have a taxiway and apron upgrade project planned , but this project may not compete well against other projects when considering faa's aip prioritization process . according to this airport official , runways are the highest priority and almost always get aip funding . the official added , however , that the farther away you get from the runway , the less likely it is that you will be able to get aip funding for the project . in addition , five airport officials noted that while overall aip grant - funding levels have remained relatively constant in recent years , demand for discretionary aip grant funding has increased , thereby increasing competition for this funding . according to faa officials , the amount of funding that faa has available for discretionary grants changes year - to - year . for example , the amount of discretionary funding allocated to airports annually can vary based on an airport's decisions to carry entitlement funding over multiple years , as entitlement funding that is carried over becomes discretionary . according to faa officials , because a very high percentage of discretionary funding comes from funding that has been carried over , it is difficult for airports to plan for or count on this funding being available in any given year . between fiscal years 2013 through 2017 , the amount of discretionary funding that was awarded averaged $1.6 billion annually . of this amount , the amount representing “pure” discretionary funding averaged $56 million annually or about 4 percent of total aip discretionary funding . pure discretionary funding refers to the amount remaining after discretionary set - asides have been funded . faa distributes pure discretionary funding to eligible projects at any airport on a competitive basis . as previously discussed , an additional $1 billion in supplemental discretionary aip funding was appropriated in 2018 , and an additional $500 million was appropriated in discretionary aip funding in 2019 . however , according to faa officials , the number of applications they received for this funding exceeded the amount of funding that was available . specifically , according to officials , faa received more than 2,500 funding requests totaling more than $10 billion in 2018 for the $1 billion authorized as supplemental discretionary aip grant funding . as of may 2019 , faa has awarded or anticipates awarding $985 million in supplemental discretionary aip grant funding to 164 airports in 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico . the supplemental grants fund projects ranging from runway reconstruction and rehabilitation , to the construction of taxiways , aprons , and terminals . about half ( 12 out of 19 ) of the airport officials we spoke to stated that competing airport and airline priorities for capital infrastructure investments can pose challenges to funding infrastructure projects and can delay projects .