pub . 92-203 , 85 stat . to describe what is known about commercial activity in the u.s. arctic , we interviewed companies and industry trade associations from the commercial - shipping , cruise , commercial - fishing , oil , and mining industries . to describe actions federal , state , and local government entities have taken in support of the u.s. arctic marine transportation system , we interviewed and collected documentation from 7 federal , 10 state , and 6 local government entities to identify infrastructure within the scope of responsibility for each entity . we also identified specific efforts each entity has taken related to mapping , ports , port connectors , weather and sea - ice data , polar icebreakers , and aids to navigation . what federal interagency efforts have been taken to identify and prioritize arctic maritime infrastructure investments ? in the absence of a singular definition of the arctic , federal agencies' definitions vary . in this report , we use the term arctic to mean areas above the arctic circle and the term u.s. arctic to discuss those areas that are u.s. waters and land as defined by the arctic research and policy act of 1984 ( arpa ) . we focused on the development of maritime infrastructure on the waters and land along the western and northern coasts of alaska , particularly the more remote areas north of the bering strait . maritime infrastructure includes ( 1 ) the marine transportation system ( ports , navigable waterways , and port connectors such as roads and railways ) ; ( 2 ) aids to maritime navigation ( buoys and beacons ) ; ( 3 ) mapping and charting ; ( 4 ) weather and sea ice forecasts ; and ( 5 ) polar icebreakers . we focused on the commercial - shipping , cruises , commercial - fishing , oil , and mining industries as potential commercial operators in this region . our scope does not include arctic issues pertaining to domain awareness , defense , or international affairs ; we recently issued reports or are conducting ongoing work in these areas . to gather information for all three objectives , we reviewed program documentation and related reports and interviewed officials from the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) , the u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , the department of transportation ( dot ) , the committee on the marine transportation system ( cmts ) , the department of the interior's ( doi ) bureau of ocean energy management ( boem ) and bureau of safety and environmental enforcement ( bsee ) , and federal interagency coordinating bodies . we conducted site visits in 2013 to nome , barrow , and anchorage , alaska . we chose these site visits based on a variety of criteria , including geographic location in the state , number of interviews to be conducted , infrastructure activity , cultural considerations , and recommendations from stakeholders .