there are exceptions . low and medium risks , particularly in industries or geographic locations where there is little perceived exposure to a terrorist event , are the least affected . however , large companies , businesses of any size perceived to be in or near a target location , or those with some concentration of personnel or facilities are unlikely to be able to obtain a meaningful level of terrorism coverage at an economically viable price . where coverage is available , it tends to have high deductibles and tight limits on the level of coverage . in general , reinsurers are being very selective on the exposures they will accept , if any . the higher the risk , the less likely it is that reinsurance coverage will be available . and even in those limited cases in which some reinsurance coverage for terrorism is still available , the prices are very high . as reinsurers walk away from terrorism insurance , primary insurers' exposure increases , at least in the short run . however , while reinsurance contract renewals tend to be concentrated at the beginning of january and july , primary insurance contracts tend to renew at a relatively even rate over the year . as a result , industry observers and participants have told us that primary insurers' exposures have increased dramatically and will not fall unless and until they can , in turn , exclude terrorism from their coverage . faced with this kind of exposure and a risk they do not believe can be priced , industry observers and participates mentioned that primary insurers will need to emulate their reinsurance counterparts and exclude terrorism coverage from some commercial insurance policies . however , a number of factors are affecting both the speed and the extent to which primary insurers can insulate themselves from terrorism . first , in contrast to reinsurance , changes to the coverage provided by direct insurers require regulatory approval in most states , at least for low - and medium - risk companies . this regulatory hurdle caused iso , acting on behalf of p / c insurers , to file a request in every state for permission to exclude terrorism from all commercial insurance coverage . as of february 22 , 2002 , 45 states and the district of columbia and puerto rico had approved the iso exclusion , according to information received by iso and the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) . the other five states either denied the suggested language from iso or are still considering the language for approval or disapproval . states that have not approved the iso exclusion expressed concerns about various issues .