we disagree . sufficient bases currently exist for issuance of a dod spi policy requirement , especially in light of the evidence in our report that ( 1 ) without this requirement not all components are implementing spi and ( 2 ) those components that are currently implementing spi are reporting substantial benefits . nevertheless , dod's decision to await an osd work group's results before making a decision on how to proceed is not unreasonable or inconsistent with our position . see response to comment 1 . we disagree . oversight is an important part of policy implementation , and without such oversight , dod would incur significant risk that the policy would not be implemented . further , establishing a baseline measure to determine compliance does not require the implementation of a specific model . the intent of our recommendations is to establish a policy requiring spi that recognizes , as our report recognizes , that there is more than one model for doing so effectively . since 1984 , the software engineering institute ( sei ) has worked to improve management of software / systems productivity and quality primarily by addressing problems in acquiring , developing , engineering , or enhancing software / systems through a series of capability maturity models . according to sei , an organization's process capability provides a means of predicting the most likely outcome of the next software / systems project undertaken ; process maturity implies that the productivity and quality resulting from an organization's software / systems processes can be improved as maturity of the processes increases . the idealsm model is based on lessons learned from sei experiences as well as from sei projects relating to software process capability and maturity . for example , during the initiating phase of the idealsm model , general spi program goals are defined , and this definition could be in terms of capability maturity model levels . in the diagnosing phase , idealsm recommends developing an organization process maturity baseline ; sei's capability maturity model− based appraisal is one way of establishing this baseline . the first of these capability maturity models , the software capability maturity model® ( sw - cmm® ) , was designed to assist organizations in improving software development and maintenance processes . in this model , software process maturity — ranked from a low of level 1 to a high of level 5 — serves as an indicator of the likely range of software cost , schedule , and quality that can be expected to be achieved by projects developed within an organization . ( see figure 2. ) continuous process improvement is enabled by quantitative feedback from the process and from piloting innovative ideas and technologies . detailed measures of the software process and product quality are collected . both the software process and products are quantitatively understood and controlled . the software process for both management and engineering activities is documented , standardized , and integrated into a standard software process for the organization . all projects use an approved , tailored version of the organization's standard software process for developing and maintaining software . basic project management processes are established to track cost , schedule , and functionality .