( see fig . 1 for va's organizational structure. ) in 1993 , we reported that between fiscal years 1988 and 1990 , dod processed up to 200 applications annually for conscientious objector status and that about 80 to 85 percent of these applications were approved . during the persian gulf war , which was fought in fiscal year 1991 , the number of applications rose to 447 , and about 61 percent were approved . this demographic information is presented in appendix i . to address the first objective — to report on trends in the numbers of applications for conscientious objector status — we used data provided by each component for calendar years 2002 through 2006 . we did not report on data between september 11 , 2001 , and december 31 , 2001 , as directed in the mandate , because several of the components did not have these data available or believed the data to be unreliable . the defense manpower data center ( dmdc ) does not maintain information on applications for conscientious objector status but does maintain information on separations . we obtained personnel information on separations for conscientious objectors from dmdc because it maintains data for all of the armed forces , including the coast guard , dating back to the early 1970s . to assess the reliability of the conscientious objector applications and separations data we received from the components and dmdc , we ( 1 ) performed electronic testing ; ( 2 ) compared data provided by the components with data provided by dmdc to assess their reasonableness ; ( 3 ) reviewed information about the systems that produced the data ; and ( 4 ) interviewed component and dmdc officials to identify known problems or limitations in the data and to understand how dmdc receives and processes data from the components . navy and marine corps officials said that they did not have visibility over this issue for either their active or reserve components , because responsibility for obtaining such evaluations resides at the unit level . an air national guard official said that the component has a limited number of personnel who can conduct such an evaluation and that when one of these professionals is not available locally , the process may be delayed . coast guard officials said that in remote units in the active and reserve components where a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist is not readily available , processing is delayed . in addition , each component's process includes provisions to allow the applicant to be ( 1 ) represented by legal counsel , ( 2 ) given the opportunity to rebut the evidence in the record before the authorized official makes a final decision , and ( 3 ) given an explanation if the application is denied . according to their regulations , all components allow an applicant to obtain and pay for outside legal counsel . when we found discrepancies , we worked with the component or dmdc to understand why the discrepancies had occurred and to gather the most complete data possible .