*indicates country has a bilateral affairs officer . *indicates country has a bilateral affairs officer . the combatant commands expressed concerns about the availability of funding for the program . for example , one combatant command stated that the most challenging aspect of the state partnership program is the funding of the guardsmen because they need to be put on special orders that are not necessary when using active duty personnel . during the course of our review , congress enacted the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 , which provides authority for the use of up to $3 million to pay for some costs associated with civilian participation . to assess the reliability of the data , we collected written information from the combatant commands to gain an understanding of the processes and databases used to collect and record data and to identify any known limitations to the data . we also collected written information on any data quality control procedures in place for data on state partnership program activities and reviewed user manuals for the various databases , where provided . we discussed the procedures for generating and verifying the data with knowledgeable combatant command and national guard bureau officials . figure 2 illustrates the request and approval process . state partnership program stakeholders , including state partnership program coordinators , bilateral affairs officers , and combatant command officials , cited benefits of the program , but the program lacks clear goals , objectives , and performance metrics . without a comprehensive oversight framework for defining and measuring progress , dod cannot fully assess whether the program is an effective and efficient use of resources . state partnership program coordinators provided examples of how the program benefits their states and their national guard units , including providing experience and training for guardsmen and developing relationships between the state and the partner country . for example , 39 of the 50 state partnership program coordinators who responded to our questions reported that the state partnership program provides experience to participating guardsmen . in another instance , one state partnership program coordinator reported that by demonstrating medical techniques to partner country participants , the guardsmen simultaneously gain direct experience performing those techniques . according to an africa command official , the data provided were selected manually , and some activities may have been overlooked . activity data provided to us by european command were also incomplete in that the location of events was missing for 482 of 753 ( 64 percent ) activities . three state partnership program coordinators specifically noted that the program allows participants to deploy and complete realistic military training outside a warzone . in addition , 17 state partnership program coordinators noted the value of the state partnership program in providing a mechanism for developing relationships between the state guard units and the partner countries . another state partnership program coordinator noted that establishing such relationships improves long - term international security , and several state partnership program coordinators noted that the relationships fostered by the program were instrumental in the partner countries' deployments to afghanistan or iraq .