doe . as part of its efforts to advance a clean energy economy , doe conducted two criticality assessments on materials important to clean energy applications , such as wind turbines , electric vehicles , photovoltaic cells , and fluorescent lighting . doe's first assessment , published in a 2010 critical materials strategy , evaluated 14 materials and identified 10 , including 7 rare earth materials , as critical or near critical over the short or medium terms . doe's second assessment , published in a 2011 critical materials strategy , assessed 16 materials and identified 10 of them as critical or near critical over the short or medium terms . as part of its 2015 quadrennial technology review , doe also published a critical materials technology assessment that reported on major trends driving future material criticality for selected clean energy applications . additionally , doe manages the isotope development and production for research and applications program ( isotope program ) through which it produces and distributes radioactive and stable isotopes that are in short supply but are critical for either federal government or u.s. commercial use . as part of the isotope program , doe has a process to identify high - priority isotopes by monitoring long - term changes in demand within the isotope community that could affect isotope availability . dod . three dod organizations have related responsibilities for managing risks from dod's use of “critical” and “strategic and critical” materials: the defense logistics agency - strategic materials ( dla - strategic materials ) , the office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for manufacturing and industrial base policy , and the strategic materials protection board . dod periodically issues two reports analyzing critical materials for defense needs according to statutory definitions of “critical” and “strategic and critical” materials . the annual industrial capabilities report to congress provides analyses of sectors of the defense industrial base , such as aircraft and ground vehicles . the biennial strategic and critical materials report on stockpile requirements summarizes dla - strategic materials' analyses of materials for the national defense stockpile . according to dla - strategic materials officials and an official with doe's oak ridge national laboratory , dla - strategic materials also collaborated with doe's oak ridge national laboratory and a private company to develop the strategic material analysis and reporting topography software tool , which is a computer - based supply chain mapping tool that can visually represent the supply chain for any number of materials . commerce . the department's bureau of industry and security is responsible for analyzing the capabilities of the u.s. industrial base to support national defense . the bureau conducted a strategic materials survey to evaluate the supply chains associated with several materials considered important to defense programs and systems . the resulting data set and report are intended to assist dod in developing planning and acquisition strategies designed to ensure the availability of materials critical to defense missions . in addition to its work supporting dod , commerce's international trade administration ( ita ) convened two roundtables of industry and government participants to gather information on critical materials issues that may affect u.s. manufacturers and the competitiveness of u.s. industry .