hais can be expensive . in 2005 the average payment for a hospitalization in pennsylvania was over six times higher for patients who contracted a hospital - acquired infection than for patients who did not acquire infections . a 2007 study of 1.69 million patients who were discharged from 77 hospitals found that the additional cost of treating a patient with an hai averaged $8,832 . the costs of hais are borne not only by the patients who suffer infections , but also by those who pay for care , such as the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) . according to the american hospital association , medicare paid for over one - third of all hospital costs in 2007 . although not all hais are preventable , the federal government and private organizations have established standards and other activities aimed at controlling and preventing them . cms has established health and safety standards — known as conditions of participation ( cop ) — with which hospitals must comply in order to be eligible for payment by medicare and medicaid and which include the cop for infection control . hospitals may choose one of two ways to show that they have met these or equivalent standards: they may be certified by a state agency under agreement with cms to survey the hospital's compliance with the cops or they may be accredited by a cms - approved private organization , including the joint commission or the healthcare facilities accreditation program of the american osteopathic association ( aoa ) . most hospitals are accredited by the joint commission . other activities within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) aimed at addressing the problem of hais in hospitals include cdc's development of guidelines , which contain recommended practices that hospitals may adopt , and the management of several databases in different parts of hhs that contain information about hais in hospitals . according to the institute of medicine , prevention of hais through implementation of evidence - based guidelines can lead to improvements in quality of care . furthermore , the collection of national data on these infections can provide a benchmark for individual hospitals to gauge their performance and design targeted interventions . in carrying out this work for our march 2008 report , we interviewed officials from cdc , cms , the agency for healthcare research and quality ( ahrq ) , the food and drug administration , the joint commission , and aoa . we also interviewed selected experts in the field of infection control . in addition , we reviewed and analyzed cdc's infection control and prevention guidelines issued from 1981 through 2007 ; minutes of hhs's healthcare infection control practices advisory committee ( hicpac ) ; the world health organization's guideline on hand hygiene ; cms's cops for hospitals and interpretive guidelines , which describe the cops and provide survey procedures used to determine compliance with them ; the joint commission's 2008 standards for hospitals and its hospital standards manual ; and aoa's 2005 standards for hospitals and its hospital standards manual . in our march 2008 report , we also discussed how compliance with hospital standards is assessed .