each is described here . purpose: to ensure that reasonable planning for all parts of the acquisition is conducted . description: acquisition planning is the process for conducting and documenting acquisition planning activities beginning early and covering all parts of the project . this planning extends to all acquisition areas , such as budgeting , scheduling , resource estimating , risk identification , and requirements definition as well as the overall acquisition strategy . acquisition planning begins with the earliest identification of a requirement that is to be satisfied through an acquisition . activities: ( 1 ) plans are prepared during acquisition planning and maintained throughout the acquisition . ( 2 ) planning addresses the entire acquisition process , including life cycle support of the products being acquired . ( 3 ) the acquisition organization has a written policy for planning the acquisition . ( 4 ) responsibility for acquisition planning activities is designated . purpose: to ensure that the acquisition is consistent with the organization's enterprise architecture . description: architectural alignment is the process for analyzing and verifying that the proposed architecture of the system being acquired is consistent with the enterprise architecture for the organization acquiring the system . such alignment is needed to ensure that acquired systems can interoperate and are not unnecessarily duplicative of one another . exceptions to this alignment requirement are permitted , but only when justified and only when granted an explicit waiver from the architecture . a particular architectural consideration is whether requirements that extend beyond the specific system being acquired should be considered when selecting system components . such “product line” ( i.e. , systems that are developed from a common set of assets and share a common and managed set of features ) considerations can provide substantial production economies over acquiring systems from scratch . activities: ( 1 ) the system being acquired is assessed for alignment with the enterprise architecture at key life cycle decision points and any deviations from the architecture are explicitly understood and justified by an explicit waiver to the architecture . ( 2 ) product line requirements — rather than just the requirements for the system being acquired — are an explicit consideration in each acquisition . purpose: to ensure that contract activities are performed in accordance with contractual requirements . description: contract tracking and oversight is the process by which contractual agreements are established and contractor efforts to satisfy those agreements are monitored . it involves information sharing between the acquirer and contractor to ensure that contractual requirements are understood , that there are regular measurements to disclose overall project status and whether problems exist , and that there are appropriate incentives for ensuring that cost and schedule commitments are met and that quality products are delivered . contract tracking and oversight begins with the award of the contract and ends at the conclusion of the contract's period of performance . activities: ( 1 ) the acquiring organization has sufficient insight into the contractor's activities to manage and control the contractor and ensure that contract requirements are met . ( 2 ) the acquiring organization and contractor maintain ongoing communication ; commitments are agreed to and implemented by both parties . ( 3 ) all contract changes are managed throughout the life of the contract .