mr. chairman , this concludes our statement . the license examiner explained that this was a standard security precaution . even though we did not have a company office or a construction site , our investigators nevertheless certified their intent to bring the machines back to their office before sending them to a new location . they made this certification via a letter faxed to nrc . four days after our final correction to the license application , nrc approved our application and mailed the license to the bogus business in the non - agreement state . it took a total of 4 weeks to obtain the license . see figure 1 for the first page of the transmittal letter we received from nrc with our license . the nrc license is printed on standard 8-1 / 2 x 11 inch paper and contains a color nrc seal for a watermark . it does not appear to have any features that would prevent physical counterfeiting . it could possibly — although it is unlikely — be fatal to be close to this amount of unshielded radioactive material for a period of days to weeks.” importantly , with patience and the proper financial resources , we could have accumulated , from other suppliers , substantially more radioactive source material than what the two suppliers initially agreed to ship to us — potentially enough to reach category 2 . in a later telephone call to one of the suppliers , a representative of the supplier told us that his company does not check with nrc to confirm the terms listed on the licenses that potential customers fax them . he said that his company checks to see whether a copy of the front page of the license is faxed with the intent to purchase and whether the requested order exceeds the maximum allowable quantity a licensee is allowed to possess at any one time . although we had no legitimate use for the machines , our investigators received , within days of obtaining a license from nrc , price quotes and terms of payment that would have allowed us to purchase numerous machines containing sealed radioactive source materials . these purchases would have substantially exceeded the limit that nrc approved for our bogus company . if these radioactive materials were unsealed and aggregated together , the machines would yield an amount of americium - 241 that exceeds the threshold for category 3 materials . according to an official in the department of environment for this state , the license examiner followed the required state procedure in requesting a site visit . the official told us that as a matter of long - standing state policy , license examiners in this state conduct site visits and interview company management ( especially radiation safety officers ) before granting new licenses for radioactive materials . as discussed previously , according to iaea , category 3 sources are dangerous if not safely managed or securely protected and “could cause permanent injury to a person who handled them , or was otherwise in contact with them , for some hours .