gao - 07-406sp . washington d.c.: march 30 , 2007 . its acquisition schedule is very aggressive and concurrent . at the start of modernization , all three critical technologies essential to achieving capability requirements were considered mature by best practice standards . since that time , however , the program added three additional critical technologies , all of which are immature . immature and untested technologies , as the program pushes forward , significantly increase the risk of poor cost and schedule outcomes . the jsf program goals are to develop and field an affordable , highly common family of stealthy , next - generation strike fighter aircraft for the navy , air force , marine corps , and u.s. allies . the carrier suitable variant will provide the navy a multirole , stealthy strike aircraft to complement the f / a - 18e / f . the conventional take - off and landing variant will primarily be an air - to - ground replacement for the air force's f - 16 and the a - 10 aircraft , and will complement the f - 22a . the short take - off and vertical landing ( stovl ) variant will be a multi - role strike fighter to replace the marine corps' f / a - 18 and av - 8b aircraft . the jsf program is dod's most costly aircraft acquisition program . dod estimates that the total cost to develop and procure its fleet of aircraft will be $276 billion , with total costs to maintain and operate the jsf adding another $347 billion over its life cycle . it is also dod's largest cooperative development program . eight partner countries are providing funding for system development and demonstration: australia , canada , denmark , italy , the netherlands , norway , turkey , and the united kingdom . concept demonstration began in november 1996 . the program entered system development and demonstration in october 2001 and is expected to run through fiscal year 2013 . manufacture and assembly of test aircraft is continuing , and first flight of the air force's variant occurred in december 2006 . overall , the cost estimate to develop the jsf has increased from $34.4 billion in 2001 to $44.5 billion in 2005 — about 29 percent . procurement costs have increased from $196.6 billion in 2001 to $231.7 billion in 2005 — about 18 percent . since program start , jsf quantities have been reduced by 530 aircraft . current estimated program acquisition unit costs are about $112 million , a 38 percent increase since 2001 . we recently issued our third annual report on the jsf acquisition . the development team has achieved first flight and has overcome major design problems found earlier in development . however , the current acquisition strategy still reflects very significant risk that both development and procurement costs will increase and that aircraft will take longer to deliver to the warfighter than currently planned . even as the jsf program enters the midpoint of its development , it continues to encounter significant cost overruns and schedule delays .