these milestones were also missed . as of may 2017 , continuous evaluation had not yet been fully implemented , and odni had not set a milestone for when it would occur . although odni is one of the goal leaders for the insider threat and security clearance reform cross - agency priority goal , a senior odni official stated that the milestones were arbitrarily set , and that implementing continuous evaluation has proven to be challenging as a result of several technical and legal issues that need to be resolved . further , odni officials highlighted the complexities associated with developing a whole - of - government continuous evaluation program and noted that a number of challenges have come to light as they have been developing the program , which have contributed to missed milestones . however , odni has not prioritized the setting of internal milestones for the future phases of implementation that it considers to be reasonable . odni officials stated that because continuous evaluation is a new initiative , no realistic timeline for full implementation will be set until the initial results of implementation are analyzed and technical capabilities have matured . further , they stated that although they are unable to develop a timeline for full implementation at this time , they are actively working to implement the program . in addition , as previously discussed , odni's milestone for issuing a continuous evaluation policy has also been adjusted over time . figure 1 shows the adjusted executive branch milestones for issuing a continuous evaluation policy and implementing a continuous evaluation program , including developing a technical capability . the uncertainty regarding the requirements and timeframes for the future phases of the program has affected the ability of executive branch agencies to plan to implement continuous evaluation and estimate the associated costs . first , although opm federal investigations notice 17- 03 notes that the first phase of continuous evaluation is to be implemented by the end of fiscal year 2017 , none of the seven executive branch agencies we spoke with has completed an agency - specific implementation plan . while some agencies , such as dod and state — both of which have established continuous evaluation programs in advance of implementation across the executive branch — have developed concepts of operations or standard operating procedures for continuous evaluation , all seven agencies we spoke with stated that they are waiting for additional information from odni before completing their implementation plans . department of homeland security officials stated that they are waiting for odni to define and schedule the future phases of implementation and to finish developing its continuous evaluation it system , because there could be unknown policy implications that would affect the department's planning efforts . in august 2017 , odni officials described plans to distribute information to executive branch agencies regarding continuous evaluation requirements for fiscal year 2018 . specific details of these plans were omitted from this report because the information is sensitive . second , six of the seven agencies we spoke with noted challenges associated with estimating the costs of implementation .