each solution will be based on its own merits . contractor proposals are to be submitted in april 2010 and contract awards , for cost - plus type contracts , are to be awarded after the milestone a decision in september 2010 . the challenge facing both dod and the army is to set these ground force modernization efforts on the best footing possible by buying the right capabilities at the best value . in many ways , dod and the army have set modernization efforts on a positive course , and they have an opportunity to reduce risks by adhering to the body of acquisition legislation and policy reforms — which incorporate knowledge - based best practices we identified in our previous work — that have been introduced since fcs started in 2003 . the new legislation and policy reforms emphasize a knowledge - based acquisition approach , a cumulative process in which certain knowledge is acquired by key decision points before proceeding . in essence , knowledge supplants risk over time . additionally , dod and the army can further reduce risks by considering lessons learned from problems that emerged during the fcs development effort . initial indications are that the army is moving in that direction . however , in the first major acquisition decision for the army's post - fcs initiatives , dod and the army — because they want to support the warfighter quickly — are proceeding with low - rate initial production of one brigade set of increment 1 systems despite having acknowledged that the systems are immature and unreliable and cannot perform as required . the body of acquisition legislation and dod policy reforms introduced since fcs started in 2003 incorporates nearly all of the knowledge - based practices we identified in our previous work ( see table 2 ) . for example , dod acquisition policy includes controls to ensure that programs have demonstrated a certain level of technology maturity , design stability , and production maturity before proceeding into the next phase of the acquisition process . as such , if the army proceeds with preliminary plans for new acquisition programs , then adherence to the acquisition direction in each of its new acquisition efforts provides an opportunity to improve the odds for successful outcomes , reduce risks for follow - on army ground force modernization efforts , and deliver needed equipment more quickly and at lower costs . conversely , acquisition efforts that proceed with less technology , design , and manufacturing knowledge than best practices suggest face a higher risk of cost increases and schedule delays . as shown in table 2 , the cumulative building of knowledge consists of information that should be gathered at three critical points over the course of a program: knowledge point 1 ( at the program launch or milestone b decision ) : establishing a business case that balances requirements with resources . at this point , a match must be made between the customer's needs and the developer's available resources — technology , engineering , knowledge , time , and funding . a high level of technology maturity , demonstrated via a prototype in its intended environment , indicates whether resources and requirements match .