the navy provided this documentation . in march 2014 , following the then - secretary of defense's february announcement requiring the navy to conduct a study of its ssc needs , the chief of naval operations ( cno ) and assistant secretary of the navy for research , development , and acquisitions created the task force to lead the study . this task force was organized under a study leader , and the cno initially assigned seven navy officers and one navy civilian also set up a flag officer / senior executive service advisory group that provided input and advice , as required . the navy refers to this ship as a frigate . secretary hagel approved the navy's plan and , in december 2014 , authorized the navy to buy a mix of 52 lcs and frigates with the mix determined by the navy . as shown in figure 4 below , there are 16 lcs ( 11-26 ) that are currently slated to be under construction and delivered from fiscal year 2017 through fiscal year 2021 , not including any further ships procured in fiscal year 2017 . these schedule delays mean that the navy now plans to start construction of four lcs in fiscal year 2017 ( lcs 23-26 ) . also , during this same period , the shipbuilders will be working to deliver up to 12 additional lcs seaframes funded in prior fiscal years ( lcs 11-22 ) . this workload indicates that there is not a schedule imperative to awarding additional lcs in fiscal year 2017 as the shipyards will both have work remaining from prior lcs contract awards . according to the navy , in most cases shipyard labor skillsets are not translatable from one stage of construction to another , and loss of production work is felt much earlier than delivery of the last ship . the navy's viewpoint is that pausing production of lcs would result in start - up delays to the frigate program . however , each shipyard will start production of two lcs in fiscal year 2017 assuming no further delays , and this concern does not account for any other work that the shipyards may have from other navy or commercial contracts . the navy's business case for the acquisition of the frigate is compromised by unknowns related to the ship's design , cost , and program oversight plans . a business case is part of a knowledge - based approach to acquisition that , in its simplest form , is demonstrated evidence that the warfighter's needs are valid and that they can best be met with the chosen concept , and the chosen concept can be developed and produced within existing resources — that is , proven technologies , design knowledge , adequate funding , and adequate time to deliver the product when it is needed . our past work on major defense acquisition programs — including shipbuilding programs — has highlighted a number of underlying systemic causes for cost growth and schedule delays and has emphasized the importance of having a sound business case at program start .