the resulting percentage is the proposed rate . after receiving a rate proposal , the cognizant agency is to verify the organization's mathematical accuracy , confirm that unallowable costs have been excluded in accordance with regulations and agency guidance , reconcile the cost proposal to the audited financial statements , and determine the reasonableness of the proposed costs . once the proposal has been reviewed , the cognizant agency and the organization negotiate and finalize a rate . the rate is then documented in a formal agreement that sets the rate for a period of 1 to 4 years . this rate is used as a mechanism for determining the proportion of indirect costs that may be reimbursed for federally funded awards . in prior reports , we have raised concerns about the growth of indirect costs and the process for setting indirect cost rates at the national institutes of health ( nih ) . in september 2013 , we found that reimbursements for indirect costs increased faster than those for direct costs on nih research grants awarded to universities for fiscal years 2002 through 2012 . in september 2016 , we found deficiencies in cognizant agencies' design of internal controls for setting rates for organizations that received nih awards . we found that these deficiencies increased the risk that rates used by nih would include inappropriate indirect costs and result in federal agencies paying more than their share of the organizations' indirect costs . my statement today reflects our preliminary observations from our ongoing review that examines ( 1 ) what is known about indirect costs of nsf awards over time and ( 2 ) the extent to which nsf has implemented guidance for setting indirect cost rates for organizations over which it has cognizance . the information in this statement on nsf's indirect costs for its awards over time is based on our preliminary analysis of data from nsf award budgets that include the amount of direct and indirect costs on awards made from fiscal years 2000 through 2016 . to assess the reliability of the data , we performed testing , including confirming that the data contained no outliers in the data fields we used , and we interviewed nsf officials . we found the data sufficiently reliable for the purposes of presenting indirect costs of nsf awards over time . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . if you or your staff members have any questions concerning this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or neumannj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . other individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include joseph cook , assistant director ; kim mcgatlin , assistant director ; rathi bose ; ellen fried ; ruben gzirian ; terrance horner , jr. ; david messman ; lillian slodkowski ; kathryn smith ; and sara sullivan . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .