our results cannot be generalized to other states . we developed a method for categorizing physicians by their type of staffing arrangement , based on medicare claims data . our analysis was limited to physicians with substantial emergency department practices in 2000 . we defined a “substantial practice” as one in which at least ( 1 ) 50 percent of the physician's medicare payments were for emergency department e&m services and ( 2 ) $20,000 in medicare payments were for emergency department e&m services . for physicians meeting these criteria , carriers provided summary data containing the physicians' names , provider identification number ( pin ) , practice addresses , payment addresses , payments received , and medicare group numbers , where applicable . using individual pins , group pins , and payment addresses , we placed physicians in one of two categories — contractor physicians and other physicians . we used a multistep process that entailed extracting and matching information from various sources . first , we used information from medicare claims data to place physicians whose individual pins were associated with group pins in the other physicians category . second , we placed physicians who did not have group pins into the contractor physician category if their medicare payments were sent to addresses used by at least one other physician or if they practiced in rural areas . we used medicare emergency department claims data , private databases , and public records to identify payment addresses and practice locations . according to cms officials , physicians who do not have group pins and whose payments are sent to addresses similar to another physician are likely to be contractors retained by staffing companies . third , we excluded physicians who did not have group pins , payment addresses in common with another physician , or who practiced in rural locations . less than 1 percent of the physicians were excluded . table 5 summarizes the results of our analysis . to determine whether contractor physicians retained by staffing companies bill medicare for the higher - level services at rates comparable to other emergency department physicians , we did the following . we asked the carriers to provide us with frequency distributions of the e&m services provided by physicians in our study . ( see app . i for more information on our scope and methodology , including our criteria for selecting the states examined. ) beneficiaries are generally the only parties under medicare statute who are entitled to receive medicare payments for physician services . however , they can “assign” their rights to payment to physicians , other providers , and suppliers who directly deliver the care or service and then submit claims to medicare . these physicians as well as other providers and suppliers must meet criteria for enrollment in the medicare program . to bill medicare , cms requires that physicians , other providers , and suppliers use a standardized , five - digit coding system on the claim forms to identify the medical services and procedures that were provided . these billing codes describe the type of medical , surgical , and diagnostic service rendered . for e&m services , these codes also designate the level — or intensity — of care provided .