borders , gao - 13-414t . cbp concurred with our recommendations and has implemented one of them . in june 2014 , in response to our recommendation , cbp issued guidance informing border patrol agents that the asset assist data field within its database was now a mandatory data field . agents are required to enter any assisting surveillance technology or other equipment before proceeding . as we testified in may 2015 , to fully address our second recommendation , cbp needs to analyze data on apprehensions and seizures , in combination with other relevant performance metrics , to determine the contribution of surveillance technologies to its border security mission . in addition , with regard to fencing and other tactical infrastructure , cbp reported that from fiscal year 2005 through may 2015 , the total miles of vehicle and pedestrian fencing along the nearly 2,000-mile u.s. - mexico border increased from approximately 120 miles to 652 miles . with the completion of the new fencing and other tactical infrastructure , dhs is now responsible for maintaining this infrastructure including repairing breached sections of fencing . we have previously reported on cbp's efforts to assess the impact of tactical infrastructure on border security . specifically , in our may 2010 and september 2009 reports , we found that cbp had not accounted for the impact of its investment in border fencing and infrastructure on border security . cbp had reported an increase in control of southwest border miles , but could not account separately for the impact of the border fencing and other infrastructure . in september 2009 , we recommended that cbp determine the contribution of border fencing and other infrastructure to border security . dhs concurred with our recommendation , and in response , cbp contracted with the homeland security studies and analysis institute to conduct an analysis of the impact of tactical infrastructure on border security . we have ongoing work for this subcommittee and others assessing cbp's deployment and management of tactical infrastructure , and we plan to report on the results of this work later this year . our march 2012 report on amo assets highlighted several areas the agency could address to better ensure the mix and placement of assets is effective and efficient . these areas included: ( 1 ) documentation clearly linking deployment decisions to mission needs and threats , ( 2 ) documentation on the assessments and analysis used to support decisions on the mix and placement of assets , and ( 3 ) consideration of how deployment of border technology will affect customer requirements for air and marine assets across locations . specifically , we found that amo had not documented significant events , such as its analyses to support its asset mix and placement across locations , and as a result , lacked a record to help demonstrate that its decisions to allocate assets were the most effective ones in fulfilling customer needs and addressing threats , among other things .