gao disagrees with each of epa's assertions . first , as we previously reported and epa acknowledged , there are limited data available to assess the effects of the nsr revisions . therefore , consistent with the review's objectives , we solicited the opinions of key stakeholders on the revisions' effects and clearly presented them as opinions in both the title and body of the report . these revisions have been the subject of congressional debate . for example , in 2002 , the congress held hearings during which members of the congress , epa officials , and a number of stakeholders — including industry , states , and environmental groups — presented their positions on the revisions . also , legislation has been introduced in the congress that seeks to further regulate emissions from industrial facilities . in addition , a number of environmental and public health groups , as well as a group of states primarily from the mid - atlantic and northeast , claimed that the december 2002 final rule violated the clean air act and asked epa to reconsider several aspects of the rule . in july 2003 , epa agreed to do so and then solicited public comment on the areas under reconsideration . based on this input , epa announced at the end of october 2003 that it would make several technical changes to the rule . state and local agencies that operate under delegation agreements were required to have implemented the december 2002 rule by march 2003 or return responsibility for implementing the rule to epa , while those operating under state implementation plans have until january 2006 to revise their regulations accordingly . as for the december 2002 proposed provisions — that would further specify what facility changes are exempt from nsr requirements under the routine maintenance , repair , or replacement exclusions — a coalition of primarily mid - atlantic and northeastern states and environmental and public health groups challenged the legality of the equipment replacement rule in court after it was finalized in october 2003 . state and local agencies that operate under delegation agreements were required to implement this rule by december 26 , 2003 or have epa implement it for them , while those operating under state implementation plans have until october 2006 to revise their regulations accordingly . however , on december 24 , 2003 , the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit stayed the equipment replacement rule pending further review , preventing the rule from going into effect while the court considers the legal challenges . epa has not determined what additional action , if any , it will take regarding establishing an annual maintenance allowance below which facility changes would be considered exempt from nsr requirements . a majority of the state officials expect that the december 2002 final rule will provide industry with greater flexibility to make facility changes without triggering nsr requirements for permits . however , a majority of the officials also expect that the rule will lead to an overall increase in emissions of harmful air pollutants and hinder efforts to meet air quality standards , potentially creating or exacerbating risk to public health . most of the officials also expect that the rule will increase their agencies' workload .