identity of the thieves . unless irs pursues a criminal investigation , irs generally does not know the real identity of the thieves . an investigation is necessary because the only identity information irs has on the fraudulent tax return is that of the identity theft victim , not the thief . officials responsible for processing returns said that they do not have the sort of information that would be needed to even begin such an investigation . ci has substantially increased efforts to criminally investigate identity theft cases in fiscal year 2012 ; however , as with other forms of fraud , ci focuses its investigative resources on the most serious cases . the number of identity theft investigations opened and time spent investigating identity theft cases have increased from fiscal year 2010 to fiscal year 2012 , as shown in table 2 . although identity theft is one of ci's investigative priorities , the number of investigations initiated is substantially less than the number of identity theft incidents confirmed by irs in 2012 . ci officials told us that while other irs functions share leads with ci , not all of these leads meet ci's criteria for developing a case for prosecution . ci officials told us they generally focus their investigative resources on the most egregious and significant identity theft cases , as measured by volume and refund amounts . whether a fraudulent return is an individual attempt or part of a broader scheme . total number and cost of fraudulent returns . irs does not know the full extent of the occurrence of identity theft . officials said that they count the refund fraud cases that irs identifies but that they do not estimate the number of identity theft cases that go undetected . irs officials explained that “we don't know what we don't know,” because if a fraudulent return goes through irs's identity theft models and other programs , they are unable to tell if they failed to detect the fraudulent return . officials explained that it is very difficult to detect a fraudulent return when an identity thief uses a correct ssn and has enough identifying information to make the return “look” like it came from the legitimate tax filer . the tax return appears to be legitimate as it has been filed with a name and ssn that match . detecting identity theft can also be challenging because some legitimate filers mistakenly file duplicate returns . for example , irs officials told us that in some cases , taxpayers intending to amend their return are confused and file a second form 1040 . in such a case , irs has to investigate whether the duplicate filing is due to taxpayer confusion or identity theft . irs captures data on the amount of money it recovers from all types of fraudulent returns , but it does not distinguish whether the type of fraud was identity theft or some other type of fraud . in some cases , external entities , such as banks or other agencies , may notify irs of potential refund fraud , including suspected identity theft - based refund fraud .