outdated guidance . we found that outdated policy and guidelines resulted in challenges for va staff in completing leasing projects on time at the sites we reviewed . for example , officials from the four las vegas outpatient sites we visited stated that va's policies for managing leases seem to change for each project , creating uncertainty regarding cfm job responsibilities . an official from the ft. wayne outpatient clinic also stated that va's leasing process is confusing and seems to frequently change . a contracting official from one of the las vegas clinics said she had to call various va headquarters officials while involved in the planning phase to obtain the latest management procedures , because some of va's guidance had not been updated since 1998 . va is now drafting its leasing handbook guidance 7815 , which va officials said they plan to finalize by the end of fiscal year 2014 . as we will discuss in more detail later in the report , this handbook covers the authorities , roles and responsibilities , policies , procedures , administration , and management of va's real property leasing program . in commenting on our draft , va noted that many lease delays resulted from external influences to va's leasing process and out of va's control . va also noted that other factors could cause delays including site selection issues involving the national environmental policy act requirements , stakeholder concerns , procurement and lessor issues , solicitation / award protects , and post - award contracting issues . furthermore , these comments stated that some projects required updates to space requirements to accommodate improved delivery of care for veterans . va noted that as delays to a lease occur , vha re - evaluates and updates the design and space program to ensure the contemplated lease project will meet va's latest requirements and optimally serve veterans . in addition to substantial delays , va also experienced cost increases to its outpatient clinic projects when compared to the costs in the projects' prospectuses . va provided cost data for its outpatient clinic lease projects in january 2014 . table 3 includes a description of the key cost data elements we reviewed . when compared to the prospectus costs for the 31 projects with complete cost data,million to $172.2 million , an increase of nearly $19 million ( 12 percent ) . for the 31 projects , the total prospectus' first year rent was estimated at $58.2 million , but the total awarded first - year rent for these projects equaled $92.7 million as of january 2014 , an increase of $34.5 million ( 59 percent ) . such increases in rent have long term implications for va , because the department must pay the higher rent over the lifetime of the lease agreement . such activities are an integral part of an entity's planning , implementing , reviewing , and accountability for stewardship of government resources and achieving effective results . similar to va's largest medical - center construction projects , we found that its major leasing projects have experienced substantial delays as well as cost increases .