personnel . gao - 16- 615su . washington , d.c.: september 9 , 2016 . where did you receive that guidance or training ? what were the key takeaways from that guidance or training ? how easy or difficult is it to routinely apply those security practices at this post ? in your opinion , is post's travel or transportation security policy appropriately tailored to the types and levels of security threats that staff face when traveling in - country at this post ? if yes , in what ways is the travel policy appropriately tailored ? b . if not , how can the policy be improved ? c. what factors , if any , create challenges to following the post's travel policy ? in your opinion , have you received all the guidance or training you need to protect yourself against potential threats or attacks when traveling in - country at this post ? if not , what additional guidance or training do you believe is needed ? what other suggestions do you have , if any , for how staff posted at diplomatic posts overseas can be better protected against potential security threats or attacks when traveling in - country ? as the list indicates , we did not ask about specific security threats , guidance , training , or security practices , but instead asked general questions on each of these topics . for example , we did not specifically ask participants whether they had received certain types of training ; rather , we asked a general question about what training they had received and relied on them to volunteer information on the types of training they had taken . however , when appropriate , we did ask more specific follow - up questions during the focus groups . our overall objective in using a focus group approach was to obtain the views , insights , and beliefs of overseas personnel on issues related to transportation security . while we recorded the audio of each focus group , we assured participants of the anonymity of their responses , promising that their names would not be directly linked to their responses . we also conducted one pretest focus group , after which we asked the participants of the pretest focus group to provide their opinions on whether the questions we asked were comprehensive , clear , unbiased , and appropriate . the participants of the pretest focus group confirmed that our questions were comprehensive , clear , unbiased , and appropriate . to analyze the focus group responses , we reviewed transcripts of the focus group audio recordings and conducted keyword searches to identify key themes related to our reportable objectives . we quantified the frequency of these key themes by counting the number of focus groups ( out of 13 ) in which the themes were raised . as appropriate , we also followed up with rsos and other officials at the posts we visited to discuss and clarify the issues raised , while preserving the anonymity of the focus group participants .