least about ? the first set of questions i'll ask deal with how faa manages its workforce . for the next question and others throughout the survey , i'd like you to use this scale for your answer - please tell me if you strongly agree ( sa ) , agree ( a ) , disagree ( d ) or strongly disagree ( sd ) . i receive the training i need to do my job effectively . could you give me more detail about that ? how has the fact that the lines of business are responsible for funding and managing training affected the amount and / or quality of training you've received ? what , if any , training do you need that your line of business ( or staff office ) has not provided ? using the scale again: the ability of my line of business ( or staff office ) to efficiently and effectively fill job vacancies has improved in the last 5 years . office 6 . has the speed of hiring improved ? {pause for response} has the quality of candidates improved ? the next set of questions i'll ask deal with the new pay and performance management systems including the new pay bands and pay - for - performance system , as well as , the “meets / does not meet standards” performance rating system implemented in 1996 . using the scale again: i am better off under the new pay band system than under the grade and step pay system . using the scale again: i think the new pay system is fair to all employees . non - atc 9 . what do you like about the new pay system ? is there anything you don't like about the new pay system ? using the scale again: separating cash awards from performance appraisals has made the appraisal process more fair . using the scale again: the way my most recent formal performance appraisal was handled gave me useful information for improving my performance . non - atc 12 . using the scale again: awards and recognition more appropriately reflect employees' performance today than 5 years ago . using the scale again: faa's process for promotion better targets qualified people now than it did 5 years ago . non - atc 14 . to what extent have managers and supervisors become more ( or less ) accountable for achieving agency goals in the last 5 years ? the next set of questions i'll ask deal with labor relations and employee relations . using the scale again: faa's employee unions have had a positive impact on implementing personnel reform in the agency . do you think labor - management relations have changed in the last 5 years ? ( as applicable ) how ? what specifically has driven this change ? do you think employee morale has changed in the last 5 years ? ( as applicable ) how ? what specifically has driven this change ? using the scale again: faa employees had sufficient opportunities to provide input for personnel reform policies and initiatives before they were finalized and implemented . using the scale again: i understand the goals of the model work environment .