i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . we estimated approximately 40 million households were eligible for lifeline in 2012 . the order established minimum lifeline eligibility , including households with incomes at or below 135 percent of the federal poverty guidelines , which expanded eligibility in some states that had more limited eligibility criteria . further , fcc proposed adding qualifying programs , such as the special supplemental nutrition program of women , infants , and children ( wic ) program , and increasing income eligibility to 150 percent of the federal poverty guidelines . we estimated that over 2 million additional households would have been eligible for lifeline in 2012 if wic were included in the list of qualifying programs . these proposed changes would add households with higher income levels than current lifeline - eligible households . given that the telephone penetration rate increases with income , making additional households with higher incomes eligible for lifeline may increase telephone penetration somewhat , but at a high cost , since a majority of these households likely already purchase telephone service . this raises questions about expanding eligibility and the balance between lifeline's goals of increasing penetration rates while minimizing the burden on consumers and businesses that fund the program . in our march 2015 report , we recommended that fcc conduct a program evaluation to determine the extent to which the lifeline program is efficiently and effectively reaching its performance goals of ensuring the availability of voice service for low - income americans while minimizing program costs . our prior work on federal agencies that have used program evaluation for decision making has shown that it can allow agencies to understand whether a program is addressing the problem it is intended to and assess the value or effectiveness of the program . the results of an evaluation could be used to clarify fcc's and others' understanding of how the lifeline program does or does not address the problem of interest — subscription to telephone service among low - income households — and to assist fcc in making changes to improve program design or management . we believe that without such an evaluation , it will be difficult for fcc to determine whether the lifeline program is increasing the telephone penetration rate among low - income customers , while minimizing the burden on those that contribute to the universal service fund . fcc agreed that it should evaluate the extent to which the lifeline program is efficiently and effectively reaching its performance goals and said that it would address our recommendation . we also reviewed two academic studies that examined the effect of the lifeline program . according to fcc , the pilot projects are expected to provide high - quality data on how the lifeline program could be structured to promote broadband adoption by low - income households . fcc noted the diversity of the 14 projects , which differed by geography ( eg , urban , rural , tribal ) , types of technologies ( eg , fixed and mobile ) , and discount amounts . fcc selected projects that were designed as field experiments and offered randomized variation to consumers .