external stakeholders . what is regulatory guidance ? how do agencies use regulatory guidance ? how do agencies determine whether to issue guidance or undertake rulemaking ? how can agencies ensure more effective guidance processes that adhere to applicable criteria ? to conduct that work , we reviewed guidance processes at 25 components that engaged in regulatory or grant - making activities in four departments — agriculture ( usda ) , education ( education ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , and labor ( dol ) . the scope of that review focused on guidance issued to external parties that explained regulatory and grant - related requirements and other policies . we reviewed agencies' written procedures , guidance documents , and websites . we also interviewed department and component officials on guidance practices . we selected and applied four government - wide internal control standards to guidance processes . we identified both opportunities for improved internal controls related to guidance and highlighted agency practices that could be applied to guidance processes in other agencies . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . more details on our methodology can be found in our report . mr. chairman , agencies must exercise diligence when using guidance . although guidance documents are not legally binding , they can affect the actions of stakeholders and other interested parties , as well as agencies' staffs , because guidance articulates agencies' interpretations and policy choices . the potential effects of these documents — and the risks of legal challenges to agencies — underscore the need for consistent and well - understood processes for the development , review , dissemination , and evaluation of guidance . our april 2015 report found that agencies and their components used guidance for multiple purposes . further , we also found that all four departments identified standard practices to follow when developing guidance . however , stronger application of internal controls would help ensure that guidance processes achieve desired results and prevent errors . components primarily relied on websites to disseminate guidance , but could do more to improve online access , such as making guidance documents easier to find and ensuring that they are current . we recommended that hhs and dol ensure consistent application of omb requirements for guidance . we also recommended that usda , education , hhs , and dol strengthen the use of internal controls in guidance production processes and improve online guidance dissemination . all four agencies generally agreed with the recommendations . one of the main purposes of guidance is to explain and help regulated parties comply with agency regulations . as shown in figure 1 , guidance may explain how agencies plan to interpret regulations . agencies sometimes include disclaimers in their guidance to note that the documents have no legally binding effect on regulated parties or the agencies .