at the border . these three measures compare checkpoint operations to other border patrol enforcement operations . two of these three measures — a comparison of checkpoint apprehensions and drug seizures to all apprehensions and seizures — were used as gpra reporting measures in the annual par . the third measure related to cost effectiveness in terms of comparing man - hours dedicated to checkpoint operations to man - hours dedicated to other enforcement activities . to what extent has the border patrol established measures of performance for checkpoints ? to what extent has the border patrol considered community impacts in the placement and design of checkpoints since 2006 , including the planned i - 19 permanent checkpoint ? how do checkpoint operations impact nearby communities , particularly those near the i - 19 checkpoint , and to what extent does the border patrol address those impacts ? to address these objectives , we reviewed border patrol checkpoint policy documents , reports , manuals , and guidance , and held discussions with relevant headquarters and field officials concerning border strategy , checkpoint operations , and the design and placement of checkpoints . we conducted site visits and observed checkpoint operations at 15 checkpoints , located in five of the nine border patrol sectors: san diego sector , california ; tucson sector , arizona ; el paso sector , texas and new mexico ; and laredo and rio grande valley sectors in texas . the sectors we visited were selected to provide diversity in the size and types of checkpoint operations ; estimated volume of illegal aliens ; and topography and density of road networks . while our site visit results are not representative of observations that may have been made at other times or locations , they provided us with an overall understanding of checkpoint operations . to assess the reliability of checkpoint performance data collected by the border patrol , we spoke with agency officials at border patrol's washington , d.c. headquarters and at the five sectors we visited in the field about data integrity procedures , including methods by which data are checked and reviewed internally for accuracy . we also provided a data collection instrument to the border patrol seeking information on how checkpoint agents collect checkpoint performance data . we determined that despite limitations in overall data collection and oversight processes , the data recorded on certain data fields — specifically apprehensions and drug seizures at checkpoints — are sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report , with limitations noted as appropriate . to assess the extent to which the border patrol considered community impacts in the design and placement of checkpoints , our scope included checkpoints that were either ( a ) new permanent checkpoints constructed since 2006 , or ( b ) new permanent checkpoints currently under construction . we did not include older checkpoints in our analysis because the guidelines and standards for checkpoint placement and design were different and limited documentation is available for them , according to border patrol and cbp officials . we did not include checkpoints that were or are being renovated or expanded , because they would not be subject to the border patrol's checkpoint placement guidelines .