we summarized their responses in the report . to obtain information on the focus of recommendations made by state's rightsizing office , we reviewed 181 rightsizing reviews completed by m / pri between 2005 and 2011 . during our overseas site visits to the czech republic , bosnia and herzegovina , and kuwait , we discussed the rightsizing recommendations with the relevant section heads at each post . see appendix i for more information about our methodology . numerous factors contribute to differences between projected and current staffing levels , such as unanticipated u.s. and foreign government policy changes . officials from ten missions we identified as having the largest differences between december 2011 staffing levels and the rightsizing projected staffing levels , either higher or lower , identified such factors . in addition to the individual named above , ming chen , debbie chung , lynn cothern , martin de alteriis , mark dowling , etana finkler , leslie holen ( assistant director ) , heather latta , lisa reijula , and christina werth made key contributions to this report . we then identified the number of reviews in each category of differences between the actual and the projection: within 10 percent , 10 to 50 percent overprojection , 10 to 50 percent underprojection , more than 50 percent overprojection , and more than 50 percent underprojection . missions with overprojections had fewer staff than projected , while those with underprojections had more . table 2 shows the percentage differences between december 2011 actual staffing levels and projected total staffing levels based on the rightsizing reviews for these missions . unanticipated changes in u.s. government policies and priorities contribute to differences between actual and projected staffing levels at overseas posts . programs such as the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) and usaid and state hiring initiatives , including have added additional staff to overseas posts , while diplomacy 3.0,other changes in u.s. foreign policy have led to lower - than - projected staffing levels . according to the management officer in mozambique , the increase in the number of u.s. direct - hire and locally - employed staff positions as a result of pepfar's initiation was greater than anticipated . the introduction of the visa waiver program for korea reduced the need for consular officers to conduct visa interviews and led to lower - than - projected staffing levels , according to the management officer in korea . ghana became a usaid priority country and the beneficiary of the global health initiative , feed the future , and partnership for growth , which led to increased staffing levels , according to the management officer in ghana . usaid's and state's hiring initiatives added a human resource officer , a political officer , and a general service officer , positions not anticipated at the time of the rightsizing review , according to the management officer in mozambique . according to the management officer in pakistan , increased funding to address development and security projects has led to higher staffing levels than the rightsizing review projected . the closure of an arabic language school for state employees in tunisia resulted in staffing levels below rightsizing projections , according to the management officer .