businesses . according to agency officials , the small business panel process takes about 8 months of work , and osha is one of only three federal agencies that is subject to this requirement . experts and agency officials also told us that changing priorities are a factor that affects the time frames for developing and issuing standards , explaining that priorities may change as a result of changes within osha , labor , congress , or the presidential administration . some agency officials and experts told us such changes often cause delays in the process of setting standards . for example , some experts noted that the agency's intense focus on publishing an ergonomics rule in the 1990s took attention away from several other standards that previously had been a priority . the standard of judicial review that applies to osha standards if they are challenged in court also affects osha's time frames because it requires more robust research and analysis than the standard that applies to many other agencies' regulations , according to some experts and agency officials . instead of the arbitrary and capricious test provided for under the apa , the osh act directs courts to review osha's standards using a more stringent legal standard: it provides that a standard shall be upheld if supported by “substantial evidence in the record considered as a according to osha officials , this more stringent standard whole.” ( known as the “substantial evidence” standard ) requires a higher level of scrutiny by the courts and as a result , osha staff must conduct a large volume of detailed research in order to understand all industrial processes involved in the hazard being regulated , and to ensure that a given hazard control would be feasible for each process . according to osha officials and experts , two additional factors result in an extensive amount of work for the agency in developing standards: substantial data challenges , which stem from a dearth of available scientific data for some hazards and having to review and evaluate scientific studies , among other sources . in addition , according to agency officials , certain court decisions interpreting the osh act require rigorous support for the need for and feasibility of standards . § 655 ( f ) . an example of one such decision cited by agency officials is a 1980 supreme court case , which resulted in osha having to conduct quantitative risk assessments for each health standard and ensure that these assessments are supported by substantial evidence . response to adverse court decisions . several experts with whom we spoke observed that adverse court decisions have contributed to an institutional culture in the agency of trying to make osha standards impervious to future adverse decisions . however , agency officials said that , in general , osha does not try to make a standard “bulletproof” because , while osha tries to avoid lawsuits that might ultimately invalidate the standard , the agency is frequently sued .