procedures for prioritizing incidents . two of the six selected agencies developed and documented procedures for prioritizing the handling of incidents . nasa listed eight factors for determining the priority of handling an incident . each of the factors is to be assigned a rating , after which the ratings for each factor would be added together to determine a number that would then be mapped to a priority ranging from low to critical . in addition , va developed procedures for prioritizing incidents where a matrix would be used to map the type of incident to a predefined priority , such as critical , high , medium , and low , for handling the incident . procedures for hud and doe partially addressed this activity since their procedures did not specify whether risk or impact would determine incident handling priorities . the remaining two of the six agencies ( i.e. , doj and dot ) had not developed and documented procedures for prioritizing incidents . however , agencies did not consistently demonstrate that they responded to cyber incidents in an effective manner . although agencies often demonstrated that they carried out various aspects of incident response activities , documenting all of the steps taken to analyze , contain , eradicate , and recover from incidents are important actions for agencies to take to ensure that incidents are being appropriately addressed . having comprehensive policies , plans , and procedures that include measures of performance and guidance on impact assessment provide key elements necessary for agencies to effectively respond to cyber incidents . testing the incident response program and ensuring employees are appropriately trained increases the assurance that controls are in place to prevent , detect , or respond to incidents . further , capturing related costs could help agencies more efficiently manage their incident response activities . omb and dhs have established cyberstat reviews to improve information security at federal agencies , but the reviews have not focused on agencies' incident response practices . although dhs and us - cert offer numerous services to agencies to assist with cyber incidents , us - cert does not have a process in place to evaluate the effectiveness of the assistance that it provides agencies . without results - oriented performance measures , us - cert will face challenges in ensuring that it is effectively assisting federal agencies with preparing for and responding to cyber incidents . to improve the effectiveness of governmentwide cyber incident response activities , we recommend that the director of omb and secretary of homeland security address agency incident response practices governmentwide , in particular through cyberstat meetings , such as emphasizing the recording of key steps in responding to an incident . to improve the effectiveness of cyber incident response activities , we are making 25 recommendations to six selected agencies to improve their cyber incident response programs .