omb circular no . a - 127 requires that appropriate internal control be applied to all financial management system inputs , processing , and output . it also requires that financial management systems and associated instructions for maintenance and use be clearly documented in sufficient detail to permit an individual with appropriate background knowledge to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the entire operation of the system . inadequate spreadsheet controls increase treasury's risk that its financial reporting data will be inaccurate , and that these inaccuracies will not be prevented or detected in a timely manner . we recommend that the secretary of the treasury direct the fiscal assistant secretary to establish effective internal control to ensure the spreadsheets used to compile the cfs are ( 1 ) protected from inadvertent change and ( 2 ) documented to facilitate detection and tracking of changes to key formulas and data . further , we recommend that columns within key spreadsheets be labeled and properly aligned to reflect the data contained within . treasury , in coordination with omb , has not established processes for monitoring and assessing the effectiveness of internal control over the processes used to prepare the cfs . according to omb circular no . a - 123 , management has a fundamental responsibility to develop and maintain effective internal control . effective internal control provides reasonable assurance that significant weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control , that could adversely affect the entity's ability to meet its objectives , would be prevented or detected in a timely manner . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . this appendix includes recommendations that were open at the beginning of our fiscal year 2007 audit from five of our previous reports: financial audit: process for preparing the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government needs improvement , gao - 04-45 ( washington , d.c.: oct. 30 , 2003 ) ; financial audit: process for preparing the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government needs further improvement , gao - 04- 866 ( washington , d.c.: sept. 10 , 2004 ) ; financial audit: process for preparing the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government continues to need improvement , gao - 05-407 ( washington , d.c.: may 4 , 2005 ) ; financial audit: significant internal control weaknesses remain in preparing the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government , gao - 06-415 ( washington , d.c.: apr . 21 , 2006 ) ; and financial audit: significant internal control weaknesses remain in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government , gao - 07-805 ( washington , d.c.: july 23 , 2007 ) . recommendations that were closed in prior reports are not included in this appendix . this appendix includes the status of the recommendations according to the department of the treasury ( treasury ) and the office of management and budget ( omb ) as well as our own assessments . explanations are included in the status of recommendations per gao when treasury and omb disagreed with our recommendation or the status of a recommendation .