ii ) . in its comments , the department stated that it concurred with our recommendations and intends to provide more information , including timelines for planned actions , once the final report has been issued . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees . we are also sending copies to the secretary of housing and urban development . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact valerie c. melvin at ( 202 ) 512-6304 or melvinv@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) to what extent the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) has implemented key information technology ( it ) governance practices , including effective cost estimation , and ( 2 ) what , if any , cost savings or operational efficiencies hud has reported achieving as a result of its it governance practices . to address our first objective , we reviewed and analyzed documentation on hud's it governance practices . this documentation included hud's it governance policy that called for the establishment of an it management framework and four investment review boards ; the it management framework and governance concept of operations that identified key it policies and processes to support it governance and investment decision making ; and charters that established the roles , responsibilities , authorities , and operations of the department's investment review boards . we also reviewed documents showing how hud determines which it projects will be recommended and then selected to receive funding , including business cases , the criteria for assigning scores to competing investments , and master lists of final scoring results . additionally , we reviewed available meeting minutes and presentations from hud's investment review boards related to investment decision making . further , we reviewed documents regarding the office of the chief information officer's ( cio ) recent efforts to establish an enterprise - wide cost estimation methodology , including a cost element dictionary and memorandum to provide guidance for formulation of hud's fiscal year 2016 it budget . to assess hud's it governance practices , we compared the evidence collected from our document reviews and analysis against critical processes in the information technology investment management framework developed by gao that were most relevant to hud's efforts . these processes establish basic capabilities that lay the foundation for implementing more mature governance capabilities in the future , specifically instituting governance boards and establishing processes for selecting and overseeing investments . in addition , we identified supplementary criteria for assessing cost - estimating practices that were derived from gao's cost estimating and assessment guide.determined that the information provided by the office of the cio was sufficiently reliable for addressing this objective . to address our second objective , we obtained and evaluated hud - reported information on achieved cost savings and operational efficiencies accomplished through selected investments and governance decisions .