we provided a draft of this report to dod for comment . dod responded that it agreed with the report's findings , and its comments are reprinted in appendix iii . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense and appropriate congressional committees . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or draperd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . we obtained tricare claims data on the number of admissions and reimbursement amounts for each sole community hospital ( sch ) for fiscal year 2013 . these officials said that they are concerned about their facilities' long - term survival . given the current environment of decreasing reimbursements , some schs we interviewed reported taking proactive steps , such as eliminating equipment maintenance contracts , to help offset the reimbursement reductions . officials from one facility we interviewed told us that they are considering an option to partner with another sch as a way to increase efficiency . tricare beneficiaries' demand for inpatient care at schs also may be affected by the availability of inpatient care from their respective military installation . we found that 24 of the 44 schs we identified as having 100 or more tricare admissions in fiscal year 2013 — about half — were within 40 miles of a military installation that only had an outpatient clinic . ( see appendix ii for a list of the 44 schs and their proximity to military hospitals and clinics ) . as a result , servicemembers and their dependents in those locations may be more reliant on a nearby sch for their inpatient care . payment weights are assigned to each drg based on the average resources used to treat patients . for example , in fiscal year 2014 , a lung transplant had a weight of 8.6099 , which would be multiplied by the annual standard payment amount ( $5,500.00 ) for a reimbursement of $47,354.45 . tricare's drg - based payment system differs from medicare's drg - based payment system in that each program has different annual standard amounts and different drg weights due to differences in the characteristics of their beneficiary populations . for example , medicare's population , which is generally older and less healthy than tricare's population , may require more resources and may require longer inpatient lengths of stay . also , some services , notably obstetric and pediatric services , are nearly absent from medicare , but are a much larger component of tricare's services .