mitigated the need for a psv . as we reported , commerce officials could not explain which factors lessened the need for a psv for the remaining 18 licenses . commerce stated that there is ambiguity in our report as to whether the gap relates to items listed on the commerce control list or to items that are not listed because they are not considered as sensitive for missile proliferation reasons . our references to the gap in the regulations refer to dual - use items that are not listed on the commerce control list . we have made changes to the draft to clarify this point . commerce stated that if it is gao's position that noncontrolled items are sensitive and should be placed on the mtcr control list , then we should explain the basis for this position . we are not suggesting that unlisted items should be added to the mtcr control list to deal with the issue we identified in the new zealand example . as indicated in our recommendation , the vehicle to address this gap would be an expansion of commerce's catch - all provision whereby license reviews would be required when the exporter knows or has reason to know that items not on the commerce control list might be used by nonstate actors for missile proliferation purposes . larger uavs are more adaptable to change . although several experts said that it is more expensive and difficult to modify an existing aircraft into a uav than to develop one from scratch , some countries , such as iraq , developed programs to convert manned aircraft into uavs . some experts also expressed concerns over adding autopilots to small aircraft to turn them into unmanned uavs that could deliver chemical or biological weapons . the u.s. government generally uses two key nonproliferation tools — - multilateral export control regimes and national export controls — to address cruise missile and uav proliferation , but both tools have limitations . the united states and other governments have traditionally used multilateral export control regimes , principally the mtcr , to address missile proliferation . however , despite successes in strengthening controls , the growing capability of countries of concern to develop and trade technologies used for wmd limits the regime's ability to impede proliferation . the u.s. government uses its national export control authorities to address missile proliferation but finds it difficult to identify and track commercially available items not covered by control lists . moreover , a gap in u.s. export control regulations could allow subnational actors to acquire american cruise missile or uav technology for missile proliferation or terrorist purposes without violating u.s. export control laws or regulations . the united states has other nonproliferation tools to address cruise missile and uav proliferation — diplomacy , sanctions , and interdiction of illicit shipments of items — but these tools have had unclear results or have been little used . the united states and other governments have used the mtcr , and , to some extent , the wassenaar arrangement , as the key tools to address the proliferation of cruise missiles and uavs .