the full capability . increasingly , dod has preferred to make fewer but heavier , larger , and more complex satellites that perform a multitude of missions rather than larger constellations of smaller , less complex satellites that gradually increase in sophistication . this has stretched technology challenges beyond current capabilities in some cases and vastly increased the complexities related to software — a problem that affected sbirs high and aehf , for example . in addition , several of the space programs discussed above began in the late 1990s , when dod structured contracts in a way that reduced government oversight and shifted key decision - making responsibility onto contractors . this approach — known as total system performance responsibility , or tspr — was intended to facilitate acquisition reform and enable dod to streamline a cumbersome acquisition process and leverage innovation and management expertise from the private sector . however , dod later found that this approach magnified problems related to requirements creep and poor contractor performance . in addition , under tspr , the government decided not to obtain certain cost data , a decision that resulted in the government having even less oversight of the programs and limited information from which to manage the programs . further , the reduction in government oversight and involvement led to major reductions in various government capabilities , including cost - estimating and systems - engineering staff . the loss of cost - estimating and systems - engineering staff in turn led to a lack of technical data needed to develop sound cost estimates . over the past decade , gao has examined successful organizations in the commercial sector to identify best practices that can be applied to space and weapon system acquisitions . this work has identified a number of practices , which we have recommended that dod adopt . generally , we have recommended that dod separate technology discovery from acquisition , follow an incremental path toward meeting user needs , match resources and requirements at program start , and use quantifiable data and demonstrable knowledge to make decisions to move to next phases . dod is making efforts to instill these practices on two programs reviewed this year: the transformational satellite communications system and the space radar program . specifically: successful organizations we have studied ensure that technologies are mature , that is , proven to work as intended before program start . both tsat and space radar are attempting to do this . according to their plans , critical technologies should reach at least a technology readiness level ( trl ) 6 by program start , meaning the technologies have been tested in a relevant environment . this stands in sharp contrast to previous programs , which have started with immature technologies , such as sbirs and npoess , and it reflects the implementation of a “back to basics” policy advocated this past year by the under secretary of the air force . it has stated it may also do the same for sbirs to pursue airss . in both cases , dod would be forgoing savings that it had already negotiated for lot buys and in effect , paying significantly more for nonrecurring engineering .