cbp . in its analysis of the 2011 fevs , cbp focused its analysis on trends since 2006 . for example , the analysis showed that cbp increased its scores by 5 or more percentage points for 36 of the 39 core fevs questions . cbp highlighted its greatest increases in hcaaf areas , such as results - oriented performance , which showed a 21 percent improvement over 2006 responses to the question — my performance appraisal is a fair reflection of my performance . the analysis also identified areas in greatest need of improvement , which showed progress since 2006 but continued low scores , such as questions on dealing with poor performers who cannot or will not improve ( 28 percent positive ) , promotions based on merit ( 28 percent positive ) and differences in performance are recognized ( 34 percent positive ) . to what extent have dhs and selected components determined the root causes of employee morale and developed action plans to improve morale ? gao , high - risk series: strategic human capital management , gao - 03-120 ( washington , d.c.: january 2003 ) . with the non - dhs average.above , below , and similar to the average . in addition , we interviewed representatives of employee groups within the four selected components to gather employee perspectives on drivers of morale . details of the selected component index scores , and their statistical significance , are reported in appendix i . the components selected had scores both to compare dhs's employee morale with that of other federal government employees , we analyzed the 2011 fevs results and reviewed opm survey results issued since 2004 , the first full year in which survey data are available . during the course of our analysis , we interviewed knowledgeable agency officials , reviewed relevant documentation , tested data for errors , and determined that the fevs data are sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . as part of this analysis , we compared 2011 dhs and non - dhs job satisfaction and engagement score results by several categories of employees , such as supervisory status , pay grade , and age . we also compared satisfaction and engagement scores within the selected components by employee group , where possible . for example , within tsa , we compared satisfaction and engagement scores reported by transportation security officers , federal security director staff , headquarters staff , and federal air marshals . to determine the extent to which dhs and the selected components identified the root causes of employee morale and developed action plans for improvements , we reviewed agency analysis results , interviewed agency human capital officials and representatives of employee groups , and evaluated action plans for improving morale . we also compared dhs and selected components' morale root cause analyses and related action plans with available guidance for such efforts . we conducted this performance audit from october 2011 through september 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .