tolling . if a refiner and nonrefiner do not agree on terms for tolling , the act does not require refiners to toll . however , as a condition of sale or auction to a refiner in phase a and b , the refiner must make excess refining capacity of helium available at commercially reasonable rates to persons who acquire helium from blm after the act's enactment . § 167d ( b ) ( 8 ) ( b ) . according to the act's legislative history , this condition was intended to maximize participation in phase a and b helium sales . the act does not define excess refining capacity or commercially reasonable rates . we refer to the condition of sale or auction as the act's tolling provision . disclosure requirement and qualifying domestic helium transactions . the act requires blm to require all persons that have storage contracts with blm to disclose , on a strictly confidential basis , ( 1 ) the volumes and associated prices of all crude and pure helium purchased , sold , or processed by persons in qualifying domestic helium transactions ; ( 2 ) the volumes and associated costs of converting crude helium into pure helium ; and ( 3 ) refinery capacity and future capacity estimates . § 167d ( b ) ( 8 ) ( a ) . we refer to this as the act's disclosure requirement . furthermore , the act defines a “qualifying domestic helium transaction” as any agreement entered into or renegotiated during the preceding 1-year period in the united states for the purchase or sale of at least 15 million standard cubic feet of crude or pure helium to which any storage contract holder is a party . price - setting . the act requires blm to annually establish , as applicable , separate sale and minimum auction prices for phase a and b using , if applicable , and in the following order of priority: ( 1 ) the sale price of crude helium in blm auctions ; ( 2 ) price recommendations and disaggregated data from a qualified , independent third party who has no conflict of interest , who shall conduct a confidential survey of qualifying domestic helium transactions ; ( 3 ) the volume - weighted average price of all crude helium and pure helium purchased , sold , or processed by persons in all qualifying domestic helium transactions ; or ( 4 ) the volume - weighted average cost of converting gaseous crude helium into pure helium . § 167d ( b ) ( 7 ) . auction and sale schedule and frequency , and one - time sale . for fiscal year 2015 , the act only permits one auction , followed by one sale that had to occur no later than august 1 , 2014 . at one point during bidding , the auction price rose as high as $180 per thousand cubic feet . we observed that participants who did not win at the auction stopped bidding when prices reached from $105 to $130 per thousand cubic feet ( see fig . reaction to the auction's outcome varied among refiners , nonrefiners , and blm officials .