vi ) . only one of these was above $25,000 . in fiscal year 2006 , the commission competitively awarded five research contracts for a total of $77,926 . none of these was above $25,000 . during 2007 , the commission plans to continue awarding research contracts using these practices . in contrast , the commission does not have any written procedures in place for nonresearch procurement . this procurement involves a variety of items , such as the costs of hearings , consulting services , and office supplies and equipment . in fiscal years 2005 and 2006 , the commission spent about 65 percent and 77 percent , respectively , of its total procurement budget in nonresearch procurement ( see apps . vi and vii ) . in the absence of nonresearch - related procurement procedures , the commission has limited assurance that the procurement is as transparent , competitive , or best value for price as possible , or that responsibilities for it are segregated among qualified staff . for example , as discussed in the following section on financial management and reporting , the commission made significant purchases of office equipment , however , the staff did not document these pricing and purchasing decisions and it is difficult to verify that the best value was obtained . earlier , we noted the absence of a formally designated procurement officer can compromise the integrity of procurement activities and together with the lack of procedures put the commission at risk of fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement . during our review , we identified a transaction that fell outside the scope of our individual transaction testing . the transaction involved computer consulting work conducted by a relative of the associate director that initially did not appear to be approved by the commission . we learned that the associate director's son , who is not an employee of the commission and not under formal contract with the commission , had access to the commission's computer system and the sensitive information it contains . the associate director confirmed that her son had had access to and worked on the system . she explained that her son had set up the computer system for the trade deficit review commission and was paid for those services by that entity . subsequently , at its inception , uscesrc inherited this computer system . we observed two quarterly business meetings of the commission on february 2 and may 25 , 2007 . we interviewed the 12 current commissioners and two former commissioners , including a former chairman of the commission and a commissioner who left the commission when his appointment expired at the end of 2006 . also , we interviewed the current executive director and the two previous executive directors of the commission . we reviewed information and met with officials from the general services administration ( gsa ) and the congressional research service ( crs ) .