investments . another 52 percent , or 165 institutions , exited cpp by exchanging their securities under other federal programs: 28 through cdci and 137 through the small business lending fund ( see fig . 3 ) .the remaining 8 percent of cpp recipients that exited the program , 13 went into bankruptcy or receivership , 11 had their securities sold by treasury , and 2 merged with another institution . also , according to data in a treasury report , as of september 30 , 2011 , 390 of the original 707 institutions remained in cpp but accounted for only 8.4 percent of the original investments . much of the $17.3 billion in outstanding investments was concentrated in a relatively small number of institutions . the largest single outstanding investment was $3.5 billion , and the top four outstanding investments totaled $6.8 billion . the top 25 remaining cpp investments accounted for $11.3 billion . the cumulative number of financial institutions that had missed at least one scheduled dividend or interest payment by the end of the month in which the payments were due rose from 164 as of november 30 , 2010 , to 226 as of november 30 , 2011 . institutions can elect whether to pay dividends and may choose not to pay for a variety of reasons , including decisions that they or their federal and state regulators make to conserve cash and maintain ( or increase ) capital levels . institutions are required to pay dividends only if they declare dividends , although unpaid cumulative dividends generally accrue and the institution must pay them before making payments to other types of shareholders , such as holders of common stock . these figures differ from the number of dividend or interest payments outstanding because some institutions made their payments after the end of the reporting month . cpp dividend and interest payments are due on february 15 , may 15 , august 15 , and november 15 of each year , or the first business day subsequent to those dates . the reporting period ends on the last day of the calendar month in which the dividend or interest payment is due . institutions still in the program ( see fig . 4 ) .despite reduced program participation , and the proportion of those missing scheduled payments has risen accordingly . the number of institutions missing payments stabilized in recent quarters ; however , most of these institutions had repeatedly missed payments . in particular , 119 of the 158 institutions that missed payments in november 2011 had also missed payments in each of the previous three quarters . moreover , these 158 institutions had missed an average of 4.8 additional previous payments , and only 7 had never missed a previous payment . on july 19 , 2011 , treasury announced that it had , for the first time , exercised its right to elect members to the boards of directors of two of the remaining cpp institutions . in considering whether to nominate directors , treasury said that it would proceed in two steps . first , after an institution misses five dividend or interest payments , treasury sends ofs staff members to observe board meetings .