task orders were frequently revised . these revisions generated a significant amount of rework for the contractor and the contracting officers . additionally , time spent reviewing revisions to the task orders is time that is not available for other oversight activities . while operational considerations may have driven some of these changes , we believe others were more likely to have resulted from ineffective planning . for example , the task order supporting the troops in iraq was revised 7 times in less than 1 year . frequent revisions have not been limited to this task order . task order 27 , which provides support to u.s troops in kuwait ( estimated value of $426 million as of may 2004 ) , was changed 18 times between september 2002 and december 2003 , including 5 changes in one month , some on consecutive days . as of may 11 , 2004 , the contracting office , dcma , and the contractor had processed more than 176 modifications to logcap task orders . in some cases , we found that contract oversight processes were in place and functioning well . for example , the defense contract management agency ( dcma ) had principal oversight responsibility for the logcap and afcap contracts and the bsc , and dcma generally provided good overall contract oversight , although we found some examples where it could have improved its performance . for example: effective oversight of the diverse functions performed under the contracts requires government personnel with knowledge and expertise in these specific areas . dcma contract administrators are contracting professionals , but many have limited knowledge of field operations . in these situations , dcma normally uses contracting officer's technical representatives . contracting officer's technical representatives are customers who have been designated by their units and appointed and trained by the administrative contracting officer . administrative contracting officers in iraq , for example , have been overwhelmed with their duties as a result of the expanding scope of some of the task orders . additionally , some army and air force personnel with oversight responsibilities did not receive the training necessary to effectively accomplish their jobs . finally , we found that military units receiving services from the contracts generally lacked a comprehensive understanding of their contract roles and responsibilities . for example , commanders did not understand the part they played in establishing task order requirements , nor did they fully understand the level of support required by the contractors . in conclusion , mr. chairman , the united states , along with its coalition partners and various international organizations and donors , has undertaken an enormously complex , costly , and challenging effort to rebuild iraq in an unstable security environment . at the early stages of these efforts , agency procurement officials were confronted with little advance warning on which to plan and execute competitive procurement actions , an urgent need to begin reconstruction efforts quickly , and uncertainty as to the magnitude and term of work required . their actions , in large part , reflected proper use of the flexibilities provided under procurement laws and regulations to award new contracts using other than full and open competitive procedures .