incentive timing . the timing of an on - orbit incentive represents how the at - risk amount is spread out over a satellite's mission life . for some of the contracts and orders we reviewed for selected case study programs , the on - orbit incentives covered a satellite's entire mission life . there were some contracts and orders , however , for which the on - orbit incentives covered only a portion of the mission life . given that when satellites fail , it is usually early in their mission life , three of the five firm - fixed - price satellite contracts or orders in our case study programs had milestone payment plans that ended once the on - orbit vehicle completed its check - out . under this arrangement , depending on the terms of the contract , the government could potentially withhold the last milestone incentive payment if a catastrophic failure occurred prior to check - out , but would not have on - orbit incentives that lasted the remainder of the mission life . in these cases , the government assumes all of the risk once the vehicles complete check - out . similarly , the on - orbit incentives for one of the sbirs contracts covered the first 4 years of the satellite's mission life . the wgs block ii and block ii follow - on contracts have a unique on - orbit incentive structure that includes a 10-year negative incentive followed by a 4-year positive incentive for the satellite's 14-year mission life . the negative incentive includes calculations to determine how much money the contractor has to pay the government if its satellite fails to meet performance requirements during the first 10 years . the positive incentive , starting at year 11 of the satellite's mission life , allows the contractor to offset any negative incentives assessed during that satellite's first 10 years . at the end of 14 years , the government adds up the positive and negative incentive amounts to determine what , if anything , the contractor has to pay back . dod agreed with our recommendations . numerous contract types are available to the government to provide flexibility in acquiring the supplies and services agencies need , including satellite acquisitions . table 1 provides an overview of typical contract types and how they may be used to acquire satellites . when determining the contract and incentive structure for satellite acquisitions , the government may consider a number of factors: where the satellite is in the acquisition phase . satellite contracts can include design , development , integration , and testing , and can cover more than 15 years . the government can tailor the contract type and fees to meet the specific circumstances of the acquisition , for example , the phase of the acquisition cycle . figure 1 shows the notional acquisition phases for a satellite . during the design and development phase , when technology risks are higher , the government typically uses cost - reimbursement contracts . when the government is acquiring a “production - model” satellite , or a copy of a satellite with a proven design and build , a fixed - price contract may be used .