ii ) . the federal reserve has coordinated with relevant industry participants and other regulators including cfpb , fdic , ftc , ncua , occ , treasury , and csbs through its mobile payments industry working group and its faster payments task force . blockchain is one type of dlt . a blockchain is a shared digital ledger that records transactions in a public or private network . distributed to all members in the network , the ledger permanently records , in a sequential chain of cryptographically secured blocks , the history of transactions that take place among the participants in the network . dlt products can have different types of access control . for example , some may be “unpermissioned” ( public ) ledgers that are open to everyone to contribute data to the ledger and have no central control , while others may be “permissioned” ( private ) ledgers that allow only certain participants to add records and verify the contents of the ledger . the financial services industry has identified various potential uses for dlt . these include tracking international money transfers or tracking the changes of ownership of various financial assets , such as or securities like bonds or stocks or derivatives like swaps contracts . in addition , dlt is being used to track ownership of bitcoin , a virtual currency , specifically using a blockchain . some companies are using dlt to raise funds . according to a recent bulletin by u.s. securities regulators , these virtual coins or tokens are being created and then disseminated using dlt as part of offerings known as token sales or initial coin offerings . as part of these token sales , purchasers may use fiat currency ( eg , u.s. dollars ) or virtual currencies to buy these virtual coins or tokens . currently , the capital raised from the sales may be used to fund development of a digital platform , software , or other project ; or , the virtual tokens or coins may be used to access the platform , use the software , or otherwise participate in the project . after they are issued , in some cases the virtual coins or tokens may be resold to others in a secondary market on virtual currency exchanges or other platforms . a variety of federal and state regulatory bodies may oversee fintech firms or their activities to the extent these firms provide a regulated payment ; lending ; wealth management ; or distributed ledger technology service or activity . table 1 explains the basic functions of the relevant federal regulators . in addition to the federal regulators above , various state entities also conduct regulatory activities over fintech firms operating within their jurisdictions . according to the association representing state regulators , state financial services regulators license and supervise activities , such as money transmission , consumer lending , and debt collection , irrespective of technology deployed . nonbank financial service providers that offer services directly to consumers are likely subject to state oversight . in addition to state financial services regulators , state securities regulators , state entities that oversee corporate activities , and state attorneys general have jurisdiction over certain fintech firms .