the result held for youth and for parents . second , comparing data on advertisement time purchases with self - reported exposure to these advertisements in the nspy , westat found a high correlation between advertising and exposure . specifically , on the basis of analysis of individual advertisements' gross rating points ( grp ) — a measure of the underlying reach and frequency of each advertisement — and self - reported exposures by respondents , westat found a high correlation between grps purchased by the campaign and self - reported exposure to advertisements among youth . the correlation for parents was somewhat smaller , but was also significant . ( 3 ) what did the evaluation find about the effect of exposure to the campaign on youth drug use ? in addressing our objectives , a team of gao social scientists reviewed and assessed materials related to westat's phase iii evaluation , applying generally accepted social science research standards , including such elements as when and how the sample data were collected , adjustments made to the sample to address nonresponse , how program effects were isolated ( i.e. , the use of statistical controls ) , and the appropriateness of outcome measures . the materials reviewed included interim and final evaluation reports , documentation and analyses provided by westat to us in response to several sets of questions that we submitted about the details of its methodology , documentation pertaining to meetings of scientific panels that provided guidance on the evaluation , and documentation prepared by ondcp about the design and implementation of the campaign . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards from october 2005 through june 2006 . as part of the treasury and general government appropriation act of 1998 , the drug free media campaign act of 1998 required , among other things , the office of national drug control policy to conduct a national media campaign for the purpose of reducing and preventing drug abuse among young people in the united states . the national youth anti - drug media campaign may be the most visible federal effort devoted to preventing drug use among the nation's youth . it aims to educate and enable america's youth to reject illegal drugs ; to prevent youth from initiating use of drugs , especially marijuana and inhalants ; and to convince occasional users of these and other drugs to stop using drugs . administered by ondcp , and implemented in three phases , the campaign has as its centerpiece a paid advertising effort in which campaign funds were used to purchase media time and space for advertisements that delivered anti - drug messages to the campaign's target audiences — youth aged 9 to 18 and their parents and adult caregivers — through strategic placement of anti - drug advertisements on television and radio and in print media . the campaign's first two phases were pilot phases that had as their objectives developing advertising concepts , creating limited advertisements , testing public awareness of the advertisements in 12 metropolitan areas , and eventually extending the pilot program nationwide .