clothing . we identified several purchases of clothing by spawar systems center employees that should not have been purchased with appropriated funds . according to 5 u.s.c . 7903 , agencies are authorized to purchase protective clothing for employee use if the agency can show that ( 1 ) the item is special and not part of the ordinary furnishings that an employee is expected to supply , ( 2 ) the item is essential for the safe and successful accomplishment of the agency's mission , not solely for the employee's protection , and ( 3 ) the employee is engaged in hazardous duty . further , according to a comptroller general decision dated march 6 , 1984 , clothing purchased pursuant to this statute is property of the u.s. government and must only be used for official government business . thus , except for rare circumstances in which a clothing purchase meets stringent requirements , it is usually considered a personal item that should be purchased by the individual . for the transactions that we tested , we found that several spawar systems center employees had purchased clothing , such as a lightweight hooded jacket , long pants , and a shirt that should have been purchased by the employees with their own money . one of the cardholders told us that he believed his purchases of clothing were appropriate because other spawar systems center employees were also purchasing clothing . food . we found a number of purchases of food at spawar headquarters , spawar systems center and npwc that represent an improper use of federal funds . without statutory authority , appropriated funds may not be used to furnish meals or refreshments to employees within their normal duty stations . free food and other refreshments normally cannot be justified as a necessary expense of an agency's appropriation because these items are considered personal expenses that federal employees should pay for from their own salaries . in january 2000 , the general services administration ( gsa ) amended the government travel regulations to permit agencies to provide light refreshments to employees attending conferences involving travel . in response to gsa's action , dod amended the joint travel regulation ( jtr ) and joint federal travel regulation ( jftr ) to permit similar light refreshments for dod civilian employees and military members . in april 2001 , dod clarified the jtr / jftr rule to permit light refreshments only when a majority of the attendees ( 51 percent or more ) are in travel status . the following food purchases should not have been paid for with appropriated funds . three instances in which npwc purchased primarily meals and light refreshments for employee - related activities , including team meetings , at a cost of about $4,100 . the supporting documentation we were provided initially by npwc showed these purchases to be the rental of rooms for meetings . however , after our further inquiry of the admiral kidd catering center we found that a large portion of the purchases were related to food and refreshments including luncheon buffets .