ii ) . this lack of agreement could adversely affect dod's ability to develop and carry out a coherent plan to defend against chemical and biological threats . until 2003 , dod's acquisition procedures ( unless waived ) required that weapon systems survivability be addressed in accordance with assessed threat levels , including chemical and biological , anticipated in the weapon system's projected operating environment . these procedures defined survivability as the capability of a weapon system and crew to avoid or withstand a man - made hostile environment without suffering an abortive impairment of its ability to accomplish its designated mission . the army , navy , and air force issued supplemental acquisition policies that established service - specific procedures to address the chemical and biological contamination survivability of their weapon systems . in 2003 , dod replaced its acquisition procedures with a defense acquisition guidebook , which , together with the controlling dod directive and instruction , no longer specifically requires that weapon system survivability against chemical and biological threats be addressed during the system design and development phase . according to a dod official , this action was part of a dod effort to simplify its weapon system acquisition process . the only current dod acquisition requirement specifically related to chemical and biological threats is that weapon system program offices address protection for crew members ( as opposed to the weapon system itself ) against the effects of a chemical or biological threat . as part of weapon system design and development efforts , dod uses scientific and technical information from research and testing activities to better understand various chemical and biological agents and their impact on military operations , including the survivability of weapon systems . dtic maintains a centralized database containing a broad range of scientific and technical information intended to maximize the return on investment in research , evaluation , and studies . in addition to its centralized database , dtic uses the chemical and biological information analysis center ( cbiac ) , a contractor - operated information analysis center , to maintain additional databases and provide information specific to chemical and biological issues . dod indicated in its august 2005 interim report that it intends to build on the existing databases maintained by cbiac and to develop a centralized database by the end of fiscal year 2007 that contains comprehensive information on the effects of chemical and biological agents and decontaminants on weapon systems . in executing its role as a coordinating point for dod scientific and technical information databases and systems , dtic makes information available throughout dod . figure 1 illustrates the intended flow of information among testing facilities , program offices , and dtic . dod and the military services do not consistently address weapon system chemical and biological survivability during the acquisition process . in the absence of clear dod guidance and effective controls , responsibility for decisions regarding weapon system chemical and biological survivability has devolved largely to the individual military services and weapon system program offices . the program offices we visited do not consistently document their chemical and biological survivability decisions , nor is there an established , clear , and effective dod - level process for the oversight of these decisions .