encouraging nonfederal investment . several stakeholders we interviewed told us that the federal government could use a federal climate resilience investment effort to encourage nonfederal investment in high - priority climate resilience projects , thereby increasing the impact of federal investment . for example , several stakeholders identified the importance of a cost - share component so that funding recipients are invested in a project's success . canada's dmaf encourages nonfederal investment by partially funding projects of national significance and requiring different levels of cost - share from funding recipients , ranging from 25 percent for indigenous recipients to 75 percent for private - sector and other for - profit recipients . several stakeholders also identified potential funding mechanisms — for example , public - private partnerships and loan guarantees — that could leverage federal dollars to encourage additional investment in climate resilience projects by nonfederal entities , including the private sector . encouraging complementary resilience activities . to increase the impact of federal investment in climate resilience , a federal investment effort presents an opportunity to encourage complementary resilience activities by nonfederal actors such as states , localities , and private - sector partners , based on interviews with several stakeholders , the canadian example , and reports we reviewed . for example , this could include establishing conditions that funding recipients must meet in exchange for receiving federal funding . alternatively , the federal government could use incentives ( eg , providing greater federal cost - share or giving additional preference in the project prioritization process ) to encourage complementary resilience activities by nonfederal actors . our disaster resilience framework states that incentives can make long - term , forward - looking risk reduction investments more viable and attractive among competing priorities . the federal government could use these conditions and incentives to encourage several types of complementary resilience activities by nonfederal actors . for example , the federal government could encourage the use and enforcement of building codes that require stronger risk - reduction measures . helping ensure adequate and consistent funding . several stakeholders we interviewed identified the need for adequate and consistent funding to implement high - priority climate resilience projects . for example , according to one stakeholder we interviewed , inconsistent , inadequate funding makes it difficult to complete large - scale projects and can lead to additional costs if significant delays occur during which existing work deteriorates . in addition to adequate and consistent funding , funding options should be designed to accommodate long - term projects since high - priority climate resilience projects can take multiple years to design and implement , according to two stakeholders we interviewed . several stakeholders suggested that federal funds be used for multiple stages of project development — such as project design , implementation , or monitoring — to increase the impact of federal funds . for example , two stakeholders we interviewed told us that resilience projects can require significant amounts of design work to develop an implementable and effective project concept and that making funds available for project design could improve the quality of project proposals , thereby maximizing the impact of federal funds . ( see fig .