challenges of the programs . further , we conducted focus groups of fema corps team leaders and members at three fema regions to obtain their perspectives on fema corps retention challenges . we analyzed these focus group discussions to identify common themes and patterns . while the information obtained from our focus groups with fema corps team leaders and members in the three regions cannot be generalized , it provided us with valuable examples of experiences in the program . we applied standards from standards for internal control in the federal government , program management best practices , program guidance , office of management and budget guidance on cost - benefit analyses and surveys , and best practices identified in our prior work on collaboration , program cost estimating and assessment , and strategic workforce planning , to examine staffing , cost , and performance issues of its new disaster workforce components.discussion of our scope and methodology . see appendix i for a more detailed we conducted this performance audit from june 2014 to june 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions on our audit objectives . in 2001 , we first identified strategic human capital management in the federal government as a high - risk area because of the significant challenges federal government agencies faced including acquiring and developing staff whose size , skills , and deployment met agency needs . in our february 2013 update , we reported that effective strategic workforce planning is essential for ensuring that agencies have the talent , skill , and experience mix they need to cost - effectively execute their mission and program goals . in our past reviews of these issues at fema , we have reported that fema should strengthen the strategic management of its workforce , including improvements in gathering workforce data , identifying staffing gaps , and developing plans with goals and measures to fill those gaps . we reported that fema lacked a strategic for example , in 2007 , workforce plan and recommended that , in responding to strategic workforce planning requirements in the post - katrina emergency management reform act of 2006 ( post - katrina act ) , fema apply the key principles of strategic workforce planning , such as assessing the number of employees and critical skills that fema needs . although fema subsequently issued a strategic workforce plan for 2008-2012 , that plan did not include performance metrics or identify possible workforce gaps , in 2011 , overlaps , or inconsistencies , as discussed later in this report.we again reported the need for and recommended that fema develop a workforce plan . most recently , in 2012 , we recommended that fema establish goals , performance measures , and systematic processes for collecting and analyzing workforce data . fema has not yet fully addressed many of our past human capital – related recommendations , as we discuss later in the report .