these actions are laudable . however , given recent events and reports that critical operations and assets continue to be highly vulnerable to computer - based attacks , the government still faces a challenge in ensuring that risks from cyber threats are appropriately addressed in the context of the broader array of risks to the nation's welfare . accordingly , it is important that federal information security efforts be guided by a comprehensive strategy for improvement . in 1998 , shortly after the initial issuance of presidential decision directive ( pdd ) 63 on protecting the nation's critical infrastructure , we recommended that omb , which , by law , is responsible for overseeing federal information security , and the assistant to the president for national security affairs work together to ensure that the roles of new and existing federal efforts were coordinated under a comprehensive strategy . our more recent reviews of the national infrastructure protection center and of broader federal efforts to counter computer - based attacks showed that there was a continuing need to clarify responsibilities and critical infrastructure protection objectives.as the administration refines the strategy that it has begun to lay out in recent months , it is imperative that it takes steps to ensure that information security receives appropriate attention and resources and that known deficiencies are addressed . first , it is important that the federal strategy delineate the roles and responsibilities of the numerous entities involved in federal information security and related aspects of critical infrastructure protection . under current law , omb is responsible for overseeing and coordinating federal agency security , and nist , with assistance from the national security agency , is responsible for establishing related standards . in addition , interagency bodies — such as the cio council and the entities created under pdd 63 on critical infrastructure protection — are attempting to coordinate agency initiatives . although these organizations have developed fundamentally sound policies and guidance and have undertaken potentially useful initiatives , effective improvements are not yet taking place . further , it is unclear how the activities of these many organizations interrelate , who should be held accountable for their success or failure , and whether they will effectively and efficiently support national goals . second , more specific guidance to agencies on the controls that they need to implement could help ensure adequate protection . currently , agencies have wide discretion in deciding what computer security controls to implement and the level of rigor with which to enforce these controls . in theory , this discretion is appropriate since , as omb and nist guidance states , the level of protection that agencies provide should be commensurate with the risk to agency operations and assets . in essence , one set of specific controls will not be appropriate for all types of systems and data . nevertheless , our studies of best practices at leading organizations have shown that more specific guidance is important . in particular , specific mandatory standards for varying risk levels can clarify expectations for information protection , including audit criteria ; provide a standard framework for assessing information security risk ; help ensure that shared data are appropriately protected ; and reduce demands for limited resources to independently develop security controls .