the national map . the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) is developing and implementing the national map as a database to provide core geospatial data about the united states and its territories , similar to the data traditionally provided on usgs paper topographic maps . through this project , usgs maintains an archive for the historic preservation of data and science applications ; provides products and services that include paper maps , digital images , data download capabilities , and scientific reports ; and promotes geographic integration and analyses . usgs relies heavily on partnerships with other federal agencies as well as states , localities , and the private sector to maintain the accuracy and currency of the national core geospatial data set as represented in the national map . according to interior's assistant secretary — policy , management , and budget , fgdc , geospatial one - stop , and the national map are coordinating their efforts in several areas , including developing standards and framework data layers for the nsdi , increasing the effectiveness of the clearinghouse , and making information about existing and planned data acquisitions available through the geospatial one - stop web site . table 1 summarizes the nsdi , geospatial one - stop , and national map programs . in addition to its other responsibilities , omb circular a - 16 charges fgdc with leading the preparation of a strategic plan for the implementation of the nsdi . such a plan could ensure coherence among the many geospatial coordination activities that are under way and provide ways to measure success in reducing redundancies . in 1994 , fgdc issued a strategic plan that described actions federal agencies and others could take to develop the nsdi , such as establishing data themes and standards , training programs , and partnerships to promote coordination and data sharing . in april 1997 , fgdc published an updated plan — with input from many organizations and individuals having a stake in developing the nsdi — that defined strategic goals and objectives to support the vision of the nsdi as defined in the 1994 plan . no further updates have been made . as the current national geospatial strategy document , fgdc's 1997 plan is out of date . first , it does not reflect the recent broadened use of geospatial data and systems by many government agencies . in conjunction with epa , the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , for example , now makes geospatial information about housing available to potential home buyers over the internet . this is one of several agency geospatial projects that did not exist in 1997 . second , significant governmentwide geospatial efforts — including the geospatial one - stop and the national map projects — did not exist in 1997 and are therefore not reflected in the strategic plan . finally , the 1997 plan does not take into account the increased importance that has been placed on homeland security in the wake of the september 11 , 2001 , attacks . geospatial data and systems have a key role to play in supporting decision makers and emergency responders in protecting critical infrastructure and responding to threats .