open . in testing a statistical sample of 45 manual interest transactions recorded during fiscal year 2005 , we found five errors relating to the calculation and recording of manually calculated interest . we estimate that 11 percent of irs's manual interest population contains errors and concluded that irs controls over this area remain ineffective . we will continue to test the accuracy of irs's manual interest calculations during our fiscal year 2006 financial audit . ( short - term ) internal revenue service: physical security over taxpayer receipts and data needs improvement ( gao / aimd - 99-15 , nov. 30 , 1998 ) open . during our fiscal year 2005 audit , we found a lack of segregation of duties related to the preparation , review , and / or reconciliation of form 795 at six of the eight tacs we visited . at three of these tacs , at times only one employee was present to carry out the functions of the office . at another tac , there was no evidence that the form 795 was reconciled by an employee other than the employee who received the payment from the taxpayer and recorded it on the form 795 . at this same tac , we observed two instances where employees did not log information onto the form 795 upon receipt . at the fifth tac , the employee responsible for receiving and recording payments on the control log did not receive an independent reconciliation of the payments before they were mailed to the scc for further processing . at the sixth tac , one employee retrieved all the checks from the locked container and logged all the checks received onto a form 795 and sent them to the scc without a supervisor or designee review . the corrective actions cited by irs were subsequent to our fieldwork at those locations . we will evaluate irs's corrective actions during our fiscal year 2006 audit . field assistance headquarters began conducting operational reviews on february 28 , 2006 . the operational reviews include assessing their ability to engage employees in process and program improvement , identifying best practice ideas , ensuring elements of accountability and responsibility are clearly communicated at each level , and assessing conformance to the current policies and procedures . analyze and determine the factors causing delays in processing and posting tfrp assessments . once these factors have been determined , irs should develop procedures to reduce the impact of these factors and to ensure timely posting to all applicable accounts and proper offsetting of refunds against unpaid assessments before issuance . ( short - term ) internal revenue service: custodial financial management weaknesses ( gao / aimd - 99-193 , aug. 4 , 1999 ) open . to ensure quality , timeliness , and accuracy of the tfrp process , the irs initiated a quality review process that focused in two primary areas . the first being consolidation of all tfrp work to one campus . consolidation of all sb / se atfr work to the ogden campus was completed in september 2005 . all w&i business unit tfrp work was transferred to sb / se campuses as of january 2006 .