this statement is incorrect . all but one of the seven countries provided information on the costs of reorganization , which the report presents in figures 3 through 9 . similar to hhs , usda commented that the countries we reviewed have much smaller populations and also differ from the united states in climate and agricultural production . our report identifies differences of this type in table 1 . the report points out , however , that these countries and the united states have at least one important similarity: they are high - income countries where consumers have high expectations for food safety . as a result , we believe the consolidation experiences of the countries reviewed have applicability to the united states . usda also provided technical comments , which we incorporated into the report as appropriate . usda's comments are included in appendix x . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretaries of agriculture and of health and human services , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix xi . this report describes the approaches the seven countries have taken in consolidating food safety functions , the challenges they faced , and the results of the countries' efforts , including benefits and costs cited by government officials and industry or consumer stakeholders . for the purposes of this report , we defined consolidation as the transfer of responsibility and resources for performing a food safety function from two or more agencies to a single agency . to identify countries that have consolidated their food safety systems , we interviewed usda and fda officials , reviewed a 2001world health organization report on how countries have organized their food safety systems , and reviewed the internet sites of countries' food safety agencies . we selected a judgmental sample of seven countries for our review based on the following criteria: usda and fda officials agreed that these countries have consolidated , the countries have high per capita income , and the countries have consolidated functions of their food safety system within the last 10 years . to address our objective , we examined the seven countries' efforts to streamline and consolidate their food safety systems , including the benefits and costs that resulted , as cited by government officials . we conducted structured interviews with senior government officials from food safety agencies and with representatives of food industry or consumer organizations in each country , reviewed and analyzed the documents they provided , and reviewed world health organization and gao reports . we also met with european union ( eu ) food safety officials to discuss how the eu's food legislation is affecting its member countries' decisions to consolidate , as well as how the eu interacts with food safety agencies in member countries .