project interdependencies . delays with one project have had a cascading effect and have caused delays in related projects . these cost overruns and schedule delays impair irs's ability to make appropriate decisions about investing in new projects , delay delivery of benefits to taxpayers , and postpone resolution of material weaknesses affecting other program areas . the “remember your advanced child tax credit” enables a person to access irs's web site to determine the amount of the advanced child tax credit they received . as of march 21 , 2004 , about 8.5 million accesses have been made to the “remember your child tax credit” feature . overall we found that irs's web site continues to improve when it comes to providing services to taxpayers . however , we continue to have concerns about the forms and publication search function . we found that the forms and publication search function still does not always make the most pertinent information readily available . for example , when we typed , “earned income tax credit” into the forms and publication search function , publication 596 — the primary publication on the earned income tax credit — was the 79th item on the list and we had to scroll through eight pages to find it . the number of taxpayers receiving assistance at irs walk - in sites continued to decline . at any one of irs's over 400 walk - in sites , taxpayers get various types of assistance , including answers to tax law questions , assistance with their accounts , and return preparation assistance ( generally for low income taxpayers ) . the number of people who received assistance at an irs walk - in site declined by 11 percent compared to the same period last year . irs continues to restrict free tax preparation services to , for example , taxpayers with an annual gross income level of $35,000 or less , because of the labor intensive nature of that work and to enable staff to concentrate on other services that only irs can provide such as account assistance . irs reduced the number of staff available for return preparation by 20 percent from 2003 . as the data in table 5 indicate , the number of returns being prepared has decreased by about 36 percent over this time last year . these trends are consistent with ones we have previously reported for recent filing seasons . figure 4 shows a downward trend in the overall assistance provided and in the return preparation at the walk - in sites . sites staffed by volunteers certified by irs do not provide the range of services irs provides , such as account assistance , and operate primarily during the filing season . irs is promoting these as alternatives to its walk - in assistance sites for certain types of service . irs works to ensure that walk - in sites have a listing of services , hours , and locations of the volunteer sites in their area . as of march 2004 , there are approximate 11,600 volunteer sites . irs also promotes its telephone operations and web site at its walk - in sites as well .