external factors . external factors — including responding to requests for additional data collection and delays due to launch - vehicle related issues — contributed to cost increases or schedule delays for the nisar , icon , and grace - fo projects . the nisar project experienced cost growth as the result of an increase in the scope of data collection in response to additional data needs being identified by an interagency working group . the additional data include soil moisture and natural hazard data that would be of value for other federal agencies and the science community . nasa officials said the additional funding for development would be used to upgrade the ground stations so that they can receive the additional data at a higher downlink data rate and volume . the icon project missed its committed launch readiness date because of an accident involving its launch vehicle . in january 2017 , two of the pegasus launch vehicle's three stages were involved in a transport accident . the stages were subsequently returned to the launch vehicle contractor facility for inspection and testing , and no damage was found . the project had been on track to launch early . subsequently , in september 2017 , an anomaly found in testing of the launch vehicle bolt cutter assemblies resulted in additional delays . nasa had planned to launch icon in mid - june 2018 , but recently announced a delay after off - nominal data was observed from the rocket during transit to the launch site . nasa announced a new launch date would be determined at a later date . the grace - fo project delayed its launch readiness date from february to may 2018 due to issues with its planned launch vehicle and launch site . the launch vehicle is the responsibility of nasa's partner on the project — german research centre for geosciences ( gfz ) . grace - fo had planned to launch at a russian launch site . in february 2016 , gfz reported that it was notified by the russian federal space agency that the dnepr launch vehicle was no longer available for grace - fo . gfz , in june 2016 , arranged to launch the two grace - fo spacecraft , along with commercial satellites , on a spacex falcon 9 . on may 22 , 2018 , grace - fo launched from vandenberg air force base in california . in addition , the commercial crew program also experienced delays , which are not included above because the program does not have a schedule baseline . since the award of the current commercial crew contracts in september 2014 , the program , boeing , spacex , and multiple independent review bodies have all identified the contractors' delivery schedules as aggressive . in february 2017 , we found that boeing and spacex had determined that neither could meet their original 2017 dates for nasa to certify their systems for human spaceflight . in january 2018 , we found that both contractors had notified nasa that final certification dates have slipped again and are now in the first quarter of calendar year 2019 .