generalizable to all db plan sponsors . however , the sample can serve as an important indicator of the health of the private db system and the sample's possible importance to the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) the 44 sponsoring firms that responded represent an estimated: 25 percent ( or $370 billion ) of total db system liabilities as of 19 percent ( or 6 million ) of the system's db participants ( active , separated - vested , retired as of 2004 ) . business line was manufacturing , with other key areas being finance and information . ( figure 1 ) these firms reported employing on average 75,000 employees in their u.s. operations in 2006 . compared to respondents reporting on their benefits covering cb employees , respondents with nb employees reported decrease in the employer's share of the cost of providing health benefits to current retirees ( figure 12 ) main reasons were increases in cost of health insurance for retirees and for active employees ( figure 13 ) . 46 percent of plan sponsors no longer offered retiree health benefits to active employees hired after a certain date . the nation's largest private sector db plans: 1 ) what recent changes have employers made to their pension and benefit offerings ? 2 ) what changes might employers make with respect to their pensions in the future , and how might these changes be influenced by changes in pension law and other factors ? 54 percent decreased or eliminated the firm's share cost of providing health benefits for future retirees who were non - bargaining employees ; ( figure 14 ) primary reasons cited were large cost increases in health insurance for both retirees and active employees ( figure 15 ) 41 percent of sponsors with bargaining unit employees reported decrease in or elimination of firm's share of health care costs for future retirees ( figure 14 ) 26 percent reported no change primary reason cited was match / maintain parity with competitor's benefits package ( figure 16 ) . to achieve our objectives , we conducted a survey of sponsors of large defined - benefit ( db ) pension plans . for the purposes of our study , we defined “sponsors” as the listed sponsor on the 2004 form 5500 for the largest sponsored plan ( by total participants ) . to identify all plans for a given sponsor , we matched plans through unique sponsor identifiers . we constructed our population of db plan sponsors from the 2004 pension benefit guaranty corporation's ( pbgc ) form 5500 research database by identifying unique sponsors listed in this database and aggregating plan - level data ( for example , plan participants ) for any plans associated with this sponsor . as a result of this process , we identified approximately 23,500 plan sponsors . we further limited these sponsors to the largest sponsors ( by total participants in all sponsored plans ) that also appeared on the fortune 500 or fortune global 500 lists .