these changes were made to the hardware and deliveries already completed . see figure 13 for an illustration of cumulative cost and schedule variances during the course of the fiscal year . despite fiscal year overruns , the fire unit production contractor continues to underrun its total contract cost and schedule . the contractor , since it began performance in december 2006 , is currently $6.1 million under budgeted costs and has completed $11.3 million more worth of work than originally anticipated . the cost underruns are primarily due to a slow start - up on fire unit fielding level of effort activities . cumulative variances are the overruns or underruns the contractor has earned since the contract began . in order to calculate fiscal year variances , we determined the contractor's cumulative variances at the end of september 2008 and subtracted them from the cumulative variances at the end of september 2009 . fiscal year 2009 variances give us an idea of the contractor's performance trends during the fiscal year . our scope and methodology is discussed in more detail in appendix iii . we conducted this performance audit from february 2010 to july 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . mda's mission is to develop an integrated and layered bmds to defend the united states , its deployed forces , allies , and friends . in order to meet this mission , mda is developing a highly complex system of systems — land - , sea - and space - based sensors , interceptors and battle management . since its initiation in 2002 , mda has been given a significant amount of flexibility in executing the development and fielding of the bmds . to enable mda to field and enhance a missile defense system quickly , the secretary of defense in 2002 delayed the entry of the bmds program into the dod's traditional acquisition process until a mature capability was ready to be handed over to a military service for production and operation . because mda does not follow the traditional acquisition process , it has not yet triggered certain statutory and regulatory requirements that other major defense acquisition programs are required to adhere to . for example , other major defense acquisition programs are required to establish the total scope of work and total cost baselines as part of their entry into the formal acquisition cycle . title 10 united states code ( u.s.c. ) section 2435 requires a baseline description for major defense acquisition programs , however the requirement to establish a baseline is not triggered until a system enters into system development and demonstration . dod has implemented this requirement with the acquisition program baseline in its acquisition policy . because the bmds has not yet formally entered the acquisition cycle , it has not yet been required to meet the minimum requirements of section 2435 .