this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for further contacts regarding this testimony , please contact j. christopher mihm at ( 202 ) 512-6806 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included jacqueline nowicki , susan ragland , and aonghas st hilaire . this will present challenges to the traditional committee structures and processes . a continuing issue for congress to consider is how to best focus on common results when mission areas and programs cut across committee jurisdictions . in summary , mr. chairman , serious and disciplined efforts are needed to improve the management and performance of federal agencies . highlighting attention through the president's management agenda and the executive branch management scorecards are steps in the right direction . at the same time , it is well recognized that consistent progress in implementing these initiatives will be the key to achieving improved performance across the federal government . in implementing the president's management agenda , the elements highlighted during this testimony should be considered and adapted as appropriate in view of the fact that experience has shown that when these elements are in place lasting management reforms are more likely to be implemented that ultimately lead to improvements . finally , congress must play a crucial role in helping develop and oversee management improvement efforts throughout the executive branch . congress has proven to be critical in sustaining management reforms by monitoring implementation and providing the continuing attention necessary for management reform initiatives to be carried through to their successful completion . mr. chairman , we are pleased that you and your colleagues in congress have often turned to gao for assistance on federal management issues and we look forward to continuing to assist congress and agencies in this regard . we have issued a large body of reports , guides , and tools on issues directly relevant to the president's management agenda . we will be issuing additional such products in the future that should prove also helpful to congress and agencies in improving federal management and performance . the administration has identified areas where it believes the opportunity to improve performance is greater . however , as stated in the president's budget , “the marks that really matter will be those that record improvement , or lack of it , from these starting points.” the administration has pledged to update the scores twice a year and to issue a mid - year report during the summer . updates and future reports will be important in ensuring that progress continues as agencies attempt to improve their performance . it is key that rigorous criteria be applied to ensure that , in fact , progress has been made . according to the administration , the president's management agenda is a starting point for management reform . as such , we have drawn upon our wide - ranging work on federal management issues to identify elements that are particularly important in implementing and sustaining management improvement initiatives .