we are not making recommendations in this report . we provided dod with a copy of this report and they returned technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . the program was subsequently designated the mq - 25 . previously the navy had been largely focused on developing and fielding a system that could provide isr and air - to ground strike capabilities , with the potential to add aerial refueling capability in the future . that system , referred to as the unmanned carrier launched airborne surveillance and strike ( uclass ) system was to have the potential to operate in highly contested environments . under the mq - 25 program , the navy is now focused on developing and fielding an unmanned tanker capable of operating from the carrier , in a permissive environment , to refuel other naval aircraft and provide only limited isr capability . the overall system is expected to extend the range of the carrier air wing's mission effectiveness and increase the number of f / a - 18e / fs available for strike fighter missions , among other things . the mq - 25 system will consist of three segments: an aircraft segment ; a control system and connectivity segment ( cs&c ) ; and an aircraft carrier segment ( see figure 2 ) . the aircraft segment is to develop a carrier - suitable unmanned vehicle and associated support systems . the cs&c segment is to interface with existing command and control systems , and the tasking , processing , exploitation , and dissemination system . the aircraft carrier segment is to make modifications to upgrade the existing carrier infrastructure to support unmanned aircraft systems . these three segments will be managed and integrated by the navy's unmanned carrier aviation program office , acting as a lead systems integrator . between fiscal years 2017 and 2022 , the navy has budgeted almost $2.5 billion to continue development of the mq - 25 carrier and control segments and to begin development of the aircraft segment . figure 1 shows the phases of dod's acquisition process . in a march 2016 report , we found that after completing a review of its airborne intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) portfolio , osd directed the navy in january 2016 to focus on developing and fielding an unmanned carrier based aerial refueling system , which represented a significant shift in requirements . over that period , the annual funding requirements for the overall mq - 25 system will increase from $89.0 million in 2017 to $554.6 million in 2022 ( see figure 3 ) . in the first quarter of fiscal year 2018 , the navy plans to request mq - 25 aircraft proposals from four competing contractors . then , in the summer of 2018 , the navy expects to hold a milestone b review to assess whether the navy is ready to enter the engineering and manufacturing development phase of the acquisition process for the aircraft segment and downselect to one of the four contractors . in july 2017 , the joint requirements oversight council ( jroc ) validated system requirements for the mq - 25 . the navy has two primary requirements , known as key performance parameters .