there are several reasons for this . first , beneficiaries taking equally priced drugs will reach the coverage gap at the same time — even with different cost - sharing structures — because entry into the coverage gap is based on total drug costs paid by the beneficiary and the plan , rather than on out - of - pocket costs paid by the beneficiary . since specialty tier - eligible drugs have high total drug costs , beneficiaries will typically reach the coverage gap within 3 months in the same calendar year . second , during the coverage gap , beneficiaries typically pay 100 percent of their total drug costs until they reach the catastrophic coverage threshold . this threshold ( $4,350 in out - of - pocket costs ) includes costs paid by the beneficiary during the initial coverage period . therefore , beneficiaries who paid higher out - of - pocket costs in the initial coverage period had less to pay in the coverage gap before they reached the threshold . conversely , beneficiaries who paid lower out - of - pocket costs in the initial coverage period had more to pay in the coverage gap before they reached the same threshold of $4,350 in out - of - pocket costs . third , after reaching the threshold , beneficiaries' out - of - pocket costs become similar because they typically pay 5 percent of the drug's negotiated price for the remainder of the calendar year . for most beneficiaries — those who are responsible for paying the full cost - sharing amounts required by their plans — variations in negotiated drug prices affect out - of - pocket costs during the initial coverage phase if their plans require them to pay coinsurance . all 35 of our selected plans required beneficiaries to pay coinsurance in 2009 for at least some of the 20 specialty tier - eligible drugs in our sample . additionally , negotiated drug prices will affect these beneficiaries' out - of - pocket costs during the coverage gap and the catastrophic coverage phase because beneficiaries generally pay the entire negotiated price of a drug during the coverage gap and pay 5 percent of a drug's negotiated price during the catastrophic coverage phase . as the following examples illustrate , there are variations in negotiated prices between drugs , across plans for the same drug , and from year to year . variations between drugs: in 2009 — across our sample of 35 plans — beneficiaries who took the cancer drug gleevec for the entire year could have been expected to pay about $6,300 out of pocket because gleevec had an average negotiated price of about $45,500 per year , while beneficiaries could have been expected to pay about $10,500 out of pocket over the entire year if they took the gaucher disease drug zavesca , which had an average negotiated price of about $130,000 per year .