records for the same patient are not matched . when medical records for the same patient are not matched ( known as a “false negative” ) , it can affect patient care . for example , providers may not have access to a relevant part of the patient's medical history — such as current allergies or prior diagnostic test results — which could help them avoid adverse events and also provide more efficient care , such as by not repeating laboratory tests already conducted . onc leads federal efforts to promote interoperability , including setting requirements for the information that ehrs and other health it systems should collect . onc developed certification criteria for ehrs and other health it systems that include the ability for health it systems to capture and exchange various types of information , including clinical data such as information on patients' allergies , as well as the patient's name , sex , and date of birth . onc also compiles an interoperability standards advisory , which suggests certain standards that developers should incorporate into their products . all seven provider representatives we interviewed described manual matching as one of the ways that they match patient records when exchanging health information with other providers . with manual matching , an individual reviews a medical record in order to match it to the correct patient . for example , an outpatient practice representative said that to match records that the practice receives by fax , a staff member must manually review information such as name and dob to identify the correct patient and add the new information to the correct patient's electronic record . all of the provider representatives we interviewed told us that they receive health records from other providers by fax . several stakeholders told us they have worked to improve the consistency with which they record and format demographic data in their ehrs . according to onc officials and hospital representatives , as well as other stakeholders with whom we spoke , implementing common standards for how certain demographic data should be formatted — such as names and addresses — could improve the consistency of data across providers and thus make it easier to match records . representatives from four hospitals told us that they collaborated with other providers in their regions to implement common standards for recording patients' demographic data . they told us the following: in 2017 , 23 providers in texas reached agreement on , and then implemented , standards for how staff should record patients' names , addresses , and other data in order to improve record matching and facilitate health information exchange . stakeholders we spoke with said more could be done to improve the ability to accurately match patients' medical records . the stakeholders identified several efforts that could improve matching , and had varying views on the roles onc and others should play in these efforts . among the examples of efforts stakeholders identified that could improve matching were implementing common standards for demographic data ; developing a data set to test the accuracy of matching methods ; sharing best practices and other resources ; implementing a national unique patient identifier ; and developing a public - private collaboration effort to improve patient record matching .