we did not make recommendations to dod . dod response and actions dod partially concurred with conducting an analysis on the impact of lower annual funding levels and concurred with assessing the supply chain and transportation network . dod agreed with gao's observations . to assess the program's ongoing development and testing we reviewed the status of software development and integration and contractor management improvement initiatives . we also interviewed officials from the program office , prime contractor , and the defense contract management agency ( dcma ) to discuss current development status and software releases . in addition , we compared management objectives to progress made on these objectives during the year . we obtained and analyzed data on flights and test points , both planned and accomplished during 2013 . we compared test progress against the total program plans to complete . we also reviewed the director , operational test and evaluation's annual f - 35 assessment . dod concurred with our recommendation . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the air force , army , and navy ; the commandant of the marine corps ; and the director of the office of management and budget . the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . alis is being developed and fielded in increments . in 2013 , the program had to release an update to the first increment because problems were discovered after the increment was released to the testing locations . the additional time to develop and field this update will likely delay the delivery of future increments . the program completed site activation of alis systems at some training and testing locations , and is in the process of adding capabilities and maturing alis in a second increment to support the marine corps' initial operational capability . dot&e notes that , although the second increment is scheduled to be delivered in time to support the marine corps' initial operational capability , there is no margin for error in the development schedule . testing of this alis increment is about two months behind largely due to a lack of test facilities . program officials note that they are in the process of adding facilities . the third , and final , increment of alis that provides full capability is not expected to be released until 2016 . the f - 35 program's high projected annual acquisition funding levels continue to put the program's long - term affordability at risk . currently the acquisition program requires $12.6 billion per year through 2037 , which does not appear to be achievable given the current fiscal environment . the program is reducing unit costs to meet targets , but a significant amount of additional cost reduction is needed if it expects to meet those targets before the beginning of full rate production — currently scheduled for 2019 . additionally , the most recent life - cycle sustainment cost estimate for the f - 35 fleet is more than $1 trillion , which dod officials have deemed unaffordable .