, companies wholly owned by the government ) . such comparisons are generally not feasible because data for assessing performance are typically unavailable for the time before commercialization , or the measures have changed in the years following commercialization . ensure the transparency and availability of all financial data used to determine the basis for charges . what are some key lessons learned about the commercialization of air navigation services ? to address these questions , we reviewed the characteristics and performance of five commercialized ansps , which we selected as illustrative of similarities and differences in ownership , length of experience with commercialization , and size and scope of operations . these ansps — australia's airservices australia ; canada's nav canada ; germany's deutsche flugsicherung gmbh ( dfs ) ; new zealand's airways corporation of new zealand , ltd. ; and the united kingdom's ( uk ) national air traffic services , ltd. ( nats ) — were commercialized between 1987 and 2001 and have been operating since then as performance - based organizations . because we selected these ansps to illustrate certain characteristics , our results cannot be generalized to all commercialized ansps . a performance - based organization develops strategies , goals , and measures and gathers and reports data to demonstrate its performance . the five ansps that we reviewed have been gathering and reporting data since commercialization , but their predecessor organizations did not necessarily gather or publicly report comparable data . consequently , assessments of each ansp's performance since commercialization are possible , but comparisons of performance before and after commercialization are generally not feasible . additionally , opportunities for comparing performance across commercialized ansps are limited to the extent that the ansps define their measures of safety , cost , and performance differently . we determined that the financial and safety data from each country were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . for additional information on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . we performed our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards from august 2004 through july 2005 . before commercialization , air navigation services under government control faced increasing strains . many were underfunded , as evidenced by freezes on air traffic controllers' wages and insufficient funds to replace aging technologies . technology replacement programs often cost more , took longer , and delivered less than promised , and stakeholders complained about performance and customer service . in some instances , the country as a whole faced widespread fiscal problems and the commercialization of air navigation services was simply part of a larger movement to reform government enterprises . for instance , the new zealand government established 14 state - owned enterprises in 1987 , including air navigation services , rail services , and postal services . the government also reformed electricity as a state - owned enterprise in 1994 and telecommunications in 2004 . although fiscal problems often drove the commercialization of air navigation services , commercialization was generally intended not only to relieve the government of a fiscal responsibility but also to free the ansp from some governmental constraints .