these comments are reprinted in appendix i . we also obtained oral comments on our draft report from groups representing esrd patients , large and small dialysis organizations , and nephrologists . the bundled payment will be expanded further in 2014 . prior to 2011 , medicare's bundled payment covered dialysis treatment and certain associated items and services under part b . this bundled payment did not cover all dialysis - related items and services . specifically , medicare paid separately under part b for injectable esrd drugs . in addition , for beneficiaries who were enrolled in medicare part d pdps , medicare covered oral esrd drugs under part d. for 2011 through 2013 , the bundled payment for dialysis care was expanded to cover , under part b , additional dialysis - related items and services such as injectable esrd drugs and oral esrd drugs with injectable equivalents . medicare continues to cover oral - only esrd drugs under part d. beginning in 2014 , the bundled payment will be expanded again — this time to include coverage for oral - only esrd drugs . as a result , medicare will begin paying for these drugs with the bundled payment under part b rather than covering them under part d. ( see fig . 1 for a summary of changes over time in medicare's payment methods for dialysis and related items and services. ) in response to a provision in the balanced budget act of 1997 , which required cms to develop a method to measure and report on the quality of dialysis care provided under the medicare program , cms developed the esrd clinical performance measures ( cpm ) project . through the cpm project , cms develops quality measures for monitoring various aspects of dialysis care and collects data to support these quality measures . cms emphasized that all of these data collection vehicles include clinical indicators on mineral and bone metabolism . cms also provided an updated schedule for national crownweb implementation and noted that data validity and reliability issues will be addressed over this period . cms also provided technical comments which we incorporated as appropriate . in their oral comments to us regarding our draft report , representatives from the american association of kidney patients ( aakp ) , the american kidney fund ( akf ) , the kidney care council ( kcc ) , the national renal administrators association ( nraa ) , and the renal physicians association ( rpa ) generally agreed with our message and recommendations to cms . the representatives generally noted that our draft report was well - written and balanced and that they appreciated that we collected data and perspectives from a variety of organizations . the groups also underscored our findings related to dialysis organizations' ability to provide oral - only esrd drugs . specifically , representatives from all of the groups reiterated some of the possible challenges we described in our draft report related to providing these drugs , including the complexity of complying with state pharmacy licensure requirements , the potential for fragmentation of care , and the potential influence of the payment change on physician prescribing behaviors for oral - only esrd drugs .