pub . 112-96 , ยง 3007 ( d ) , 126 stat . in addition , the act directed the medicare payment advisory commission to study medicare ambulance payments , including the appropriateness and effects of the add - on payments , and provide recommendations for reforming the ambulance fee schedule , as appropriate . pub . 112-96 , ยง 3007 ( e ) , 126 stat . to examine 2010 ground ambulance providers' costs for transports , in april 2012 , we sent a web - based survey to a random sample of 294 eligible ambulance providers to collect data on their costs , revenues , transports , and organizational characteristics in 2010 . we received completed surveys from 154 providers , for a response rate of 52 percent . our sample was based on our 2007 report's sampling frame , which was representative of all ground ambulance providers that billed medicare in 2003 . because we found previously that cost data from ambulance providers that shared operational costs with other services , such as those provided by fire departments or air ambulance services , were unreliable , we excluded these providers from our current sample , as was done in the 2007 report ; however , unlike the sample for the 2007 report , we also excluded providers that shared operational costs with a hospital . therefore , our sample is representative of the population of approximately 2,900 ground ambulance providers that billed medicare in 2003 and in 2010 , were still operational in 2012 , and did not share costs with nonambulance services or air ambulance services ( an estimated 26 percent of the ambulance industry in 2010 ) . we selected these providers because they do not have to estimate costs across multiple business lines and represent mature organizations , void of potentially expensive start - up costs . using the survey data , we calculated providers' costs per transport and examined how costs per transport varied across providers . we also determined which of the following cost components most contributed to providers' total cost , as well as to increases in total cost: personnel ; vehicle ; fuel ; medical supplies , equipment , and communications ; building or facility ; overhead and administration ; or other . we performed a regression analysis to investigate the relationship between providers' total cost and characteristics such as service area ( urban , rural , or super - rural ) , volume of transports , mix and intensity of medicare transports , level of government subsidies received , use of volunteer staff , and type of ownership . we divided predicted total cost by total transports to derive cost per transport . to ensure the reliability of the survey data , we incorporated internal data checks in the survey instrument , contacted providers that submitted inconsistent or incomplete data , and excluded three providers with reported costs per transport that were more than three standard deviations from the mean of the lognormal distribution for survey respondents . using medicare claims data for all survey recipients , we were able to test for potential nonresponse bias for the characteristics contained in the claims data .