whistleblower disclosures . estimated termination rates among employees who filed whistleblower disclosures from fiscal years 2014 to 2018 were higher than termination rates among all federal employees . this applies to both probationary and permanent employees . specifically , estimated termination rates for probationary employees who filed were higher than estimated termination rates for permanent employees who filed . for example , as shown in table 1 , in fiscal year 2018: the lowest estimated rate ( minimum ) of termination among probationary employees who filed whistleblower disclosures was 10.1 percent , compared to the overall 1.1 percent termination rate for all probationary employees . the lowest estimated rate ( minimum ) of termination among permanent employees who filed whistleblower disclosures was 2.9 percent , compared to the overall 0.3 percent termination rate for all permanent employees . taking unmatched complaints into account , we estimated that the termination rate for probationary employees who filed whistleblower disclosures could be any percentage from 10.1 to 46.9 percent . taking unmatched complaints into account , we estimated that the termination rate for permanent employees who filed whistleblower disclosures could be any percentage from 2.9 to 5.2 percent . the minimum estimated termination rate for probationary employees ( 10.1 percent ) who filed whistleblower disclosures exceeds the maximum estimated rate for permanent employees who filed whistleblower disclosures ( 5.2 percent ) . whistleblower retaliation complaints . we found that the lowest possible rates ( minimums ) of termination for employees who filed whistleblower retaliation complaints were higher than termination rates among all federal employees , both for probationary and permanent employees . specifically , estimated termination rates for probationary employees who filed were higher than estimated termination rates for permanent employees who filed . for example , as shown in table 2 , in fiscal year 2018: the lowest estimated rate ( minimum ) of termination for probationary employees who filed retaliation complaints was 17.4 percent , compared to the overall 1.1 percent termination rate for all probationary employees . the lowest estimated rate ( minimum ) of termination for permanent employees who filed retaliation complaints was 5.5 percent , compared to the overall 0.3 percent termination rate for all permanent employees . taking unmatched complaints into account , we estimated that the termination rate for probationary employees who filed whistleblower retaliation complaints could be any percentage from 17.4 to 69.4 percent . taking unmatched complaints into account , we estimated that the termination rate for permanent employees who filed retaliation complaints could be any percentage from 5.5 to 9.9 percent . the minimum estimated termination rate for probationary employees who filed retaliation complaints ( 17.4 percent ) exceeds the maximum estimated rate for permanent employees who filed retaliation complaints ( 9.9 percent ) . both whistleblower disclosures and retaliation complaints . for the category of employees who filed both whistleblower disclosures and retaliation complaints , termination rates were higher than termination rates among all federal employees , both for probationary and permanent employees . specifically , estimated termination rates for probationary employees who filed were higher than estimated termination rates for permanent employees who filed .