treatment . to mitigate these limitations , the army included a primary and alternate evacuation protocol in its standardized operating procedures , to help ensure that servicemembers who are sexually assaulted during deployment have access to care . dod has established policies and procedures for its sexual assault prevention and response program that address , among other things , the provision of medical and mental health care for servicemembers who are sexually assaulted . specifically , in october 2005 dod published a directive that contains its comprehensive policy for the prevention of and response to sexual assault . while generally applicable to all servicemembers and locations , dod's directive calls for the sexual assault prevention and response program to be gender - responsive , culturally competent , and recovery - oriented ; and for an immediate , trained sexual assault response capability to be available in deployed locations . for example , dod requires care for sexual assault victims to be linguistically appropriate ; sensitive to gender - specific issues such as pregnancy ; and supportive of a victim's ability to be fully mission - capable and engaged . in june 2006 , dod's office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness issued an instruction that provides guidance for implementing its policy and specifies roles , responsibilities , and required training for program personnel such as health care providers who may be for example , dod's involved in responding to victims of sexual assault . instruction identifies various types of health care providers who , depending on their training , may be eligible to conduct sexual assault forensic examinations ; and directs the military services to establish a multi - disciplinary case management group and include provisions for continuity of victim care when a victim has a temporary or permanent change of station , or is deployed . additionally , dod's instruction identifies required categories of training for program personnel on topics that include victim advocacy and medical treatment resources , sexual assault response policies , and the sexual assault examination process . department of defense instruction 6495.02 , sexual assault prevention and response program procedures ( june 23 , 2006 ) . although dod issued this overarching instruction that provides guidance for implementing its sexual assault prevention and response policies to personnel such as health care providers , we found that the office of the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs — the organization responsible for ensuring the effective execution of the department's medical mission — has not , in turn , developed more specified guidance to address the military services' responsibility to provide specialized medical and mental health care to victims of sexual assault . according to dod directive 5136.01 , the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs is required to , among other things , exercise authority , direction , and control over dod medical policy , and to establish policies , procedures , and standards that govern the management of dod health and medical programs .