gao - 09-865 . washington , d.c.: september 17 , 2009 . depot maintenance: actions needed to identify and establish core capability at military depots . gao - 09-83 . washington , d.c.: may 14 , 2009 . the organizations we interviewed are listed in table 4 . and ( 2 ) to what extent does the air force's depot maintenance strategic plan address ousd ( at&l ) 's direction that was designed to provide a framework for the services to meet future challenges ? we are issuing a separate report on the navy depot maintenance strategic plan . the related gao products section at the end of the report lists additional publications on related topics . we used the same set of methodological procedures to answer both questions , and each type of procedure was performed simultaneously for the two questions . specifically , we reviewed the air force's depot maintenance strategic plan , which is composed of the strategy and master plan . we evaluated the air force's plan using qualitative content analyses to compare information in it against criteria from the seven elements of a results - oriented management framework and the 10 issues listed in the ousd ( at&l ) direction for depot maintenance strategic plans . to conduct these analyses , we first developed a data collection instrument that incorporated these two types of criteria . one team member then analyzed the plan using this instrument . to verify preliminary observations from this initial analysis , a second team member concurrently conducted an independent analysis of the plan . we compared the two sets of observations and discussed any differences . we reconciled the differences with the assistance of analysts from the team that was evaluating the navy depot maintenance strategic plan . we met with air force officials to confirm our understanding of the plan and sought additional information where our preliminary analyses revealed that the plan partially addresses or does not address criteria . we also interviewed and obtained documentary evidence from relevant ousd ( at&l ) officials on its oversight of the services' plans . additionally , we interviewed depot leaders and strategic planning personnel during site visits at two of the three air force depots to obtain first - hand information on issues the depots face . we also obtained data on workload and personnel from the air force and determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for our report . more detailed information on our scope and methodology is provided in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from july 2009 through may 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based of our audit objectives . depot maintenance is the materiel maintenance or repair requiring overhauling , upgrading , or rebuilding of parts , assemblies , or subassemblies , and the testing and reclamation of equipment , regardless of the source of funds for the maintenance or repair or the location at which the maintenance or repair is performed .