however , this has not always been the case . in order to manage unserviceable assets and minimize carryover , the depots took a number of actions on a daily , weekly , monthly , and quarterly basis . for example , on a daily basis , ( 1 ) programs were reviewed for asset availability and ( 2 ) if it was determined that there was a shortage of assets , the item manager was notified . on a weekly basis , schedules were adjusted based on requirements and asset availability . because of the lack of parts , the work did not begin until july 2007 which resulted in more carryover than originally planned . about $5.4 million of the $5.6 million carried over from fiscal year 2007 into fiscal year 2008 . because of the global war on terrorism and the surge in production of the m2s , anniston had problems with obtaining parts to overhaul the machine guns since 2004 . because the depot could not get the needed parts from dla or army supply , it used parts from other m2 machine guns . some of these parts included the barrels , buffer body assemble , bolt , barrel extensions , breech locks , and receivers . since the depot used parts from these 1,200 machine guns to repair machine guns in previous years , these 1,200 machine guns were missing parts . the funds were then reobligated within the next 2 weeks . the action directed by the army materiel command artificially lowered the reported carryover balances for army's industrial operations and more specifically the army depot maintenance activities in fiscal year 2006 . as discussed previously , congressional decision makers receive an aggregated report on carryover balances that covers the army's industrial operations activities . we have previously reported on a similar year - end deobligation problem related to navy research and development activities . in response to our recommendation on this issue , ousd ( comptroller ) issued guidance on july 28 , 2003 , to the military services and dod components prohibiting the manipulation of customer order balances in an attempt to reduce reported carryover . the guidance directed components to conduct internal reviews of accounting procedures currently in use , to include year - end adjustments , to ensure that this type of manipulation of carryover levels is not occurring . for fiscal year 2007 , ousd ( comptroller ) approved about $299.7 million in additional exemptions from the carryover calculations that were not excluded in previous years . without the exemptions , the depots would have exceeded the carryover ceiling by $251.2 million . when large differences occurred between budgeted and reported actual new orders , we met with army headquarters officials to determine the reasons for these differences . second , we identified orders received by the depots late in the fiscal year to determine if these orders were contributing to the carryover . third , we analyzed reports and data files that provide information on the status of production work at the depots to determine if there were parts shortages resulting in carryover .