interoperability . key systems and technologies of different agencies need to be compatible with each other for cross - agency collaboration . five agencies reported that lack of interoperability was a great or very great hindrance , and 13 reported somewhat of a hindrance or a moderate hindrance . infrastructure considerations . six agencies reported facing a great or very great hindrance in readying their it infrastructure for encryption and 11 reported this was somewhat of a hindrance or a moderate hindrance . table 6 summarizes the number of agencies reporting the extent to which 10 conditions affect their agency's ability to implement encryption . although agencies reported facing hindrances to implementing encryption , a new program ( gsa smartbuy specific to encryption products ) established after we started our review , offers agencies options to overcome key hindrances . for example , prohibitive costs and acquiring fips - compliant products are two hindrances that agencies may be able to address through smartbuy . as discussed in appendix iv , discounted pricing is available for data - at - rest encryption software . in addition , all products available through smartbuy use cryptographic modules validated under fips 140-2 security requirements . to help agencies comply with omb requirements for encrypting information on mobile devices , a governmentwide acquisition vehicle was established for encryption products for stored data . through a governmentwide program known as smartbuy ( software managed and acquired on the right terms ) , agencies can procure encryption software at discounted prices . according to the general services administration ( gsa ) , smartbuy is a federal government procurement vehicle designed to promote effective enterprise - level software management . by leveraging the government's immense buying power , smartbuy could save taxpayers millions of dollars through governmentwide aggregate buying of commercial off - the - shelf software products . smartbuy officially began in 2003 , when omb issued a memo emphasizing the need to reduce costs and improve quality in federal purchases of commercial software . the memo designates gsa as the executive agent to lead the interagency initiative in negotiating governmentwide enterprise licenses for software . smartbuy establishes strategic enterprise agreements with software publishers ( or resellers ) via blanket purchase agreements . omb memorandum 04-08 , maximizing use of smartbuy and avoiding duplication of agency activities with the president's 24 e - gov initiatives , requires agencies to review smartbuy contracts to determine whether they satisfy agency needs — such as for products to encrypt stored data — and , absent a compelling justification for doing otherwise , acquire their software requirements from the smartbuy program . the issuance of omb's may 2006 recommendation to encrypt mobile devices contributed to the addition of 11 smartbuy agreements for stored data encryption products established in june 2007 . the products offered fall into one of three software and hardware encryption product categories: full disk encryption , file encryption , or integrated full disk / file encryption products . all products use cryptographic modules validated under fips 140-2 security requirements . volume discounts on encryption products are available when purchasing in tiers of 10,000 , 33,000 , and 100,000 users .