it management . dhs has updated its approach for managing its portfolios of it investments across all components . as part of the revised approach , the department is using its capital planning and investment control process and the joint requirements council to assess it investments across the department on an ongoing basis . for example , as part of its capital planning process for the fiscal year 2020 budget , the office of the chief information officer worked with the components to assess each major it investment to ensure alignment with dhs's functional portfolios , and to identify opportunities to share capabilities across components . this updated approach should enable dhs to identify potentially duplicative investments and opportunities for consolidating investments , as well as reduce component - specific investments . additionally , dhs has continued to take steps to enhance its information security program . in november 2018 , the department's financial statement auditor reported that dhs had made progress in correcting its prior year it security weaknesses . however , for the 15th consecutive year , the auditor designated deficiencies in it systems controls as a material weakness for financial reporting purposes . work also remains in implementing our six open recommendations concerning dhs's cybersecurity workforce assessment requirements . dhs also faces challenges in fulfilling its pivotal role in government - wide cybersecurity efforts , as identified in our ensuring the cybersecurity of the nation high - risk area . dhs has established the national cybersecurity and communications integration center , which functions as the 24 / 7 cyber monitoring , incident response , and management center for the federal civilian government . however , dhs has continued to be challenged in measuring how the center is performing its functions in accordance with mandated implementing principles . financial management . dhs received a clean audit opinion on its financial statements for 6 consecutive years — fiscal years 2013 to 2018 . however , in fiscal year 2018 , its auditor reported two material weaknesses in the areas of financial reporting and information technology controls and financial systems , as well as instances of non - compliance with laws and regulations . these deficiencies hamper dhs's ability to provide reasonable assurance that its financial reporting is reliable and the department is in compliance with applicable laws and regulations . further , dhs components' financial management systems and business processes need to be modernized ; the current systems affect the department's ability to have ready access to reliable information for informed decision - making . as we reported in 2017 , dhs officials have faced various challenges in their efforts to address this — lack of sufficient resources , aggressive schedule , complex requirements , and increased costs . effectively modernizing financial management systems for the coast guard , federal emergency management agency , and immigration and customs enforcement would help address dhs's risk in this area . human capital management . more detailed information on the scope and methodology of our prior work can be found within each specific report . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .