nasa guidance does not allow rollover . allowing contractors an opportunity to obtain previously unearned fees reduces the motivation of the incentive in the original award fee period . in almost all of the 50 dod contracts we reviewed , rollover is now the exception and not the rule . while in 2005 we found that 52 percent of all dod programs rolled over fee , only 4 percent of the programs in our sample continue this practice . we reviewed active contracts from our 2005 sample and found that eliminating rollover will save dod more than an estimated $450 million on 8 programs from april 2006 through october 2010 . however , with the exception of nasa where rollover is not allowed , we found instances at each agency , where rollover was allowed , at times , for 100 percent of the unearned fee . linking fees to outcomes: omb's guidance indicates that award fees should be used to achieve specific performance objectives established prior to contract award , such as delivering products and services on time , within cost , and with promised performance ; and must be tied to demonstrated results , as opposed to effort . contracting officers and program managers across all five agencies said award fee contracts could benefit from objective targets that equate to a specific amount of the fee . while the combination of award fee contracts which evaluate subjective criteria and incentive contracts which evaluate objective targets was the preferred approach of several officials , there is no guidance on how to balance or combine these contract types . the effective use of subjective criteria requires that they be accompanied by definitions and measurements of their own to ensure they are linked to outcomes rather than processes or efforts . dod's joint strike fighter is one program that has incorporated more discrete criteria . more detailed information on our scope and methodology appears in our 2009 report . in december 2007 , the omb office of federal procurement policy issued guidance to chief acquisition officers and senior procurement executives to review and update their acquisition policies on the appropriate use of incentive fee contracts , which include award fee contracts . the guidance highlighted preferred practices including: ( 1 ) linking award fees to acquisition outcomes , such as cost , schedule , and performance results ; ( 2 ) limiting the use of rollover to exceptional circumstances defined by agency policies ; ( 3 ) designing evaluation factors that motivate excellent contractor performance by making clear distinctions between satisfactory and excellent performance ; and ( 4 ) prohibiting payments for contractor performance that is judged to be unsatisfactory or does not meet the basic requirements of the contract . further , omb asked agencies to obtain and share practices in using award fees through an existing web - based resource . the omb guidance was developed based on award fee problems that had been identified by gao and which dod and nasa had begun to address .