conveyance . if the foreclosure process is completed and no third party purchases the home at the foreclosure sale , the home usually becomes the property of the servicer . servicers convey these properties to fha , which sells them out of its reo inventory . during the default and foreclosure process , servicers must meet two fha time requirements . the first requires servicers to initiate a foreclosure ( first legal action ) or utilize a loss mitigation option within 6 months of borrower default . the second requirement , for the “reasonable diligence” period , requires servicers to obtain good and marketable title and possession of a property within a specified time frame that varies by state . the servicer secures the property and obtains possession once the property is vacant . servicers are subject to financial penalties for missing these deadlines . in both cases , servicers must curtail the debenture interest that they otherwise would be entitled to collect from the date of the missed time frame . servicers are responsible for maintaining vacant foreclosed properties in accordance with fha requirements , which specify allowable reimbursable amounts to preserve and protect the property . a servicer needing additional funds to complete the required maintenance must submit an “overallowable” request to fha . when a servicer forecloses on a property with an fha - insured mortgage and the property is not sold to a third party through cwcot , the property is held in the servicer's name until the servicer conveys the title to fha . as seen in figure 1 , these properties span a range of home types and ages . fha requires servicers to preserve and protect the property and ensure it meets fha's conveyance condition standards before conveying title . fha's preservation and protection requirements include a number of specific steps for securing , maintaining , and repairing properties and documenting property conditions . fha reimburses the servicer for up to $5,000 per property for required work , and the servicer may request overallowable funds if needed . fha's conveyance condition standards are broader requirements , including that a property be undamaged by natural disaster and in “broom swept” condition , have all damage covered by hazard insurance repaired , and be undamaged by the servicer's failure to properly secure or maintain the property . hud regulations state that the servicer must obtain good and marketable title and convey the property to hud within 30 days of the date on which the servicer filed the foreclosure deed for record or certain other key dates , whichever is later . the servicer noted that while fha provides training on other aspects of its program , including loss mitigation , it does not do so for the conveyance process or submitting claims . limited direction on photographic evidence . fha's policies and procedures provide instructions for servicers and contractors on how to document property conditions , but contain limited direction on photographic evidence . servicers must thoroughly document the condition of the property when they first obtain possession so that fha does not hold them responsible for damage caused by the borrower . servicers also must take before and after pictures of any work they do on the property .