( app . ii provides a description of the hypothetical groups and the premium quotes we obtained within these localities. ) for example , see the following . we also selected three states where premiums can vary to different degrees by health , along with other factors . florida amended its rating system in july 2000 to permit limited variation in premiums for health status . california and texas have rating bands that allow premiums to vary for health and other factors . within each state , we obtained quotes for a selected city — specifically , ( 1 ) albany , new york , ( 2 ) baltimore , maryland , ( 3 ) sacramento , california , ( 4 ) orlando , florida , and ( 5 ) austin , texas . we asked that agents associated with nahu solicit quotes from the three to five major insurers active in each locality's small group market . specifically , based on their expertise , agents solicited quotes for the most popular and actively marketed benefit packages from these insurers . appendix i provides more detailed information on our methodology . we performed our work from april 2000 through october 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . small employers with fewer than 50 employees represent more than three - fourths of all u.s. private establishments and employ nearly one - third of the private sector workforce . ( see fig . however , small employers are less likely than large employers to offer health insurance to their employees . in 1998 , whereas 96 percent of employers with 50 or more employees offered health insurance , 71 percent of employers with 10 to 49 employees provided coverage and only about 36 percent of employers with fewer than 10 workers offered health benefits to their employees.the primary reason small employers cited for not offering coverage was cost . during the early 1990s , concern about small employers' access to health insurance and the affordability of providing coverage to their employees led most states to adopt small group insurance market reforms . while the extent and scope of reforms varied across states , most states included reforms guaranteeing that small employers seeking coverage would be accepted for at least certain plans offered by insurers ( known as guaranteed issue ) ; guarantees that small employers could renew health insurance even if they had high claims except under certain circumstances , such as the failure to pay premiums ( guaranteed renewal ) ; limits on how long insurers could deny coverage for medical conditions individuals had at the time they obtained coverage ( limits on preexisting condition exclusions ) ; and limits on the variation allowed in premiums . states regulate insurance products sold within their borders , but their laws do not affect all employers . the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) generally preempts states from directly regulating employer - sponsored health plans . thus , employers that assume the risk for , or “self - fund,” their employees' health benefits are largely exempt from state regulation , including premium taxes and mandated benefits .