only one program references the other . our review found the schedule profiles in the budget exhibits were generally provided but sometimes did not provide a detailed display of major program milestones such as engineering milestones , acquisition approvals , or test and evaluation events . develops more specific guidance for budget exhibits to ensure that they are accurate , consistent , clear , and complete , and enforce a disciplined process for ensuring proper reporting of program progress and planned efforts . congress may wish to have dod's comptroller work with relevant committees to reach agreement on how to revise budget exhibits and the program element code structure to meet congressional oversight needs as well as serve the needs of dod . in these discussions , consideration could be given to: the value and cost of modifying or replacing the current pe code structure so that it more readily informs congress as to the nature of the r&d effort for systems in development as well as fielded systems and systems approved for production . the best means to inform congress of the state of development of the requested effort as it progresses toward production . pe codes have 10 positions . in general , each position conveys information , as seen in figure 1 . the first and second positions of the pe code illustrated above define the major force program ( mfp ) , which contain the resources necessary to achieve a broad objective or plan . in figure 1 , for example , the “06” in the first positions indicate this is a research and development effort . dod has not identified any proposed actions to correct this misidentification . dod partially concurred with our second recommendation and will place greater emphasis on proper reporting of program progress and planned efforts as reported in its budget exhibits . however , dod took issue with developing a template , stating that it is doubtful any single template would be feasible or desirable given the complexity of the rdt&e activity . we believe more specific guidance is needed to ensure that dod is more effectively communicating the purpose for which funding is sought , the progress made with prior funding , as well as the other key funding justification information . we have modified the wording of the recommendation to remove the term “template.” we still believe that greater standardization is called for , but recognize that templates are but one means among many to achieve that end . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the air force , navy , army , and the commandant of the marine corps ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will provide copies to others on request . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . should you or any of your staff have any questions on matters discussed in this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-4841 or by e - mail at sullivanm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .