reg . 38387. previously evaluated for reallocation , and in 2001 , we reported that at the time adequate information was not currently available to fully identify and address the uncertainties and risks of reallocation . industry stakeholders , including wireless service providers , representatives of an industry association , and a think tank representative we contacted in 2011 expressed concerns over the usefulness of the spectrum identified by ntia in the fast track evaluation , since most of the spectrum identified ( 100 of the 115 mhz ) is outside the range considered to have the best propagation characteristics for mobile broadband . overall , there has been limited interest in the bands above 3 ghz for mobile broadband use because , according to industry stakeholders , there has been minimal development of mobile broadband in bands above 3 ghz and no foreseeable advances in this area at this time . according to industry representatives , the 1755 – 1780 mhz band that ntia considered as part of the fast track evaluation has the best characteristics for mobile broadband use , and it is internationally harmonized for this use . ntia did not select this band to be made available in the 5-year time frame due to the large number of federal users currently operating there . however , ntia identified it as the first band to be analyzed under the 10-year plan to determine if it can be made available for commercial broadband use . an industry stakeholder has stated that the 1695 – 1710 mhz band identified by ntia in the fast track evaluation is the second - best alternative for wireless broadband if the 1755 – 1780 mhz band were not made available ; however , the 1695 – 1710 mhz band is not currently used internationally for wireless broadband , which may reduce device manufacturers' incentive for developing technology that can be used in these frequencies . while federal spectrum users often share spectrum among themselves , they may have little economic incentive to otherwise use spectrum efficiently , including sharing it with nonfederal users . from an economic perspective , when a consumer pays the market price for a good or service and thus cannot get more of it without this expense , the consumer has an incentive to get the most value and efficiency out of the good as possible . if no price is attached to a good — which is essentially the case with federal agencies' use of spectrum — the normal market incentive to use the good efficiently may be muted . in the case of federal spectrum users , obtaining new spectrum assignments may be difficult , so an agency may have an incentive to conserve and use the spectrum it currently has assigned to it or currently shares efficiently , but the extent of that incentive is likely weaker than if the agency had had to pay a market price for the all of their spectrum needs . as such , federal spectrum users do not fully face a market incentive to conserve on their use of spectrum or use it in an efficient manner .