ft . some service officials expressed concern because they do not have enough room for the new machine in processing plants , and there are only a few plants that will be able to accommodate the equipment . the service is working to expand mechanization and improve productivity in order to reduce workhours in the methods employed to move mail between operations , prepare mail for processing , and load and unload mail from trucks , known as material handling . however , cost concerns limit the effectiveness of these initiatives . the service has deployed various systems to move trays of mail throughout its processing plants , including the low cost tray sorter , the tray management system , and a prototype of the universal transport system . between fiscal year 2000 and 2003 , the service reduced its material handling workhours in 244 processing plants by 11 million or 11 percent . however , the service recently announced that it was curtailing the deployment of the universal transport system because of low return on investment . to reduce material handling workhours and limit the amount of manual labor needed to move mail between operations , the service has deployed low cost tray sorters ( lcts ) , which are essentially conveyor belts used to move trays of mail between various operations . lcts will replace the current method of loading mail into handcarts , manually moving the handcarts between operations , and unloading the handcarts . according to the service , lctss are configured to the unique needs of each particular processing plant and are only justified and deployed on a site - specific basis . to date , the service has deployed the lcts in 160 plants ; however , the service has stated that additional site - by - site justifications are possible resulting in additional lcts deployments . figure 15 shows one version of the lcts . the service has also installed the tray management systems in a number of postal plants . the tray management systems is an automated system that manages and controls mail transport , staging , and retrieval of letter and flat mail trays throughout a plant on a conveyor belt system by scanning barcodes and directing the trays to mail processing equipment . the service initially planned on deploying 42 systems but temporarily suspended deployment because of capacity and reliability problems . in 1998 , the number of systems to be deployed was reduced to 23 sites costing $497.3 million . only three multistory plants have the tray management system . the service recently abandoned an effort to automate material handling due to low return on investment of its experimental universal transport system . this system was designed to expand the processing of product lines beyond that of traditional tray management systems , which only process letter and flat trays . instead , the universal transport system is a system that transports trays , bundles , packages , and sacks throughout a plant to enhance work processes and improve information flow . the service spent $27.3 million developing this system in a processing plant in fort myers , fl , over the past 5 years .