, are dutiable ) are not included in the programs . for example , just 1 percent of bangladesh's dutiable exports to the united states and 4 percent of pakistan's are eligible for gsp . although regional preference programs tend to have more generous coverage , they sometimes feature “caps” on the amount of imports that can enter duty - free , which may significantly limit market access . imports subject to caps under agoa include certain meat products , a large number of dairy products , many sugar products , chocolate , a range of prepared food products , certain tobacco products , and groundnuts ( peanuts ) , the latter being of particular importance to some african countries . a second , related , trade - off involves deciding which developing countries can enjoy particular preferential benefits . most of this growth in u.s. imports from preference countries has taken place since 2000 . this accelerated growth suggests an expansionary effect of increased product coverage and liberalized rules of origin for least - developed countries ( ldc ) under gsp in 1996 and for african countries under agoa in 2000 . gsp — the longest standing u.s. preference program — expires december 31 , 2009 , as do atpa benefits . at the same time , legislative proposals to provide additional , targeted benefits for the poorest countries are pending . preference programs entail a number of difficult policy trade - offs . for example , the programs are designed to offer duty - free access to the u.s. market to increase beneficiary trade , but only to the extent that access does not harm u.s. industries . u.s. preference programs provide duty - free treatment for over half of the 10,500 u.s. tariff lines , in addition to those that are already duty - free on a most favored nation basis . but they also exclude many other products from duty - free status , including some that developing countries are capable of producing and exporting . gao's analysis showed that notable gaps in preference program coverage remain , particularly in agricultural and apparel products . for 48 gsp - eligible countries , more than three - fourths of the value of u.s. imports that are subject to duties ( i.e. a few ldcs in asia are not included in the u.s. regional preference programs , although they are eligible for gsp - ldc benefits . two of these countries — bangladesh and cambodia — have become major exporters of apparel to the united states and have complained about the lack of duty - free access for their goods . african private - sector representatives have raised concerns that giving preferential access to bangladesh and cambodia for apparel might endanger the nascent african apparel export industry that has grown up under agoa . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in an effort to promote and achieve various u.s. foreign policy objectives , congress has expanded trade preference programs in number and scope over the past 3 decades . the purpose of these programs is to foster economic development through increased trade with qualified beneficiary countries while not harming u.s. domestic producers .