both the contractors and the program have contributed to these delays . in phase one , boeing and spacex identified risks in their designs and developed reports on potential hazards , the controls they put in place to mitigate them , and explanations for how the controls will mitigate the hazards . in phase two , which is ongoing , the program reviews and approves the contractors' hazard reports , and develops strategies to verify and validate that the controls are effective . in phase three , the contractors will conduct the verification activities and incrementally close the reports . the commercial crew program's review and approval of the contractors' hazard reports have taken longer than planned . the program originally planned to complete phase two in early 2016 but currently does not expect to complete this phase until june 2017 . the commercial crew program has a goal of reviewing hazard reports within 8 weeks of receiving them , but a recent report by the nasa office of inspector general found that the reviews are taking longer than anticipated and a backlog has developed . additional cracks were later identified . program officials told us that they have informed spacex that the cracks are an unacceptable risk for human spaceflight . spacex officials told us that they are working closely with nasa to eliminate these cracks in order to meet nasa's stringent targets for human rating . specifically , spacex has made design changes that , according to its officials , did not result in any cracking during initial life testing . finally , both the program and a nasa advisory group consider spacex's plan to fuel the launch vehicle after the astronauts are on board the spacecraft to be a potential safety risk . spacex's perspective is that this operation may be a lower risk to the crew ; nasa and spacex's risk evaluation is ongoing . nasa and spacex may also need to re - examine spacex's safety controls related to the fueling process if the investigation of the september 2016 falcon 9 mishap identifies issues with the fueling of the vehicle . at the time of our review , spacex also had other elements in its design that had not yet been completed and reviewed . spacex requested , and the program approved , proposals to split its critical design review into three reviews because portions of its design had not been ready at previous reviews . the critical design review is the time in a project's life cycle when the integrity of the product's design and its ability to meet mission requirements are assessed , and it is important that a project's design is stable enough to warrant continuation with design and fabrication . a stable design can minimize changes prior to fabrication , which can help avoid costly re - engineering and rework effort due to design changes . spacex's final planned design review was held in august 2016 ; however , the program reported that a number of outstanding areas , primarily related to ground systems , still needed to be reviewed . spacex officials told us these areas were reviewed in november 2016 .