( app . ii contains sba's comments on a draft of this report. ) gpra is intended to shift the focus of government decisionmaking , management , and accountability from activities and processes to the results and outcomes achieved by federal programs . new and valuable information on the plans , goals , and strategies of federal agencies has been provided since federal agencies began implementing gpra . under gpra , annual performance plans are to clearly inform the congress and the public of ( 1 ) the annual performance goals for agencies' major programs and activities , ( 2 ) the measures that will be used to gauge performance , ( 3 ) the strategies and resources required to achieve the performance goals , and ( 4 ) the procedures that will be used to verify and validate performance information . these annual plans , issued soon after the transmittal of the president's budget , provide a direct linkage between an agency's longer - term goals and mission and day - to - day activities . annual performance reports are to subsequently report on the degree to which performance goals were met . the issuance of the agencies' performance reports , due by march 31 , represents a new and potentially more substantive phase in the implementation of gpra — the opportunity to assess federal agencies' actual performance for the prior fiscal year and to consider what steps are needed to improve performance and reduce costs in the future . because of the lack of explanation in the plan and report regarding how these strategies relate to helping businesses succeed , we were unable to assess whether they are clear and reasonable . sba's performance plan does not generally categorize its human capital or information technology strategies by outcome , so we could not determine specifically how this outcome of helping businesses succeed is impacted by these strategies . however , in its plan , sba states that automation and asset sales will allow staff to shift their attention from the processing of transactions to using information to analyze programs , activities , and performance . sba states that it plans to continue to develop and deliver training in marketing and outreach , commercial credit analysis , lender oversight , and lender relations . additional strategies for human capital and information technology are discussed in the plan and reports as part of sba's overall internal goal of “improving sba management.” in its performance plan , sba provides a description of its use of interagency coordination as a strategy for this outcome . for example , sba states that it meets regularly with the commerce - directed trade promotion coordinating committee to discuss challenges , propose program initiatives , work on developing new products , and avoid duplication of effort . sba reported that it succeeded in meeting its fiscal year 2000 goal of providing timely service to disaster victims , yet we have concerns about the quality of sba's measures . for example , while sba's fiscal year 2000 performance report shows that it met its 3-day field presence measure , sba's ig determined that this measure has not consistently been applied by disaster area offices .