sam will be developed in phases . in each phase , capabilities from selected iae systems will be added to sam and those legacy systems will then be shut down . during the first iae stage , gsa worked to create a portfolio of governmentwide systems through an acquisition strategy known as “adopt , adapt , acquire.” gsa and omb officials surveyed various government stakeholders to develop an inventory of existing data systems and to identify additional data - related needs of the government . using this information , the ace directed gsa to adopt or adapt existing agency - specific systems for governmentwide use . for example , the central contractor registration ( ccr ) database , where contractors register certain business information prior to being considered for contract awards , was a department of defense ( dod ) system that iae adopted for governmentwide use in 2003 . gsa officials believed dod's system met the government's requirements , and adopting it was a better alternative than developing a new system . the federal procurement data system – next generation ( fpds - ng ) is an example of a system that iae adapted . fpds , the fpds - ng predecessor , was initially implemented in 1978 and in 2003 gsa hired a vendor to modernize the system . when no existing systems could be adopted or adapted for governmentwide use , iae's strategy was to acquire new systems from software developers . for example , gsa contracted with ibm in 2004 to develop and operate the online representations and certifications application ( orca ) database , for firms to submit certifications on matters such as firm size and ownership status . table 1 identifies the portfolio of systems that were included in the first stage of iae up through 2008 and whether each system was adopted , adapted , or acquired . shortly after iae was established , gsa and the ace created a funding structure in which agencies contribute to the program based on their level of contracting activity . gsa negotiated memorandums of understanding ( mou ) with the 24 departments and agencies covered by the chief financial officers act to collect funding contributions , which pay for the development , operations , and maintenance of iae's portfolio . when developing its annual budget , gsa estimates what the cost of operating iae will be and then determines each agency's contribution based on its contracting activity ( number and value of contracts ) the prior year . for example , dod is the largest agency in terms of the number and value of contracts awarded and therefore contributes the most , 65 percent of the total . the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 ( transparency act ) created new reporting requirements for federal loan and grant recipients that increased the use of certain iae systems . for example , to comply with the transparency act , omb required grant recipients to register in ccr . in 2008 , gsa negotiated separate mous with 22 departments and agencies for additional contributions to fund the higher costs associated with providing greater support to grant and loan recipients .