in some cases , the improvements have not been sustained . it was unable to provide decent , safe , and sanitary housing ; had poor internal controls ; was not complying with federal regulations ; and political influence was interfering with its ability to improve , according to hud officials . hud hired consultants to manage the housing authority and designated a hud official to act as the board of commissioners . what factors have influenced the decision to terminate some receiverships ? to address the objectives , we interviewed hud headquarters and field staff , housing authority officials , and the receivers themselves ; reviewed public housing laws , policies and procedures ; and reviewed documents concerning the impact of the receiverships on the housing authorities . for 8 of the authorities , we obtained and analyzed hud's performance scores during the periods before and after receivers were appointed ; these scores were unavailable for the other 7 authorities because their receivership predated hud's scoring system or for other reasons . while we report changes in hud's scores for these authorities , the small number of receiverships of each type preclude using the scores to statistically identify possible distinctions between administrative and judicial receiverships . further , we did not explore other factors that might have contributed to changes in scores . we performed our work from february 2002 through december 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . details about our methodology are in appendix i . under the housing act of 1937 , as amended , congress created the federal public housing program to help communities provide housing for low - income families . congress annually appropriates funds for the program and hud allocates them to public housing authorities ( pha ) . phas are typically created under state law , and a locally appointed board of commissioners approves their decisions . hud and the phas have an annual contributions contract — a written contract under which hud agrees to make payments to the pha and the pha agrees to administer the housing program in accordance with hud regulations and requirements . hud provides the housing authorities with several types of assistance including operating subsidies to cover the difference between rent payments and capital funds to improve the physical condition of properties and upgrade the management and operation of existing public housing developments ; and hope vi grants , on a competitive basis , to revitalize severely distressed public housing . these grants fund the capital costs of improvements such as major rehabilitation and new construction , the demolition of severely distressed public housing , and community and support services for residents . in fiscal year 2000 , hud began implementing the public housing assessment system ( phas ) to improve the department's ability to measure phas' performance . from 1991 until 2001 , hud had used the public housing management assessment program ( phmap ) to evaluate public housing authorities . both systems measure the same basic elements , but the earlier system is based on self - certified information from the housing authorities and does not include an independent physical inspection or input from the public housing residents — both integral parts of the new assessment system .