( see fig . the data we collected on jsf subcontracts show that by december 31 , 2003 , the prime contractors and their teammates had awarded over $14 billion in subcontracts for the development phase of the program . these subcontracts were for everything from the development of subsystems — such as radar , landing gear , and communications systems — to engine hardware , engineering services , machine tooling , and raw materials . the recipients of these contracts included suppliers in 16 foreign countries and the united states ; 73.9 percent of the subcontracts by dollar value went to u.s. companies and 24.2 percent went to companies in the united kingdom ( the largest foreign financial contributor to the jsf program ) . ( see appendix i for joint strike fighter partner financial contributions and estimated aircraft purchases and appendix ii for joint strike fighter system development and demonstration subcontract awards ) . finally , 2,597 of 4,488 subcontracts or purchase orders we obtained information on went to u.s. small businesses . although these businesses received only 2.1 percent of the total dollar value of the subcontracts awarded , dod and contractor officials have indicated that all companies in the development phase are in good position to receive production contracts , provided that cost and schedule goals are met . the gathering of these data , which most of the contractors have made available to the jsf program office and dcma , has increased the breadth of knowledge available to dod and the program office on the jsf supplier base . neither dod nor the jsf program office previously collected this information because , according to program officials , this information is not necessary in order to manage the program . at least one major subcontractor , on its own initiative , is now separately tracking jsf subcontracts on a monthly basis . while the jsf program office maintains more information on subcontractors than required by acquisition regulations , this information does not provide the program with a complete picture of the supplier base . the jsf program office collects and maintains data on subcontract awards for specific areas of interest — international suppliers and u.s. small businesses . the program office has used the award fee process to incentivize the prime contractors to report on both small business awards through the third tier and subcontract opportunities and awards to international suppliers . in addition , the program office has some visibility over certain subcontracts through mechanisms such as monthly supplier teleconferences , integrated product teams , informal notifications of subcontract awards , and dcma reports on the performance of major suppliers . finally , the jsf program office maintains limited information on the companies responsible for supplying critical technologies . the jsf program office's information on the suppliers of key or critical technologies is based on lists that the prime contractors compile as part of the program protection strategy . these program protection requirements — not the supplier base — are the focus of dod's and the jsf program office's approach toward critical technologies .