washington , dc . gao - 07-1256t . washington , d.c.: september 26 , 2007 . veterans' disability benefits: processing of claims continues to present challenges . gao - 07-562t . va is in the process of addressing some of our and the commission's concerns . for example , va is modifying the rating schedule to provide detailed and updated criteria for evaluating traumatic brain injury and the potential effect of medical advances on certain conditions . in january 2008 , va announced that it had contracted for a study of the appropriate level of compensation for any loss of earnings capacity caused by service - incurred or service aggravated conditions . in addition to program design , va's regional office claims processing structure may be disadvantageous to efficient operations . va would also have to determine where these staff should be deployed . even as staffing levels increase , however , va acknowledges that it still must take other actions to improve productivity . for example , va added more locations where service members can initiate the va disability claims process up to 180 days prior to separating from the service . va reports that these locations , known as benefits delivery at discharge sites , now total 140 . the goal of the program is to provide benefits within 60 days following discharge . in addition , va also plans to pilot paperless benefits delivery at discharge , where service members' disability claim applications , service medical records , and other evidence would be captured electronically prior to discharge . va expects this new process will reduce the time needed to gather evidence for deciding claims . gao currently has work underway looking at the benefits delivery at discharge program . another step to improve claims processing is a pilot program by va and the department of defense ( dod ) in which va completes disability ratings for service members who have been found unfit for duty due to disability by the military services . the goal of the pilot program is to deliver faster and more consistent disability evaluations and compensation to service members and veterans . because va rates disabilities while the service member is still in the military service , disability benefits can be awarded soon after the service member is discharged . gao is currently studying this pilot . in addition to challenges with managing pending claims inventories and deciding claims in a timely manner , va acknowledges that regional office decisional accuracy needs further improvement . va reports that it improved the accuracy of decisions on rating - related compensation claims from 80 percent in fiscal year 2002 to 88 percent in fiscal year 2007 . however , this figure remains short of its current strategic goal of 98 percent . in march 2007 , va stated it had established an aggressive quality assurance program to assess rating , authorization , and fiduciary program accuracy . additionally , va plans to begin routine quarterly monitoring of compensation and pension cases by diagnostic code and to expand quality review staff to complete additional reviews . va also continues to face questions about its ability to ensure that veterans receive consistent decisions across regional offices .