cboc contracts . contracts for cbocs generally contained the most detailed performance requirements . for example , all four of the cboc contracts we reviewed had complete performance requirements for three of the six applicable categories — the type of provider or care , clinical practice standards , and medical record documentation . however , two of the four cboc contracts — at the minneapolis and seattle vamcs — lacked detail in one or more of the performance requirement categories we reviewed . for example , the seattle vamc cboc contract was the only cboc contract we reviewed that did not include a required set of operating hours for the contracted facility , which was a component we assessed within the access to care category . specialty care contracts . the amount of detail in performance requirements within specialty care contracts varied across our four selected vamcs . overall , performance requirements in these contracts lacked specificity in key categories . for example , two of our selected specialty care contracts — for the seattle and minneapolis vamcs — were for the services of cardiothoracic surgeons and had very similar results in our review , except for their descriptions of performance requirements within the clinical practice standards category . for this category , the seattle vamc cardiothoracic contract had detailed performance requirements , but the minneapolis vamc cardiothoracic contract did not contain a statement describing the provider's responsibilities for the reporting of and response to adverse events and patient complaints , a component we assessed within the clinical practice standards category.in addition , the nashville vamc specialty care contract for the services of a psychiatrist had limited detail because it did not contain requirements for the clinical contractor's privileges to be renewed at the beginning of each new contract term , and received a partial rating in the medical record documentation category because the contract did not contain performance requirements for the timely entry of information into va's electronic medical record . temporary clinical provider contracts . see department of veterans affairs , health care resources contracting — buying , title 38 u.s.c . 8153 , va directive 1663 ( aug. 10 , 2006 ) . directive 1663 states that contracts for full - time providers must identify the key personnel proposed to provide the service and their qualifications . to determine whether performance standards used by agencies meet these qualities , we previously found that performance standards should have several attributes — including being clearly stated and using measurable targets . procurement operations office . the procurement policy office is responsible for providing guidance to va's acquisition workforce in network contracting offices and saos . this office produces and updates standard operating procedures for cors and cos. service area offices . saos are the regional contract management entities created to oversee the activities of the 21 network contracting offices and the cos and supervisors that work within them . vha created three saos — east , west , and central — to manage the contracting activities of six to eight visns each . additionally , the performance standards included within the 12 clinical contracts we reviewed were not always stated clearly and did not always include measurable targets .