part 810 . part 810 applies to commercial activities because nuclear reactors fueled with uranium also produce plutonium . section 57 ( b ) of the aea requires establishment of orderly and expeditious procedures , to include , among other things , explicit direction on the handling of requests to engage or participate in development or production of special nuclear material outside of the united states and express deadlines for soliciting and collecting the views of the other agencies ( with identified officials responsible for meeting such deadlines ) . activities generally authorized under part 810 do not require prior application to or notification of the secretary of energy , although companies must report certain information about such activities to doe within 30 days . applications for specific authorization , which must be approved by the secretary of energy , undergo a three - stage review process , as depicted in figure 1 . in the first or “initial” review stage , nnsa prepares an analysis of each application . in the second or “interagency” review stage , nnsa provides the application to state for concurrence and to the nrc , commerce , and the department of defense ( dod ) for consultation . doe's target time frames for completion of the initial and interagency review stages are 30 days each . doe does not have a target time frame for completion of the third or “final” review stage , in which nnsa and doe staff conduct a final review of the application and make a recommendation to the secretary , who then makes a determination as to whether the proposed export would be inimical to the national interest . part 810 assistance to foreign atomic energy activities part 810 program elements and the national nuclear security administration's ( nnsa ) procedures for processing , reviewing , and approving specific authorizations to determine doe's internal targets . we analyzed doe data on the processing times for the 89 specific authorizations granted from 2008 through 2013 . for each authorization , the analysis included a calculation of the number of days between the date of each application for authorization and the date of the secretary's determination , which encompasses the entire part 810 process . exporters who are required to report on generally authorized activities must do so no more than 30 days after they begin . according to an nnsa official , some generally authorized activities would trigger frequent reports , so nnsa negotiates a filing frequency for the exporters to report all of their generally authorized activities on a consolidated basis instead of requiring reports for each activity . for specific authorizations , exporters must also report no more than 30 days after they initiate activities , and , depending on the conditions contained in their authorization , they are also required to submit ongoing reports that detail their activities conducted under the authorization on a quarterly , semiannual , or annual basis . nnsa officials stated that they read and categorize each report as it is received . if they decide that a particular report merits further attention , they conduct follow - up analysis , which includes checking that the activities and individuals listed are consistent with the application and the authorization .