amo . from fiscal years 2013 through 2017 , cbp ( 1 ) gained aviation enforcement agent staff , ( 2 ) generally maintained staffing levels for its marine interdiction agent position , and ( 3 ) consistently lost air interdiction agent staff . first , despite the aviation enforcement agent position generally having cbp's highest annual attrition rates , cbp hired more aviation enforcement agents than it lost each fiscal year and increased its overall staffing level by 79 positions during our review period . even so , amo staffing levels for these positions remained below its authorized targets in 4 out of the 5 fiscal years we reviewed . second , amo staffing levels for the marine interdiction agent position remained level as amo lost a net total of 3 marine interdiction agents from fiscal years 2013 through 2017 . nevertheless , onboard staffing levels for these positions remained below the annual authorized levels in 4 of the 5 fiscal years we reviewed . third , on average , cbp hired 25 air interdiction agents and lost 52 agents each fiscal year , resulting in an average annual loss of 27 agents and a net decrease of 136 positions between fiscal years 2013 and 2017 . further , even though the authorized staffing targets for these positions decreased every year since fiscal year 2013 , amo's onboard air interdiction agent staffing levels remained below authorized levels in 4 of the 5 fiscal years we reviewed ( see fig . cbp has acknowledged that improving its retention of qualified law enforcement personnel is critical in addressing staffing shortfalls , but officials identified difficulties in retaining key law enforcement staff as a result of geographically remote and hard - to - fill duty locations . cbp officials across all three operational components and hrm cited location — and specifically employees' inability to relocate to posts in more desirable locations — as a primary challenge facing the agency in retaining qualified personnel . border patrol officials explained that duty stations in certain remote locations present retention challenges due to quality - of - life factors — for example , agents may not want to live with their families in an area without a hospital , with low - performing schools , or with relatively long commutes from their homes to their duty station . border patrol's difficulty in retaining law enforcement staff in such locations is exacerbated by competition with other federal , state , and local law enforcement organizations for qualified personnel . according to border patrol officials , other agencies are often able to offer more desirable duty locations — such as major cities — and , in some cases , higher compensation . cbp data indicate that border patrol agents consistently leave the component for employment with other law enforcement agencies , including ofo as well as other dhs components such as ice . for example , while retirements accounted for more than half of annual cbp officer losses from fiscal years 2013 through 2017 , they accounted for less than a quarter of annual border patrol agent losses , indicating that the majority of these agents are not retiring but are generally leaving to pursue other employment .