( recommendation 3 ) . we view this as a step in the right direction . now that the agency has finalized its definition of informal enforcement actions and provided instructions on how regional offices should report such actions , by clearly documenting in guidance on how regional offices should use the definition to collect data on these actions , epa would have better assurance that the regional offices consistently collect and maintain these data . similarly , epa does not have complete information on its compliance monitoring and enforcement activities because the agency does not require the collection of data on compliance assistance activities . as a result , the agency has not issued guidance instructing regional offices to collect such data and specifying which mechanism to use to maintain them . without clearly documenting in guidance to the regional offices that they should collect data on compliance assistance activities and specifying which mechanism to use to maintain the data , such as icis , epa will lack key information . such information is needed to track progress toward its strategic objective of increasing the agency's use of compliance assistance activities to help regulated entities comply with laws and regulations . while epa communicates the results of its compliance monitoring activities and enforcement actions through its website and annual reports , neither of its 2018 annual reports includes a readily identifiable section or appendix that discusses the known limitations of the data . the 2018 annual results report also does not fully describe how the data in the report should be interpreted , given the known data limitations the report contains . by including the known limitations of the data in its annual reports and providing information on the intended use of epa's data , epa would have better assurance that congress and the public are informed about the data presented and how the data should be interpreted . we are making the following three recommendations to epa: the assistant administrator for epa's office of enforcement and compliance assurance should clearly document in guidance to the regional offices how they should use the definition of informal enforcement actions to collect data on these actions . ( recommendation 1 ) the assistant administrator for epa's office of enforcement and compliance assurance should clearly document in guidance to the regional offices that they should collect data on compliance assistance activities and specify which mechanism to use to maintain the data , such as icis . ( recommendation 2 ) the assistant administrator for epa's office of enforcement and compliance assurance should include the known limitations of data in its annual reports and provide information on the intended use of epa's data . we provided a draft of this report to epa for review and comment . in its written comments , reproduced in appendix i , epa stated that it agreed with all three of our recommendations and many of our findings and conclusions . epa also provided technical comments , which we incorporated into the report , as appropriate .