this report contains recommendations to you . as you know , 31 u.s.c . a basic element of cryptography is encryption . because agency personnel serve as the primary source of information on the status of recommendations , gao requests that the agency also provide us with a copy of your agency's statement of action to serve as preliminary information on the status of open recommendations . encryption can be used to provide basic data confidentiality and integrity by transforming plain text into cipher text using a special value known as a key and a mathematical process known as an algorithm . irs policy requires the use of encryption for transferring sensitive but unclassified information between irs facilities . the national security agency also recommends disabling protocols that do not encrypt information transmitted across the network , such as user id and password combinations . although irs had implemented controls to encrypt information traversing its network , it did not always ensure certain sensitive data was encrypted . for example , one data center has not yet disabled unencrypted protocol services for all its unix servers . similarly , at another center , users' login information is still being sent across the irs internal network in clear text , potentially exposing account usernames and passwords . more importantly , irs continues to transmit data , such as account and financial information , from its financial accounting system using an unencrypted protocol . by transmitting data unencrypted , irs is at increased risk that an unauthorized individual could view sensitive information . to establish individual accountability , monitor compliance with security policies , and investigate security violations , it is crucial to know what , when , and by whom specific actions have been taken on a system . organizations accomplish this by implementing system or security software that provides an audit trail , or logs of system activity , that they can use to determine the source of a transaction or attempted transaction and to monitor users' activities . the way in which organizations configure system or security software determines the nature and extent of information that can be provided by the audit trail . to be effective , organizations should configure their software to collect and maintain audit trails that are sufficient to track security - relevant events . irs did not always effectively monitor its systems . for example , irs had not configured security software controls to log changes to datasets that would support effective monitoring of the mainframe at one of its data centers . in addition , other weaknesses include inadequate logging of security - relevant events for unix and windows servers at one data center and for unix servers at another . by not effectively logging changes to its systems , irs will not have assurance that it will be able to detect unauthorized system changes that could adversely affect operations , or appropriately detect security - relevant events . physical access controls are used to mitigate the risks to systems , buildings , and supporting infrastructure related to their physical environment and to control the entry and exit of personnel in buildings , as well as data centers containing agency resources .