ddtc guidelines . ddtc's export compliance guidelines include nine elements that it has identified as important aspects of an effective export compliance program . export control roles and responsibilities of researchers described ? export authorization and tracking export - controlled items entities should develop processes to ( 1 ) ensure the organization makes correct export decisions , including identifying when u.s. government authorization is required prior to exporting ; ( 2 ) track and protect any export - controlled items being used or developed by the organization ; and ( 3 ) screen all parties associated with an export transaction against the u.s. proscribed / restricted parties lists prior to exporting . a majority of the 100 universities' websites included information about relevant export regulations and a definition of exports , and almost half provided additional resources or tools for researchers to better understand how or whether their research involves items subject to export control regulations ; however , a limited number provided information about practices the university may employ to protect export - controlled items . for example , 74 of the 100 universities published information about the international traffic in arms regulations ( itar ) and the export administration regulations ( ear ) on their websites . about half of the universities also maintained a frequently asked questions section concerning export control regulations and about half provided tools such as decision tree matrices to help researchers determine whether an export may require a license . however , less than a third of the universities' websites included any information about technology control plans or guidance regarding foreign visitors , which are practices that universities may undertake to protect export - controlled items used in university research or other academic activities . for example , only 27 of the 100 universities' websites contained explanations of when a technology control plan would be necessary . see table 9 for additional results from our website analysis . twenty of the 100 universities' websites provided information regarding export compliance recordkeeping requirements . see table 10 for these results . about half of the universities' websites provided information about export control trainings available online , developed by the university , associations , or for - profit organizations , among others . however , only 21 of the 100 universities' websites provided information about how to request university - provided , in - person training regarding export compliance . see table 11 for additional results from our website analysis . only about a quarter of the universities' websites provided guidance about when to report potential violations , but about half of the universities' websites provided information about the potential administrative or criminal penalties associated with export control violations . see table 12 for additional results from our website analysis . reporting and addressing violations entities should develop clear procedures outlining the actions employees should take in the event that potential noncompliance is identified . entities should also develop processes for identifying and addressing the root cause of any noncompliant activity . guidance on when to report a potential export control violation ? less than half of the universities in our sample published an export compliance manual on their website . see table 13 for these results . kimberly gianopoulos , ( 202 ) 512-8612 or gianopoulosk@gao.gov .