the first goal has been met . the fsm and the rmi are independent nations and are members of international organizations such as the united nations . the second goal of the compact – advancing economic development and self - sufficiency for both countries – was to be accomplished primarily through u.s. direct financial payments ( to be disbursed and monitored by the u.s. department of the interior ) to the fsm and the rmi . for the 15- year period covering 1987 through 2001 , funding was provided at levels that decreased every 5 years . for 2002 and 2003 , while negotiations to renew expiring compact provisions were ongoing , funding levels increased to equal an average of the funding provided during the previous 15 years . thus , funds available to the two governments were “bumped - up” during the last 2 years of assistance . for 1987 through 2003 , u.s. assistance to the fsm and the rmi to support economic development is estimated on the basis of interior data , to be about $2.1 billion . we have found that many compact - funded projects in the fsm and the rmi experienced problems because of poor planning and management , inadequate construction and maintenance , or misuse of funds . further the u.s. , fsm , and rmi governments provided little accountability over compact expenditures and have not ensured that funds were spent effectively or efficiently . economic self - sufficiency has not been achieved . although total u.s. assistance ( compact direct funding as well as u.s. programs and services ) as a percentage of total government revenue has fallen in both countries ( particularly in the fsm ) , the two nations remain highly dependent on u.s. funds . u.s. direct assistance has maintained standards of living that are higher than could be achieved in the absence of u.s. support . in addition , u.s. programs have been extended to the fsm and the rmi to provide a wide range of critical services , such as health care , education , telecommunications , and job training , but in most cases local conditions have impaired the programs' effectiveness . the third goal of the compact – securing national security rights for all parties – has been achieved . at the time that the compact was negotiated , the united states was concerned about the use of the islands of the fsm and the rmi as “springboards for aggression” against the united states , as they had been used in world war ii , and the cold war incarnation of this threat – the soviet union . the compact and its related agreements established several key defense rights for all three countries . the compact obligates the united states to defend the fsm and the rmi against an attack or the threat of attack in the same way it would defend its own citizens . the compact also provides the united states with the right of “strategic denial,” the ability to prevent access to the islands and their territorial waters by the military personnel of other countries or the use of the islands for military purposes .