, not correlated ) . ( recommendation 2 ) . we provided a draft of this report to education for review and comment . for the purpose of reporting , we combined deferred maintenance , repair , renovation , and alteration into a deferred maintenance and repair category . in some cases , we updated responses after following up with the survey respondent . while we did not inspect or evaluate the state of these colleges' buildings , hbcu officials explained in detail the capital project needs . in particular , we toured campuses to better understand their capital project needs and the extent to which education's two key programs have helped address those needs . the categorization was conducted by one analyst then independently confirmed by a second analyst . in addition , key support was provided by michael armes , susan aschoff , allison bawden , deborah bland , marcia carlsen , gina hoover , duewa kamara , john karikari , risto laboski , eunice lalanne , won lee , sheila mccoy , jean mcsween , jeffrey g. miller , john mingus , mimi nguyen , anna maria ortiz , christopher ross , benjamin sinoff , and karen tremba . based on our review of education's data , review of loan contracts , and interviews with relevant education and designated bonding authority officials , we found the hbcu capital financing participation data to be sufficiently reliable for the purpose of describing participation and use of the program . this rating indicates the credit quality of the bonds and likelihood of default . the entity may hire municipal advisors and is required to have an underwriter to prepare and sell the bonds to investors . entities are provided the funding up front to finance the project and then pay the principal , interest , and any fees to investors until the bond matures , often up to 30 years . almost all the hbcus responding to our survey ( 70 of 79 ) reported that , on average , 46 percent of their building space needed to be repaired or replaced . for example , of the 35 public hbcus that responded to our survey question on building condition , 8 reported more than three - quarters of their building space is in need of repair or replacement . like all institutions of higher education , hbcus are facing increasing capital project needs due to aging campus facilities , according to higher education organization officials and facilities experts . hbcus' planning documents we reviewed also support our survey findings around capital project needs . for example , consultants hired by one public hbcu found that a quarter of its buildings were in poor condition with the potential for demolition , according to the college's master plan . severe weather was also cited as a challenge by officials at another public hbcu we visited where nearly all their building space had been damaged , requiring them to shut down portions of their functional buildings , construct new buildings , and build flood walls . according to officials from this college , however , damages remain unaddressed in part due to a lack of funding ( see fig .