unanticipated events . va officials at the denver project site discovered they needed to eradicate asbestos and replace faulty electrical systems from pre - existing buildings . they also discovered and removed a buried swimming pool and found a mineral - laden underground spring that forced them to continually treat and pump the water from the site , which impacted plans to build an underground parking structure . in our april 2013 report , we found that va had taken steps to improve its management of major medical - facility construction projects , including creating a construction - management review council . in april 2012 , the secretary of veterans affairs established the construction review council to serve as the single point of oversight and performance accountability for the planning , budgeting , executing , and delivering of va's real property capital - asset program . the council issued an internal report in november 2012 that contained findings and recommendations that resulted from meetings it held from april to july 2012 . the report stated that the challenges identified on a project - by - project basis were not isolated incidents but were indicative of systemic problems facing va . in our 2013 report we also found that va had taken steps to implement a new project delivery method — called the integrated design and construction ( idc ) method . in response to the construction industry's concerns that va and other federal agencies did not involve the construction contractor early in the design process , va and the army corps of engineers began working to establish a project delivery model that would allow for earlier contractor involvement in a construction project , as is often done in the private sector . we found in 2013 that va did not implement idc early enough in denver to garner the full benefits . va officials explained that denver was initiated as a design - bid - build project and later switched to idc after the project had already begun . according to va officials , the idc method was very popular with industry , and va wanted to see if this approach would effectively deliver a timely medical facility project . thus , while the intent of the idc method is to involve both the project contractor and architectural and engineering firm early in the process to ensure a well coordinated effort in designing and planning a project , va did not hire the contractor for denver until after the initial designs were completed . according to va , because the contractor was not involved in the design of the projects and formulated its bids based on a design that had not been finalized , these projects required changes that increased costs and led to schedule delays . va staff responsible for managing the project said it would have been better to maintain the design - bid - build model throughout the entire process rather than changing mid - project because va did not receive the value of having the contractor's input at the design phase , as the idc method is supposed to provide . for example , according to denver va officials , the architectural design called for curved walls rather than less expensive straight walls along the hospital's main corridor .