this guidance varies by service . generally , the services' guidance establishes eligibility criteria for servicemembers and in some cases also defines criteria for selecting specialties for inclusion in the program . the navy and marine corps have adopted all the original criteria that were established by dod's 1985 program instruction . the air force updated its program guidance in 1998 , which only partially reflected dod's original program instruction . this instruction includes the criteria for individual servicemembers' eligibility as well as guidance for the selection of specialties . the army has established guidance for individual servicemembers' participation in the program but not specific guidance for determining which specialties should be included in the program . in addition to establishing their own guidance for selecting individuals and occupations to include in the program , the services have also defined some other program characteristics , which also differ between the services as shown in table 1 for fiscal year 2001 . while congressional authorization allows the maximum amount of a bonus to be $60,000 and the maximum multiple to be 15 , the services determine their own limit . in fiscal year 2001 , the maximum bonus ranged from $35,000 to $60,000 , and the services' maximum bonus multiple ranged from 5.0 to 8.0 . the table also displays the minimum and maximum reenlistment periods . the army , navy , and air force pay bonuses to reenlistees with an initial payment and equal annual installments over the reenlistment period . the initial payment is made at the time of the reenlistment or when the reenlistment period begins and is equal to 50 percent of the total bonus . the remaining 50 percent is paid in equal annual payments over the term of the reenlistment , and the payments are called “anniversary payments.” in the example above , the initial 50-percent payment would be $16,000 , and the anniversary payments would be $4,000 for 4 years . starting in fiscal year 2001 , the marine corps began paying the entire bonus in one lump - sum payment at the beginning of the reenlistment period . it is too early to determine what effect this change will have on the operation of the marine corps' selective reenlistment bonus program . for fiscal years 1997-2001 , some services did not consistently apply all the criteria they had established to select which specialties they include in the reenlistment program . by not doing so , they broadened the number of eligible specialties and reenlistees who received bonuses . while achieving higher reenlistments , the services have not managed their programs to stay within their congressionally appropriated budgets . as a result , the services spent more on their program than was appropriated in each of fiscal years 1997-2001 . some services are not consistently using all of the criteria they have established to select critical specialties for the selective reenlistment bonus program . better program oversight and management by dod would have required the services to justify exceeding their appropriations during this 5-year period . we do not believe that more accountability for budget execution will diminish the services' ability to respond to changing operational needs .