additional assistance . this includes providing aid to local areas that are experiencing increased unemployment , to pay for direct services such as training . under wia regulations , each state is required to have a rapid response unit with responsibility for rapid response services . the staff in these units may deliver services directly by providing orientations or workshops for dislocated workers , or they may supervise the provision of such services . in the latter capacity , the state unit staff would assign the delivery of direct services to other personnel such as local area staff or private contractors . in addition to the dislocated worker funds that are set aside for rapid response , wia allows states to set aside up to 15 percent of their dislocated worker allotment to support statewide activities other than rapid response . ( app . i contains a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology. ) we performed our work between december 2000 and december 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . wia specifies one funding source for each of the act's main client groups — adults , youths , and dislocated workers . labor estimated that approximately 927,000 dislocated workers would be served with these funds in program year 2000 . a dislocated worker is an individual who ( 1 ) has been terminated or laid off , or who has received a notice of termination or layoff , from employment ; is eligible for , or has exhausted entitlement to , unemployment insurance or is not eligible but has been employed for a sufficient duration to demonstrate attachment to the workforce ; and is unlikely to return to previous industry or occupation ; ( 2 ) has been terminated or laid off , or has received a notice of termination or layoff , from employment as a result of any permanent plant closure of , or substantial layoff at , a plant , facility , or enterprise ; ( 3 ) was self employed but is unemployed as a result of general economic conditions in the community in which the individual resides or because of natural disasters ; or ( 4 ) is a displaced homemaker . the secretary of labor retains 20 percent of the dislocated worker funds in a national reserve account to be used for emergency grants , demonstrations , and technical assistance and allots the remaining funds to each of the 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico according to a specific formula . the formula , first adopted in 1982 under the job training partnership act , was grandfathered into the dislocated worker program under wia . according to the formula , of the total funds that labor allots to the states , one - third is based on each of the following: the number of unemployed in the state compared with the total number of unemployed in all states , the number of excess unemployed in the state compared with the total number of excess unemployed in all states ( i.e.