call for written descriptions . as specified in the animal welfare act regulations and public health service policy , hhs , usda , and epa call for researchers to send written descriptions of research projects involving animals to animal care and use committees for their review and approval . in particular , the animal welfare act regulations require these committees to determine that researchers have provided a written narrative description of the methods and sources they used to determine that alternatives were not available . the public health service policy requires that researchers' institutions submit written descriptions of research projects to the committees and for the committees to determine that researchers' procedures avoid or minimize discomfort , distress , and pain to animals , consistent with sound research design , among other things , and that researchers follow the u.s. government principles for the utilization and care of vertebrate animals used in testing , research , and training . the principles require the consideration of alternatives . in our review of protocol forms from our sample of 12 research facilities ( including hhs , usda , and epa facilities ) , we found that all of the forms requested information on researchers' consideration of alternatives , though the forms varied in the particular information they requested . the types of information requested included a rationale for involving animals and for the number of animals to be used , assurance that research activities do not unnecessarily duplicate previous experiments , and a description of the methods and sources used to determine that alternatives were not available . several of the protocol forms required researchers to identify alternatives considered but not adopted . recommended method for identifying alternatives . in their implementation of the animal welfare act and health research extension act , respectively , usda and nih consider database searches as a best practice for researchers using animals covered by the acts to identify and consider alternatives to animal testing . a database search involves a researcher using keywords related to the planned use of animals to query citations in databases of published scientific literature . from april 1997 through july 2018 , usda maintained a policy , known as animal care policy #12 , in its animal care policy manual . in policy #12 , the agency recommended a database search as the most effective and efficient method for demonstrating compliance with the requirement to consider alternatives to painful or distressful procedures . according to usda's deputy administrator responsible for implementation of the animal welfare act regulations , in july 2018 , usda placed the policy in inoperative status after determining that some research facilities and agency inspectors had misinterpreted the policy as a requirement . moreover , in response to the 21st century cures act , usda is reviewing its animal care policy manual , including policy #12 , to ensure the policies in the manual conform with the animal welfare act and its implementing regulations , harmonize with nih guidance , and reduce researcher burden where possible . according to the deputy administrator , as of june 2019 , usda had not decided what , if anything , it would do to revise or replace policy #12 .