3 ) and runways . while critical to safe , efficient winter operations , these programs involve treating aircraft and airport pavement with millions of pounds of deicing and anti - icing compounds annually . according to the environmental protection agency , these compounds contain chemicals that can harm the environment . some airports can control deicing pollution by capturing the fluids used to deice aircraft using technologies such as aip - funded deicing pads , where aircraft are sprayed with deicing fluids before takeoff and the fluids are captured and treated ; drainage collection systems ; or vacuum - equipped vehicles . third - party contractors , rather than individual air carriers , are increasingly performing deicing operations at commercial airports . faa does not currently have a process to directly oversee these third - party contractors but indicates that it has one under development . while faa and others are undertaking efforts to mitigate the risks of aircraft icing and winter weather operations , through our interviews and discussions with government and industry stakeholders , we have identified challenges related to these risks that , if addressed by ongoing or planned efforts , could improve aviation safety . these challenges include ( 1 ) improving the timeliness of faa's winter weather rulemaking efforts , ( 2 ) ensuring the availability of adequate resources for icing - related research and development ( r&d ) , ( 3 ) ensuring that pilot training is thorough , relevant , and realistic , ( 4 ) ensuring the collection and distribution of timely and accurate weather information , and ( 5 ) developing a more integrated approach to effectively manage winter operations . improving the timeliness of faa's winter weather rulemaking efforts . faa's rulemaking , like that of other federal agencies , is a complicated , multistep process that can take many years . nonetheless , ntsb , faa , and we have previously expressed concerns about the efficiency and timeliness of faa's rulemaking efforts . in 2001 , we reported that a major reform effort begun by faa in 1998 did not solve long - standing problems with its rulemaking process , as indicated both by the lack of improvement in the time required to complete the rulemaking process and by the agency's inability to consistently meet the time frames imposed by statute or its own guidance . the issue of insufficient rest emerged as a concern from ntsb's investigation of the february 12 , 2009 , crash of continental connection / colgan air flight 3407 near buffalo , new york . moreover , a capacity for progress in rulemaking will be critical because , as we have reported to this subcommittee in our recent reviews of the transition to the next generation air transportation system ( nextgen ) , many of the procedures that are proposed to safely enhance the efficiency and capacity of the national airspace system to address current delays and congestion in the system and to accommodate forecasted increases in air traffic will be dependent on the timely development of rules and standards . ensuring the availability of adequate resources for icing - related r&d . nasa is a key source of r&d related to icing .