we believe that these actions are needed . we found in our january 2015 report that interior had identified 4,722 sites with confirmed or likely contamination . these include 4,098 bureau of land management ( blm ) sites that the agency reported had confirmed contamination or required further investigation to determine whether remediation was warranted . the majority of these sites were abandoned mines . interior's national park service ( nps ) identified 417 sites with likely or confirmed contamination ; the bureau of indian affairs , 160 sites ; the fish and wildlife service , 32 sites ; and the bureau of reclamation , 15 sites . these interior agencies identified additional locations of concern that would require verification or initial assessment to determine if there were environmental hazards at the sites . officials we interviewed from interior agencies , except blm , told us that they believed they had identified all sites with likely environmental contamination . we also found that the total number of sites blm may potentially have to address is unknown , due primarily to incomplete and inaccurate data on abandoned mines on land managed by the agency . blm accounts for the largest number of contaminated sites and sites that need further investigation in interior's inventory . table 1 shows the number of contaminated or potentially contaminated sites in blm's inventory as of april 2014 , and the extent to which remediation measures had been undertaken or were completed . blm estimated that it will take decades to complete the inventory . to inventory a site , blm field staff must visit the site to collect data , research the land ownership and extent of mining activity that occurred , and record the information in blm databases . our work has found that the lack of interagency agreements between epa and dod has historically contributed to delays in cleaning up military installations . for example , we reported in july 2010 that , as of february 2009 , 11 dod installations did not have an interagency agreement , even with cercla's requirement that federal agencies enter into interagency agreements with epa within a certain time frame to clean up sites on the npl , and even though the department had reached agreement with epa on the basic terms . without an interagency agreement , epa does not have the mechanisms to ensure that cleanup by an installation proceeds expeditiously , is properly done , and has public input , as required by cercla . we found one dod installation that , after 13 years on the npl and receipt of epa administrative cleanup orders for sitewide cleanup , had not signed an interagency agreement . we recommended that the administrator of epa take action to ensure that outstanding cercla section 120 interagency agreements are negotiated expeditiously . in may 2013 , we reported that dod had made progress on this issue by decreasing the number of installations without an interagency agreement from 11 to 2 , but both of those sites still posed significant risks . according to an epa official , as of september 2015 , one of these two installations now has an interagency agreement .