dol . dol's bureau of international labor affairs is responsible for monitoring implementation of fta labor provisions for all ftas . the bureau's office of trade and labor affairs is designated as the point of contact for implementation of the labor provisions of the ftas as well as for the labor cooperation mechanisms . however , we did not see evidence that a current plan is in place to address the outstanding concerns that ustr and dol have identified . peru . documentation that ustr and dol provided demonstrates a systematic approach to some , but not all , of the monitoring and enforcement steps that we identified . specifically , both agencies have engaged to some extent with peru regarding labor matters in the 5 years since the peru fta went into effect . although dol has periodically reviewed and updated the submission process since establishing it in 1994 , dol officials told us that they have not reviewed or adjusted the submission review time frame to reflect the time it takes dol to issue its reports after accepting the submissions . dol's extensions of each submission review period since 2008 have shown this time frame to be unrealistic . federal standards for internal control call on agency management to monitor and assess the effectiveness and efficiency of their operations over time and to promptly resolve any deficiencies . our interviews with union and other nongovernmental stakeholders in the selected partner countries suggested that little or no awareness and understanding of the fta labor submission process may have affected the number of submissions filed . union representatives we interviewed in our five case study countries — colombia , el salvador , guatemala , oman , and peru — were generally either unaware of dol's labor submission process or considered it difficult to understand and use . for example , a union representative in colombia stated that the union would have filed a submission if the representative had known about the process . in another example , representatives of one of the larger el salvador unions — gmies , an ngo that monitors the actions of the salvadorian government — stated that it was difficult for a “typical worker” to file a submission with dol and that the information required for the submission is generally difficult , if not impossible , to obtain and document . a small number of union representatives who were aware of the process attributed their knowledge to information received from afl - cio or their country's solidarity center . for instance , in guatemala , a representative of a union that had signed the current guatemala submission stated that without the help of the solidarity center , the union would have been unable to locate submission instructions and file the submission . moreover , although the government officials we interviewed in the five countries knew of the labor submission process , only in el salvador did these officials express an understanding of how dol evaluates a submission and conducts its fact - finding investigations . for example , the guatemalan ministry of labor officials we interviewed could not provide information about how the process works or describe the criteria dol uses to evaluate a submission's merits .