the recommendations are listed by report . this program was never used . credit market programs: term asset - backed securities loan facility ( talf ) provided liquidity in securitization markets for various asset classes to improve access to credit for consumers and businesses . sba 7 ( a ) securities purchase program provided liquidity to secondary markets for government - guaranteed small business loans in the small business administration's ( sba ) 7 ( a ) loan program . american international group ( aig ) investment program ( formerly systemically significant failing institutions program ) provided support to aig to avoid disruptions to financial markets from aig's possible failure . automotive industry financing program aimed to prevent a significant disruption of the american automotive industry through government investments in the major automakers . home affordable modification program ( hamp ) divides the cost of reducing monthly payments on first - lien mortgages between treasury and mortgage holders / investors and provides financial incentives to servicers , borrowers , and mortgage holders / investors for loans modified under the program . principal reduction alternative ( pra ) pays incentives to mortgage holders / investors for principal reduction in conjunction with a hamp loan modification for homeowners with a current loan - to - value ratio exceeding 115 percent . the second - lien modification program ( 2mp ) provides incentives for second - lien holders to modify or extinguish a second - lien mortgage when a hamp modification has been initiated on the first - lien mortgage for the same property . home affordable foreclosure alternatives ( hafa ) provides incentives for short sales and deeds - in - lieu of foreclosure as alternatives to foreclosure for borrowers unable or unwilling to complete the hamp first - lien modification process . housing finance agency innovation fund for the hardest hit housing markets ( hardest hit fund or hhf ) supports innovative measures developed by state housing finance agencies and approved by treasury to help borrowers in states hit hardest by the aftermath of the housing crisis . federal housing administration's ( fha ) short refinance program provides underwater borrowers — those with properties that are worth less than the principal remaining on their mortgage — whose loans are current and are not insured by fha with the opportunity to refinance into an fha - insured mortgage . as of august 22 , 2016 , our performance audits of the tarp programs resulted in 74 recommendations to treasury . treasury implemented 62 , or approximately 84 percent . three of the implemented recommendations were closed based on actions taken by treasury since we last reported on the status of our tarp recommendations in september 2015 — all three recommendations were mha - related . treasury issued clarifying lep guidance to mha program servicers in april 2014 . in june 2016 , treasury provided us with copies of the final report on the results of the compliance reviews of the larger mha program servicers' implementation of lep guidance . treasury also provided specific examination policies and procedures used by mha compliance agent in its reviews of program servicers' implementation of lep requirements .