we do not have these data . further , even if the consumer reached the online retailer via a link from a digital music service or other platform , the consumer might have originally heard the single on broadcast radio and , therefore , removal in this instance would be inappropriate . as we note in the report , it is not clear to what degree , if any , the various promotional outlets impact sales individually or in conjunction with one another . other outlets . musicians and performers whose music is featured on television or other outlets may have increased sales as a result of that promotion . using the bia media access pro database , we determined the annual revenues of all commercial broadcast radio stations . before conducting our analysis , we addressed certain features and limitations of the data to enhance the precision of our results . we identified commercial and noncommercial stations , their primary and secondary formats for each station , as well as “dark” stations not currently broadcasting . we classified commercial broadcast radio stations as either music or nonmusic based on the station's format category , except for stations with religion or spanish as their format categories . for stations with these format categories , we looked at the primary , secondary , and tertiary formats , a more granular level of analysis . if any of these three formats were a music content , then we considered the station a music station ; otherwise , we identified the radio station as a nonmusic station . we did this in order to compare revenue for music versus nonmusic stations and to eventually determine the royalty rate each station would pay . next , we imputed station revenue for sister stations that did not report revenue information . we accomplished this by identifying the sister stations that reported revenue and allocating the total reported revenue between that station and its nonreporting sister station . we also imputed the total revenues for nonreporting stations that were not sister stations , which accounted for approximately 40 percent of the stations . in order to do this , we ran a regression using the primary license coverage population , format category , license class , and whether it was an arbitron market , as the explanatory variables . based on this regression , we were able to develop predicted revenues for the nonreporting stations and scaled this to $4 billion , the unaccounted - for total revenues of the broadcast radio industry . using the revenue data , we estimated the marginal effect of a station being a music or nonmusic station . to assess the benefits the recording industry receives from its current relationship with the broadcast radio industry , we conducted three analyses using information obtained from ac nielsen's soundscan , broadcast data systems ( bds ) , and insight databases . first , using the soundscan and bds databases , we identified the quantity of digital singles of sound recordings sold for 12 sound recordings during the first quarter of 2010 , and reported the total sales per spin . before conducting our analysis , we addressed certain limitations of the data . we identified genres of music based on nielsen's “core genre” definitions .