and service guidance . we also reviewed the air force's and the navy's performance metric briefings and improvement plans to determine whether the departments regularly reviewed sustainment metrics and had plans aimed at improving aircraft availability . we interviewed dod , air force , and navy officials knowledgeable about sustainment of these selected fixed - wing aircraft to discuss dod's and the departments' efforts in sustaining these aircraft , including historical information on each aircraft , applicability of policy and guidance for legacy aircraft , and overviews of performance management frameworks identified by the departments to monitor and improve aircraft availability . to develop the fixed - wing aircraft sustainment summary documents ( i.e. , “sustainment quick looks” ) in appendixes ii – xiii we obtained historical and current information including background on aircraft capabilities , manufacturer , sustainment strategy , depot maintenance and squadron locations , and key dates in the life cycle of each aircraft ( i.e. , first manufactured , initial and full operational capability , last production , and planned sunset year ) . we collected and analyzed the following metrics: aircraft availability , not mission capable maintenance , not mission capable supply , and not mission capable aircraft from fiscal year 2011 through march 2017 ; the number of aircraft in depots for fiscal years 2011 through 2016 ; budgeted and executed flight hours from fiscal years 2011 through overall o&s and maintenance costs for fiscal years 2011 through 2016 . we compared availability actuals to goals , aircraft in depots to availability trends , and budgeted and executed flight hours to availability trends . we analyzed o&s cost by reviewing its six elements and compared them to availability trends . we also analyzed the subcategories of the maintenance costs element . through interviews with knowledgeable officials and reviewing documentation , we identified sustainment challenges ( i.e. , aging , maintenance and supply support ) and mitigation actions to address these challenges for each selected fixed - wing aircraft . dod deemed some of the information , such as aircraft availability , not mission capable status , number of aircraft in depots , and budgeted and executed flight hours , to be sensitive ( i.e. , for official use only ) , which must be protected from public disclosure . this public report omits the information that dod deemed to be sensitive . additionally , to support our work for each objective we conducted site visits and interviewed officials to discuss data trends and identify specific sustainment challenges such as aging , maintenance , and supply support , among other challenges affecting aircraft availability , and mitigation actions to address these challenges .