as a result , they did not request the additional authority . documentation certifying adoptions varies from state to state . in its oversight role for state adoption programs , hhs provides information to states through guidance and technical assistance . it also provides information to states and families on adoption - related issues through websites . when the credit was first enacted in 1996 , families that had qualifying expenses greater than the maximum limit for the credit could carry over that amount and claim those expenses for up to 5 years . also , the law phased out the credit for taxpayers above an upper income limit ( which was $182,520 in adjusted gross income for tax year 2010 ) . families adopting non – special needs children can claim only the amount of documented qualified expenses up to the maximum limit . however , since 2002 , families adopting special needs children have been able to claim the maximum tax credit without having to document adoption expenses . for tax years 2010 and 2011 , the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) of 2010 made the adoption credit refundable and set the maximum credit at $13,170 for 2010 , with the maximum amount for 2011 indexed for inflation . the credit is scheduled to revert to a nonrefundable credit with a $10,000 maximum for tax year 2012 . for 2013 and beyond , the credit will be available only for special needs adoptions and may only be claimed for qualified expenses incurred up to a maximum of $6,000 . see appendix i for detailed information on adoption tax credit legislation . irs reported spending 32,000 staff days on adoption tax credit audits during the 2011 filing season . this represents about 3.5 percent of all staff days expended on initial review and correspondence audits . by comparison , the almost 100,000 returns filed on which taxpayers claimed the adoption tax credit as of august 20 , 2011 , represent less than one - tenth of 1 percent of all individual returns filed up to that point . according to irs officials , data for audits completed through september 2011 show that an adoption credit correspondence audit takes , on average , 74 calendar days . this delays refunds , which , according to adoption agency officials , can create difficulties for families expecting to cover adoption costs with the refund . given these additional documentation requirements already in place , we believe that the benefits of making state assistance agreements available to adoptive parents on the irs website outweigh the risks . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the chairmen and ranking members of other senate and house committees and subcommittees that have appropriation , authorization , and oversight responsibilities for irs . we will also send copies to the commissioner of internal revenue , the secretary of the treasury , the chairman of the irs oversight board , and the director of the office of management and budget .