vulnerability . tsa officials stated that their primary measures for assessing the vulnerability of commercial airports to attack — including assessing security of perimeter and access controls — is the jva process and professional judgment . tsa has increased the number of jvas conducted at commercial airports since 2009 . in 2009 , we reported that tsa conducted jvas at 57 ( 13 percent ) of the nation's then approximately 450 commercial airports since fiscal year 2004 . as of the end of fiscal year 2015 , tsa conducted jvas at 81 ( about 19 percent ) of the 437 airports since fiscal year 2009 . in addition , tsa has also assessed the vulnerability of airports through the tssras by assigning numerical values to the vulnerability of each attack scenario and related countermeasures based on the judgements of tsa and other subject matter experts , such as airport officials . consequence . tsa has assessed consequence through the tssras by analyzing both direct and indirect consequences of the various attack scenarios related to domestic airports . according to the tssras , direct consequences ( or impacts ) include the immediate economic damage following an attack that includes infrastructure replacement costs , deaths , and injuries . indirect consequences are the secondary macro - and micro - economic impacts that may include the subsequent impact on supply chains , loss of revenues , consumer behaviors , and other downstream costs . to further address components of risk , tsa established an integrated project team in the summer of 2015 to plan for the development of a compliance - based risk assessment . the intent of this effort , according to tsa officials , is to leverage compliance inspections findings as well as other assessment data to yield a risk level that incorporates threat , vulnerability , and consequence for all regulated airports and other entities . tsa officials stated that this new planned effort will differ from the risk assessment of airport security in that they intend it to be an ongoing process that will be more operational in nature . tsa officials stated that this effort is in its infancy , and will not be developed and implemented until at least fiscal year 2018 . while tsa released its risk assessment of airport security in may 2013 , it has not updated this assessment to reflect changes in the airport security risk environment or routinely shared updated national risk information with airports or other stakeholders . specifically , tsa based its risk assessment of airport security primarily on information from the tssra submitted to congress in may 2013 , jvas conducted in fiscal year 2011 , and a special emphasis assessment conducted in september 2012 . however , since completion of its risk assessment of airport security in 2013 , tsa has not updated it with information tsa submitted to congress in the july 2014 and july 2015 versions of the tssra . tsa updated these versions of the tssra to include additional attack scenarios related to domestic aviation and to reflect an increase in threat scores across all modes of transportation . in the july 2015 tssra , tsa stated that one scenario would relate directly to airport security .