state oversight practices . while selected states may have similar reported practices for overseeing the use of psychotropic medications , they vary in whether they examine data to determine if their practices are followed . for example , while child welfare and medicaid officials in all seven states told us their state requires some form of agreement or informed consent for a child's treatment plan , officials in three of these states told us they review reports on whether such an agreement was obtained . physician prescribing patterns . all seven selected states examine data to better understand certain prescribing patterns , such as the use of antipsychotics , the use of multiple psychotropic medications at the same time , and dosage levels for the medications prescribed . child welfare and medicaid officials in all of these states said they have particularly focused on antipsychotic medications , in part due to concerns about inappropriate use of these medications and their potential negative side effects for children . officials in five states told us their state has experienced reductions in antipsychotic use among children in foster care in recent years . researchers have also noted that concerns about the use of antipsychotic medications spurred state efforts to oversee and improve prescription behavior , and a june 2016 study examining medicaid data in 20 states from 2005 through 2010 found that trends in the use of these medications are no longer increasing . however , the study noted that current prescribing patterns for antipsychotics at the “new normal” rates of use remain of great concern to many stakeholders . child welfare and medicaid officials in one state also underscored the significance of examining prescribing patterns after they observed spikes in the use of certain medications . these officials said that after their state started requiring second opinions for adhd prescriptions , they saw increases in prescriptions of antipsychotics , and after requiring second opinions on antipsychotics , they saw increases in prescriptions for the use of multiple psychotropic medications at the same time . officials interpreted these patterns as showing that some physicians choose to prescribe certain medications partly to avoid their state's oversight practices . these officials expressed concern that new requirements may cause increased medication use in other areas , which would need to be monitored . in addition , while officials in six states said their state requires or recommends a caseworker or physician conduct follow - up visits with a child on psychotropic medications , officials in one of these states told us they examine data on the required follow - up , specifically for adhd medications . officials in three of these states told us they do examine data on whether a physician monitors the child's metabolic health , including height , weight , and lipid panels . these measures can be used to monitor whether a child is experiencing any adverse effects as a result of taking medications . child welfare and medicaid officials in most selected states said they have particularly focused on ensuring children in foster care receive psychosocial services to help address experiences with trauma .