this needs to be done quickly . our review of the integrated baseline review , which agencies are required by omb to complete to ensure that the evm program baseline is accurate , showed that it did not address key baseline considerations , such as cost and schedule risks . moreover , other us - visit contractors have not been required to use evm , although program officials told us that this was to change effective october 1 , 2006 . to ensure that programs manage their performance effectively , it is important that they define and measure progress against program commitments and hold themselves accountable for results . measurements of the operational performance , progress , and results are important to reasonably ensure that problems and shortfalls can be addressed and resolved in a timely fashion and so that responsible parties can be held accountable . more specifically , to permit meaningful program oversight , it is important that expenditure plans describe how well dhs is progressing against the commitments made in prior expenditure plans . however , us - visit's expenditure plan for fiscal year 2006 ( the fifth expenditure plan ) continued a longstanding pattern of not describing progress against commitments made in previous plans . for example , according to the fiscal year 2005 expenditure plan , the prime contractor was to begin integrating the long - term increment 4 strategy into the interim us - visit system's environment and the overall dhs enterprise architecture , and that us - visit and the prime contractor would work with the stakeholder community to identify opportunities for delivery of long - term capabilities under increment 4 . however , the fiscal year 2006 plan does not discuss progress or accomplishments relative to these commitments . additionally , the expenditure plan committed to begin deploying the most effective exit alternative for capturing biometrics at air and sea poes during fiscal year 2005 . in contrast , the 2006 expenditure plan states that the exit pilots will continue throughout fiscal year 2006 and does not address whether the fiscal year 2005 schedule deployment commitment was met . also , the fiscal year 2006 expenditure plan did not address all performance measures cited in the fiscal year 2005 plan . specifically , the 2005 plan included 11 measures . in contrast , the 2006 plan listed 7 measures , 4 of which are similar , but not identical to , some of the 11 measures in the 2005 plan . this means that several of the 2005 plan's measures are not addressed in the 2006 plan . moreover , even in cases of similar performance measures , the fiscal year 2006 plan does not adequately describe progress in meeting commitments . we did not assess the reliability of the 2003 estimate . the cost estimate did not separately break out costs for entry and exit construction , but did factor in the cost for building additional exit vehicle lanes and booths as well as buildings and other infrastructure that would be required to accommodate a mirror imaging at exit of the capabilities required for entry processing .