( see app . i for a profile describing the workload and workforce at the san ysidro port of entry. ) to determine the effect of differences in the two systems on officers' pay , we analyzed some customs and ins officers' work schedule and pay data at the san ysidro port of entry . we compared work schedules , shifts , and pay for federal pay periods 2 and 3 , covering 4 weeks in january and february 2001 . we selected these two pay periods because they allowed us to assess the effects of the differences in overtime , sunday , holiday , and night pay . our analysis involved obtaining the officers' work schedules , shifts , and pay for the two pay periods and comparing the amount officers were paid with the amount they would have been paid under the other agency's pay provisions . we obtained work schedules , shifts , and pay data for customs officers from customs' central pay database , the customs overtime scheduling system ( coss ) , which contains detailed information of officers' overtime and premium pay . for ins , we obtained planned work schedules from the finalized schedule report and actual work schedules and shift data from the time & attendance worksheet and the inspection overtime order report and certification forms at the port . we obtained pay data for ins officers at san ysidro from their budget systems and reports branch at ins headquarters . we developed three pay comparisons based on customs officers' work schedules , shifts , and pay and three based on ins officers' work schedules , shifts , and pay . from each agency , we judgmentally selected two gs - 11 , step 7 officers , and one gs - 9 , step 4 officer . gs - 11 and gs - 9 officers were selected because they are the predominant grade levels at the port . we selected officers who worked on the most heavily staffed shifts at san ysidro , whose work schedules or shifts we believed would best illustrate the differences in specific pay elements including sunday , holiday , and night differential pay . customs and ins payroll specialists with expertise in time and attendance reporting assisted us in calculating our comparisons . table 2 shows that customs and ins have different provisions for overtime and pay for sunday , holiday , and night work . the systems are not easy to compare because pay rates and time periods that count toward overtime and night differential pay also differ . table 3 shows a comparison of the hours of overtime worked versus the number of hours paid under customs and ins pay provisions . the primary difference between the two overtime provisions is that customs pays double the hourly rate for actual hours worked , while ins can pay more than double - time depending on the number of hours worked . table 4 shows a comparison of sunday pay under customs and ins pay provisions . the major difference is that customs pays 1.5 times the hourly rate for actual hours worked ; ins provides 2-days' pay for 8 or fewer hours worked . table 5 shows a comparison of holiday pay under customs and ins pay provisions .