risk assessment . risk assessment is a qualitative and / or quantitative determination of the likelihood of an adverse event occurring and the severity , or impact , of its consequences . it may include scenarios under which two or more risks interact , creating greater or lesser impacts , as well as the ranking of risky events . risk characterization . risk characterization involves designating risk on a categorical scale ( eg , low , medium , and high ) . threat assessment . risk mitigation is the implementation of mitigating actions , depending upon an organization's chosen action posture ( i.e . the decision on what to do about overall risk ) . specifically , risk mitigation may involve risk acceptance ( taking no action ) , risk avoidance ( taking actions to avoid activities that involve risk ) , risk reduction ( taking actions to reduce the likelihood and / or impact of risk ) , and risk sharing ( taking actions to reduce risk by sharing risk with other entities ) . threat is defined as potential intent to cause harm or damage to an asset ( eg , natural environment , people , man - made infrastructures , and activities and operations ) . a threat assessment identifies adverse events that can affect an entity and may be present at the global , national , or local level . criticality assessment . criticality is defined as an asset's relative worth . a criticality assessment identifies and evaluates an entity's assets based on a variety of factors , including importance of a function and the significance of a system in terms of national security , economic activity , or public safety . criticality assessments help to provide a basis for prioritizing protection relative to limited resources . vulnerability assessment . vulnerability is defined as the inherent state or condition of an asset that can be exploited to cause harm . a vulnerability assessment identifies the extent that these inherent states may be exploited , relative to countermeasures that have been or could be deployed . risk characterization provides input for deciding which areas are most suited to mitigate risk . mitigation evaluation . mitigation evaluation is the identification of mitigation alternatives to assess the effectiveness of the alternatives . the alternatives should be evaluated for their likely effect on risk and their cost . mitigation selection . mitigation selection involves a management decision on which mitigation alternatives should be implemented among alternatives , taking into account risk , costs , and the effectiveness of mitigation alternatives . selection among mitigation alternatives should be based upon pre - considered criteria . there are as of yet no clearly preferred selection criteria , although potential factors might include risk reduction , net benefits , equality of treatment , or other stated values . this concludes our prepared statement . we would be pleased to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have . for information about this testimony , please contact peter guerrero , director , physical infrastructure issues , on ( 202 ) 512-2834 ; or norman rabkin , managing director , homeland security and justice issues , on ( 202 ) 512- 8777 .