a returned offer has not been rejected . when irs has sufficient financial information to make a decision , it first determines whether an offer can be accepted on the basis of datc . if not , irs considers the offer under eta rules . at any point during the process , taxpayers may withdraw their applications . would a partial payment requirement discourage eligible taxpayers from submitting offers ? as discussed earlier , irs does not monitor accessibility . without a measure of accessibility , the impact of a partial payment on accessibility might not be easily determined . another question is whether 60 days are enough time to implement the partial payment requirements . irs officials stated that computer systems would require changes to accommodate the imposition of partial payments . we did not determine how long it would take irs to make the changes . because some delinquent taxpayers will always be unable to fully pay their tax debts , irs's oic program is necessary to ensure that taxpayers pay what they can and have a “fresh start” toward complying with their future obligations . the performance of the program is important because factors like the timeliness of offer decisions can have a large impact on taxpayers in difficult financial straits and because the irs resources devoted to the program are significant . opportunities exist to make immediate improvements to the program and lower costs . first , staffing adjustments have not kept pace with declines in cases in recent years , resulting in lower productivity . reducing staffing to increase productivity to its recent levels would lower program costs . second , because the distinction between datc and eta hardship offers is not meaningful , the program is unnecessarily complex . practitioners and others have complained about the resulting confusion and burden on taxpayers , which may discourage taxpayers from using the program . costs to taxpayers and irs could be reduced by eliminating the distinction . the success of the program also depends on how well irs management understands the reasons for the program's performance . one step in understanding performance is measuring it . irs's measurement of timeliness on an offer basis masks how long it takes to make a final decision for taxpayers to get their liabilities resolved . irs's tracking of accessibility is also incomplete because it is not done relative to the size of the pool of potentially eligible taxpayers . irs's tracking of the future compliance of program participants is also incomplete because it does not routinely measure compliance . another step in understanding performance is setting goals . numeric goals provide objective criteria for assessing performance . the numeric goals for oic timeliness still are not based on an analytical assessment of taxpayer needs and other benefits , and the goals are set for each case rather than for taxpayers . a third step in understanding performance is analysis that determines the causes of performance . by understanding the causes of performance , irs management can make better - informed decisions about how to improve performance . irs's 2004 compliance study is an example — it led to the creation of the hand - off unit .