architecture ? yes no 32 . to what extent , if at all , did the following challenges affect the development of your agency / department's enterprise architecture ? ( check one box in each row. ) from this point , the agency and department surveys differ . bureaus ) enterprise architecture development , maintenance , or use ? ( check one box and provide 1 . yes continue with question 40 additional information if necessary. ) no skip to question 42 1 . yes please provide a copy of the policy or guidance with your response . department provided oversight of your enterprise architecture efforts ? ( check one. ) ( eg , oversight and approval processes ) ? b. c . approved by a committee or enterprise ? investment review board ? approved by the head of your agency / department ? approved by other official or committee ? please specify: submitted to omb ? please provide documentation for each approval indicated above . do your agency / department's enterprise architecture products undergo independent verification and validation ( iv&v ) ? ( check one box and provide additional information if necessary. ) yes if iv&v is contractor - provided , please provide a copy of the contractor's statement of work . do your agency / department's enterprise architecture management processes undergo independent verification and validation ( iv&v ) ? ( check one box and provide additional information if necessary. ) yes if iv&v is contractor - provided , please provide a copy of the contractor's statement of work . does your agency / department periodically update its enterprise architecture products ? ( check one box and provide additional information if necessary. ) yes if yes , please provide date of last update: 24 . is your agency / department's enterprise architecture under configuration management ( i.e. , a process for establishing and maintaining the integrity of work products ) ? ( check one box and provide additional information if necessary. ) yes if yes , please provide date of current version: 25 . does a process exist for formally managing changes to your agency / department's enterprise architecture ? ( check 26 . does your agency / department have a written and approved policy that requires that it investments comply with the enterprise architecture ? ( check one box and provide additional information if necessary . if policy is written but not approved , please check “no”. ) yes please provide a copy of the written policy . continue with question 27 2 . no skip to question 28 27 . does your agency / department permit waivers to its requirement that it investments comply with the enterprise architecture ? ( check one. ) yes , only if the request provides a written justification 2 . yes , a waiver can be granted based on an informal request 3 . no , the agency / department does not provide for waivers to this policy 28 . is your agency / department's enterprise architecture an integral component of your agency / department's it investment management process ? ( check one. ) to what extent does your agency / department's it investments comply with the enterprise architecture ? ( check one. ) very great extent 4 . some or little extent 5 .