see , for example , h.r . the department of agriculture runs the healthierus school challenge , an initiative to recognize schools that have created healthier school environments through the promotion of nutrition and physical activity . at the state and district levels , various parties may be involved in providing students with opportunities in pe or sports . for example , many states have requirements regarding schools' provision of pe , according to cdc . however , policies may vary by state or district , such as the required grades in which pe should be offered , the number of minutes students should be in class , or the specific content and curriculum areas that should be taught . for extracurricular athletics , the national federation of state high school associations provides leadership for the administration of most high school interscholastic sports — the main form of extracurricular athletic competition in schools , which includes varsity and junior varsity level teams . initiative aimed at increasing physical activity . in turn , each state has its own state high school athletic association that is a voluntary member of the federation . the amount of pe instruction time that schools offer to students generally decreased from 2000 to 2006 , according to shpps data , and relatively few schools offered students the opportunity to participate in daily pe or its instructional equivalent , as recommended by naspe ( see fig . schools we visited differed widely in the amount of pe instruction time offered to their students . for example , only 3 out of 13 schools we visited offered daily pe or its instructional equivalent . national data show that a higher percentage of middle schools offered daily pe than did elementary or high schools . these 3 schools had longer school days , which officials said made it easier to fit pe into the daily schedule . among the 4 elementary schools we visited , 1 provided all students a daily 60-minute pe class , while another provided students just one 30-minute pe class per week . at the same time , the estimated percentage of schools that required students to take some pe increased at each grade level from 2000 to 2006 , particularly for grades at the middle and high school levels , according to shpps data ( see fig . for example , the estimated percentage of schools that required ninth grade students to take pe increased from 13 percent in 2000 to 55 percent in 2006 . the percentage of states that required or encouraged districts or schools to follow naspe - based pe standards — such as competency in motor skills and promotion of responsible personal and social behavior — increased from 59 percent in 2000 to 76 percent in 2006 . in 2006 , an estimated 65 percent of schools adopted such standards . district and school officials with whom we spoke said pe curricula now focus less on traditional sports in favor of helping students develop lifelong skills . for instance , three schools we visited offered outdoor adventure - based activities that helped students develop problem solving and teamwork skills .