we disagree . during the summer and fall of 2001 , medicare+choice legislative proposals were developed in both the house and senate . also congressional hearings were held on the status of the medicare+choice progam , which included the issue of adjusted community ratings . regarding our assessment of personnel changes in the oig , the inspector general stated that her actions were appropriate and that the nature of the senior executive service encourages rotations among staff . while we do not dispute the inspector general's authority to reassign staff to meet office needs , the manner in which she made these changes clearly created an atmosphere of anxiety in the oig . the inspector general stated that she explained the rationale for her decisions “over and over again.” however , our discussions with staff members revealed that they did not understand why many of the changes had been made . moreover , most of the eight senior managers whose departures we found particularly troubling told us that the inspector general never explained to them why she wanted them to leave their positions . the inspector general also commented that our employee survey suggested that there were no widespread negative perceptions among staff concerning her personnel decisions . we disagree with this observation because our survey did not contain a question related to her personnel changes . instead , our survey focused on employee satisfaction within their immediate work groups — most of which are in the field where the consequences of the inspector general's changes were least felt . the inspector general noted that most of the individuals who left the oig following her changes were in new positions that were “at least equal to or better than” the ones they occupied at the oig and that she always promoted from within the organization . we do not think that the current employment situations of these former staff members are relevant to the inspector general's personnel decisions , nor is her practice of promoting other employees from within the organization . in our draft report , we also discussed the oig's budgetary difficulties . in her comments , the inspector general described her efforts to respond to this situation , which primarily consisted of directing one of her senior managers — who was in an acting deputy position — to develop strategies for resolving the oig's financial problems and to work with other senior oig managers to develop a spending plan . while we would fully expect that the inspector general would want to call on her management team to confront the agency's budgetary problems , our concern was that she personally played only a minor role in resolving this matter , particularly in the absence of a principal deputy . given the inspector general's limited personal involvement , the oig's senior management team lacked a leader with sufficient authority to mediate any disagreements between them and to take aggressive steps to identify appropriate solutions to the organization's fiscal challenges . finally , the inspector general's comments pointed out that oi had taken steps to correct the deficiencies we noted in its credentialing system . we acknowledged that corrective action has been initiated and this was reflected in our draft report .