see fig . 1 for examples of follow - on actions ) . is the program designed so that it is not redundant or duplicative of any other federal , state , local or private effort ? is the program design free of major flaws that would limit the program's effectiveness or efficiency ? is the program design effectively targeted , so that resources will reach intended beneficiaries and / or otherwise address the program's purpose directly ? section ii: strategic planning ( yes , no , n / a ) 1 . does the program have a limited number of specific long - term performance measures that focus on outcomes and meaningfully reflect the purpose of the program ? does the program have ambitious targets and timeframes for its long - term measures ? does the program have a limited number of specific annual performance measures that can demonstrate progress toward achieving the program's long - term goals ? does the program have baselines and ambitious targets for its annual measures ? do all partners ( including grantees , sub - grantees , contractors , cost - sharing partners , and other government partners ) commit to and work toward the annual and / or long - term goals of the program ? are independent evaluations of sufficient scope and quality conducted on a regular basis or as needed to support program improvements and evaluate effectiveness and relevance to the problem , interest , or need ? are budget requests explicitly tied to accomplishment of the annual and long - term performance goals , and are the resource needs presented in a complete and transparent manner in the program's budget ? has the program taken meaningful steps to correct its strategic planning deficiencies ? specific strategic planning questions by program type rg1 . are all regulations issued by the program / agency necessary to meet the stated goals of the program , and do all regulations clearly indicate how the rules contribute to achievement of the goals ? capital assets and service acquisition programs ca1 . has the agency / program conducted a recent , meaningful , credible analysis of alternatives that includes trade - offs between cost , schedule , risk , and performance goals and used the results to guide the resulting activity ? if applicable , does the program assess and compare the potential benefits of efforts within the program and ( if relevant ) to other efforts in other programs that have similar goals ? does the program use a prioritization process to guide budget requests and funding decisions ? section iii: program management ( yes , no , n / a ) 1 . does the agency regularly collect timely and credible performance information , including information from key program partners , and use it to manage the program and improve performance ? are federal managers and program partners ( including grantees , sub - grantees , contractors , cost - sharing partners , and other government partners ) held accountable for cost , schedule and performance results ? are funds ( federal and partners' ) obligated in a timely manner and spent for the intended purpose ?