seas . to improve student achievement through use of technology in elementary and secondary schools and to help all students become technologically literate by the end of the eighth grade and , through the integration of technology with both teacher training and curriculum development , establishing research - based instructional methods that can be widely implemented . awards are made to seas . partnerships of school districts and ihes may apply to states for subgrants . partnership must include , at a minimum , an engineering , mathematics , or science department of an ihe , and a high - need school district . ( 4 ) what are the challenges to collaboration within states and how does education address these challenges ? jessica orr contributed to writing this report . mimi nguyen developed the graphics for the report . to conduct our work , we used a variety of methods , including interviews with education officials , surveys of states and the district of columbia , and site visits in three states . to raise student achievement by improving teachers' knowledge and understanding of and appreciation for traditional u.s. history . 118,952 fiscal year 2009 appropriations ( dollars in thousands ) school districts eligible for a reading first subgrant and public or private organizations or agencies located in a community served by an eligible district may apply . supports local efforts to enhance the early language , literacy , and prereading development of preschool - age children , particularly those from low - income families , through strategies and professional development that are based on scientifically based reading research . school districts , including charter schools that are districts in their state , seas , or partnerships of ( 1 ) a district , sea , or both , and ( 2 ) at least one nonprofit organization may apply . to learn about the major federal programs supporting teacher quality efforts , we selected programs from the guide to u.s. department of education programs 2008 and verified that these were the relevant programs with education officials . for each grant program , we reviewed federal laws , nonregulatory guidance , policies , procedure manuals , and other documentation , and interviewed officials from a range of education offices overseeing teacher quality programs to determine how they coordinate program efforts as well as how they monitor grantees . we also interviewed officials from a selection of relevant education - funded research organizations and related assistance providers at the regional and national levels to understand how education funds and supports efforts to improve teacher quality . to learn about the specific areas of teacher quality that state agencies are focusing on and the challenges to collaboration within their states , we administered two surveys between august and november 2008 — one to heads of state educational agencies and another to heads of state agencies for higher education in states and the district of columbia using self - administered , electronic questionnaires posted on the internet . we received a 94 percent response rate for the state educational agency survey and a 96 percent response rate for the state agency for higher education survey .