gao - 04-699t . washington , d.c.: april 21 , 2004 . sec generally agreed with the report and its recommendations . the letter from sec's chairman noted that sec has been working actively with the trading markets , core clearing organizations , and major market participants to strengthen the resiliency of the financial markets . in addition , sec's letter noted that it would be taking specific actions in response to our recommendations , including conducting an assessment of key broker - dealers' trading staff arrangements and the preparations of these firms to resume trading operations following a disaster . some of the organizations we reviewed also had invested in more secure technologies . for example , one organization put in place a new multitiered external network , which provides multiple layers of security . during our reviews , we also identified and discussed with these organizations additional actions they could take to further improve their information security . all the critical organizations had also further increased their ability to recover from attacks or other disasters since our 2003 report , but some still had limitations in their business continuity capabilities that increased their risk of disruption . since our report , these organizations also have more specific standards against which to measure their capabilities because federal financial regulators have issued business continuity guidelines and principles that set expectations for these organizations . these regulatory guidelines direct the organizations to establish geographically diverse backup capabilities and state that the operation of a backup site should not be impaired by a wide - scale evacuation at the primary site or the inaccessibility of the staff . although the guidance does not specify a minimum distance between primary and backup facilities , regulators state that such facilities should not rely on the same infrastructure components , such as transportation , telecommunications , water supply , and power supply . as of may 2004 , four of the seven critical organizations had geographically dispersed backup sites that their officials indicated were capable of conducting the organizations' critical operations . each backup site was located at a considerable distance from the organizations' primary sites — ranging from almost 300 miles to over 1,100 miles . however , as of june 2004 , the remaining three critical organizations that we noted in our previous report as lacking geographic separation between their primary and backup facilities did not have geographically diverse backup facilities capable of assuming all critical operations . instead , these three organizations' current backup facilities were located within the same geographic area as their primary sites ( although , as discussed below , one organization had a geographically diverse facility that it could use to run some of its critical applications ) . officials at one organization said that these facilities do not depend on the same infrastructure components as their primary facilities ; although , in some cases , they would depend on the same transportation system . although having backup sites does reduce the risk that these organizations' operations would be disrupted in future attacks , both primary and backup facilities could be affected by wide - scale events , and thus , these organizations faced an increased level of risk of operational disruptions .