ice data . to report on family members apprehended by cbp and detained in ice family residential centers , we reviewed ice detention data from june 2014 , when ice opened its first family residential center on the southwest border , through fiscal year 2018 , the most current data available at the time of our review . ofo data . assessing potential sponsors . orr officials stated that orr needs additional information about parents and other adults accompanying a child ( who is later designated as a uac ) at the time of apprehension to assess all potential sponsors with whom uac will be placed as they await immigration proceedings in the united states . however , the joint concept of operations contains limited details about what information should be shared between dhs and hhs about relevant adults . for example , the agreement states that ice and cbp will provide orr with contact information for parents , legal guardians , or adult relatives . however , the agreement does not , for example , require dhs to share the details of an adult's criminal history information to orr . in addition , border patrol headquarters officials stated that agents typically would not alert orr to any concerns about invalid family relationships , as they do not believe that information is relevant . orr officials stated they need detailed information about an accompanying adult to assess whether they could potentially pose a danger to the child , and this is not addressed in the joint concept of operations . however , orr officials stated that this information is often not included in dhs's referrals for uac , and orr sometimes learns about an accompanying adult from a child after placement in an orr shelter . reunifying eligible separated family units . to ensure compliance with the federal court injunction in the ms. l. v. ice litigation , orr officials stated that they need to know enough details about ( 1 ) family separations or ( 2 ) situations in which cbp had concerns a family relationship was invalid , to determine whether there are any family units potentially eligible for reunification . if dhs and hhs determine that a parent will be reunified with a child , orr is responsible for ( 1 ) verifying the validity of the family relationship and ( 2 ) determining whether the parent is fit or poses a danger to the child , according to orr officials . for family unit reunifications , orr has relied , in part , on the determinations made by dhs when the family was separated , according to these officials . however , orr officials stated the information dhs provides about family separations is generally limited or provided inconsistently , often without enough detail for orr to assess whether the family unit may be eligible for reunification . for example , the referral might state a family separation is due to the parent's criminal history , but orr must follow up with ice to specify the charge , determine whether the adult was convicted , or learn the date of the event . in addition , orr may conduct family reunifications in accordance with orr policies and procedures in other situations .