gao - 05-8 . washington , d.c.: january 28 , 2005 . another 17 courses are under development . jkddc managers plan to continue identifying and developing joint individual education requirements and associated courseware . they also plan to develop a long - term joint individual training continuum and a global distribution capability for joint education and training that include multinational and international partners . a pilot global distribution capability demonstration is planned for fiscal year 2006 , with a mature joint individual training continuum expected in late 2009 . the jaec initiative is focused on continually monitoring program results and identifying improvements in joint training . the jaec joint management office was established during fiscal year 2004 under the deputy under secretary of defense for readiness . most of the early efforts conducted under this initiative have been focused on planning , assessing , and developing tools and techniques that can be embedded in the other training transformation initiatives in order to provide a robust joint assessment and enabling capability . this effort has resulted in the establishment of preliminary training transformation performance assessment metrics in early 2005 . the first of three formal periodic program assessments will occur from april to october 2005 and refinements to the metrics will continue to be made as this process progresses . additionally , the jaec joint management office is developing a process that would uniformly track joint training , education , and experience , and ensure this information can be linked to readiness assessments by 2006 . within this initiative , the joint chiefs of staff has the lead for evaluating enhancements to dod's joint training system to make it more user friendly and adaptable to evolving operational concepts and to complete these enhancements by 2009 . current and future funding also reflect the incremental development approach dod is using to implement the program . the jntc initiative , the leading effort for transforming military training , accounts for $1.48 billion , or 84 percent , of the total $1.76 billion budgeted for fiscal years 2003 through 2011 . efforts related to the jkddc and jaec ( the trailing initiatives ) are collectively budgeted for $284.9 million . for the first time , in fiscal year 2005 , all three training transformation initiatives prepared program execution plans reflecting what they expected to spend during that fiscal year , as shown in table 1 . resources to manage the training transformation program come from three primary sources: ( 1 ) funding provided directly to and controlled by the services for service - specific program activities related to the jntc initiative ; ( 2 ) funding provided directly to the joint forces command , the office of the secretary of defense , and the joint staff for their own training transformation activities ; and ( 3 ) funding provided directly to the joint forces command for distribution to the services for service - specific jntc program activities . by providing the joint forces command with this funding , the office of the secretary of defense has given the command the flexibility to annually fund service activities deemed critical to the training transformation program , because they contribute to meeting the goals and objectives identified in the training transformation implementation plan .