all types of vehicles can roll over . however , taller , narrower vehicles such as pickups , minivans , and suvs have higher centers of gravity and thus are more susceptible to roll over if involved in a single - vehicle crash . nhtsa reported that 61 percent of fatalities in suvs and 45 percent of fatalities in pickups in 2002 were the results of rollover crashes . the results are also published by what car ? ( a british car magazine ) , which ? car ( a magazine owned and produced by british consumer associations ) , and the general german automobile association ( adac ) magazine . other consumer magazines in europe also provide crash test information . lastly , japan annually publishes the choosing a safer car booklet , which provides new and carryover crash test results . the japan ncap also publishes summary brochures of test results . like the u.s. ncap , the insurance institute and the australia and euro ncaps worked with the news media to inform consumers about the results of the vehicle safety tests . for example , each program issued press releases to convey the results of safety research and crash tests . in addition , the insurance institute has worked with television broadcasts , such as the prime time news magazine program dateline nbc , to raise the public's awareness of how vehicles perform in the program's crash tests . insurance institute officials grant interviews explaining the results of the tests and use broadcast - quality film and lighting to record the crash tests and make them available for television broadcasts . according to japan ncap officials , they work with television shows to help produce news segments that highlight changes in test procedures and recent test results . further , according to euro ncap officials , in addition to other activities , europe promotes consumer education by using crashed vehicles as public displays in prominent places in europe during press conferences . the events are designed to attract news media and public attention in an attempt to increase public interest in and knowledge about car safety . the level of government and industry involvement varies among the crash test programs . for example , the u.s. ncap , which is operated and funded solely by the u.s . dot , has traditionally based its u.s. ncap on the federal motor vehicle safety standards as a matter of agency policy and follows an informal rulemaking process where industry and other interested parties can submit comments once nhtsa issues a notice of proposed rulemaking . the insurance institute , which is funded by private insurance companies , has no such process and can make an internal decision to modify tests at any time . for example , according to insurance institute officials , when they began their side - impact tests , they developed a crash test barrier to represent the risk of severe head injuries in side impacts by suvs and pickups . the insurance institute officials said they did not involve automobile manufacturers in the decision - making process but informed them as well as nhtsa before implementing the change .