( see app . i for a more complete discussion of our scope and methodology , and app . ii for a list of the field offices we visited and information about them. ) as we describe in appendix i , we tested the reliability of ssa's work productivity and staffing data , the national average field office customer wait time for fiscal years 2002 to 2006 , and national and field office wait time data for fiscal years 2007 and 2008 from ssa's visitor intake process , and found that they were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review . to review the challenges that ssa faces in meeting service delivery needs in the future , we interviewed ssa headquarters officials responsible for operations , budget , and strategic human capital planning , and obtained relevant documentation . this documentation included data on the projected growth in the number of claims , beneficiaries , and staff retirements , and ssa's fiscal year 2008 to 2013 strategic plan . we conducted our work between july 2007 and january 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . ssa offers a range of services , which includes providing financial assistance to eligible individuals through the following three major benefit programs: old - age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) — provides benefits to retired workers and their families and to survivors of deceased workers . disability insurance ( disability ) — provides benefits to eligible workers who have qualifying disabilities , and their eligible family members . supplemental security income ( ssi ) — provides income for aged , blind , or disabled individuals with limited income and resources . in fiscal year 2008 , these three benefit programs provided a combined total of approximately $650 billion to nearly 55 million beneficiaries . ssa projects that the benefit payments and number of beneficiaries for the three programs will increase in fiscal year 2009 ( see tables 1 and 2 ) . besides paying benefits through these three programs , ssa issues social security cards , maintains earnings records , and performs various other functions through a network of field office and headquarters operations using an administrative budget of over $10 billion . ssa's field operations consist of: field offices , which serve as the agency's primary points for face - to - face contact ; social security card centers , which issue social security numbers ; teleservice centers , which offer national , toll - free telephone service ; program service centers , which make entitlement decisions for benefits , as well as assist in answering 800-number calls . table 3 shows the type of work that is performed by various ssa field components . field offices are located in communities across the united states , the virgin islands , puerto rico , and guam , delivering services through face - to - face contact , over the phone , and through the mail .