schedule changes . this figure consists of two timelines that identify key milestones for the program . the first timeline is based on the initial apb dhs leadership approved after the department's current acquisition management policy went into effect . the second timeline identifies when the program expected to reach its major milestones as of january 2018 and includes milestones introduced after the program's initial apb . dates shown are based on the program's apb threshold dates or updates provided by the program office . test status . this table identifies key recent and upcoming test events . it also includes dhs's director , office of test and evaluation's assessment of programs' test results , if an assessment was conducted . staffing profile . this figure identifies the total number of staff a program needs ( measured in full time equivalents ) including how many are considered critical and how many staff the program actually has . lastly , each program assessment summarizes comments provided by the program office and identifies whether the program provided technical comments . automated commercial environment ( ace ) customs and border protection ( cbp ) the ace program is developing software that will electronically collect and process information submitted by the international trade community . ace is intended to provide private and public sector stakeholders access to information , enhance the government's ability to determine whether cargo should be admitted into the united states , and increase the efficiency of operations at u.s. ports by eliminating manual and duplicative trade processes , and enabling faster decision making . final deployment and operational testing of ace functionality delayed . program plans to identify an approach to address collections functionality in march 2018 . we last reported on this program in march 2018 and april 2017 ( gao - 18-271 , gao - 17-346sp ) . cbp declared a cost and schedule breach in april 2017 — 5 months after re - baselining the program in response to a prior breach — because of difficulties developing the collections aspect of ace's remaining functionality , which collects and processes duties owed on imported goods . cbp reported that its officials were not versed in the complexities of collections in the legacy system and underestimated the level of effort required to integrate collections capabilities into ace . as a result , the program delayed final deployment of ace functionality several times and missed the deadlines for completing the remaining milestones in its current acquisition program baseline ( apb ) , including achieving acquisition decision event ( ade ) 3 and full operational capability ( foc ) by the revised dates of june 2017 and september 2017 , respectively . additional coding and testing to complete ace development also required contract extensions that exceeded the current apb cost thresholds . the program subsequently decoupled collections from ace's remaining functionality to permit deployment of the other post - release capabilities — such as liquidations and reconciliation — using a phased approach between september 2017 and february 2018 . in november 2017 , cbp officials estimated that efforts to decouple collections from post - release functionality would be an additional $32 million in acquisition costs .