gao - 10-696 . washington d.c.: july 29 , 2010 . these facilities have been in operation for over 50 years . the naval hospital provides services for active duty servicemembers and their family members stationed on guam . transient active duty servicemembers , military retirees ( transient and living on guam ) and their family members , national guard members , and officials from other federal agencies also receive health care from the naval hospital . in addition to the navy - operated military treatment facilities on guam , the air force's 36th medical group located at andersen air force base operates a medical and dental clinic , renovated in 2006 , that delivers primary medical and dental care to dod beneficiaries in and around andersen air force base , which is on the northern part of the island . a civilian hospital — guam memorial hospital — as well as community health clinics are also on guam . according to navy planning documents , military health system beneficiaries typically do not use the services of guam memorial hospital or the community health clinics , and will only be referred there by naval hospital guam in the case of an emergency that occurred in closer proximity to guam memorial hospital . the united states and japan held a series of sustained security consultations , referred to as the defense policy review initiative , which were aimed at reducing the burden of the u.s. military presence on japanese communities and strengthening the u.s. - japan security alliance . by 2006 , these consultations established the framework for the future u.s. force structure in japan , including the relocation of military units from okinawa , japan to guam . an estimated 8,600 marines and their estimated 9,000 dependents are expected to relocate from okinawa , japan to guam . in addition , the united states plans to expand the capabilities and presence of the army , navy , and air force on guam over the next several years . as such , the military population on guam is expected to grow by over 160 percent , from 15,000 to over 39,000 by 2020 . the deputy secretary of defense established the joint guam program office to facilitate , manage , and execute requirements associated with the relocation of u.s. marine corps assets from okinawa , japan to guam . the joint guam program office is also expected to lead the coordinated planning efforts and synchronize the funding requirements between dod components , and to work closely with other stakeholders , such as the government of japan . the joint guam program office receives planning assistance from the naval facilities engineering command in conducting analyses and developing an acquisition strategy for infrastructure needed to support dod operational requirements . the naval facilities engineering command executes contracts for construction and infrastructure projects including those funded by contributions from the government of japan . to accommodate the additional inpatient and outpatient requirements resulting from the expected increase in the military population on guam , the navy plans to expand inpatient and outpatient care in the replacement hospital and move primary outpatient and dental care to the two new branch health clinics .