these should be attached to the carrier's proposal . provide documentation of faa approval — a letter from the faa approving the use of an less - than - lethal device based on its meeting safety standards imposed by the faa demonstrating that the device will not interfere , disturb , interrupt , or cause catastrophic failure to the avionics of the aircraft . ( foregoing is tsa text. ) we have included a list of these proposed criteria in appendix i of this report . in addition to making the request process consistent and clear , establishing criteria can help the agency ensure that any approvals for the use of electric stun devices on board commercial aircraft are compatible with tsa's mission to ensure the security of the nation's transportation system and the traveling public . for example , in the case of criteria governing training , we have previously reported that any civilian electric - stun - device training curriculum should have a very explicit use - of - force policy . unlike police officers , civilians are not generally experienced in deciding whether the use of force is justified and , if so , to what extent . what controls does tsa have in place to help ensure uniform and timely review of air carrier requests to deploy electric stun devices on board commercial aircraft ? although tsa has no supporting documentation of having applied the criteria proposed in its 2003 report to requests submitted by commercial air carriers , according to agency officials , tsa took into account these considerations when ultimately approving the foreign air carrier request in december 2004 . the information contained must , at the very least , provide evidence that the product is known to the industry , with viable and recent studies and research supporting its use in the aircraft environment and that the product meets safety standards set by the federal aviation administration . threshold of protection — the correspondence must contain language that enumerates how an ltl device meets the threshold of protection for the cockpit , aircraft and passenger safety . to determine what analysis the federal government had conducted to assess the safety and effectiveness of electric stun devices on board commercial aircraft , we conducted a literature search to identify the extent of past research that had been done by various federal agencies on the safety and effectiveness of deploying these devices on board commercial aircraft . we also conducted a literature search of existing studies addressing the health effects of these devices . we currently have a separate ongoing engagement that is evaluating the extent to which claims regarding the safety and effectiveness of electric stun devices are supported by currently available scientific data . the results of our literature searches were limited because no federal studies or reviews examining the use of electric stun devices on board commercial aircraft have been published since may 2003 , and no studies have been published examining the potential health effects of these devices on individuals who are on board commercial aircraft .