stephens . gasb statement no . 68 was in effect for fiscal years beginning after june 15 , 2014 , and established standards for measuring and recognizing liabilities , deferred outflows of resources , and deferred inflows of resources related to pensions . for each of the other territories that implemented gasb statement no . 68 , implementing the statement resulted in the territory recognizing previously unrecognized net pension liabilities and , therefore , a decline in ending net position in the year of recognition . puerto rico's total net position for the primary government and component units combined also declined year over year between fiscal years 2005 and 2014 , from a positive $2.5 billion as of fiscal year end 2005 to a negative $43.6 billion as of fiscal year end 2014 . puerto rico officials , representatives from ratings agencies that we spoke to , and publically available reports that we reviewed cited various major factors as contributors to puerto rico's high debt levels . the factors cited include the following: public debt financing government operations: ratings agency officials told us that puerto rico has long used public debt as a means to finance general government operations and indicated that debt has been used for this purpose in puerto rico since at least 2000 . according to these officials , the sustained use of debt to finance general government operations is unusual when compared to states and was considered a “red flag” in the case of puerto rico . as puerto rico's debt grew , the government found it increasingly difficult to meet other responsibilities , including paying tax returns , settling accounts payable , and fulfilling pension obligations . triple tax exempt status: debt in puerto rico was attractive to investors for its triple tax exempt status . over time , puerto rico's primary government accumulated debt from investors without addressing its persistent deficits . according to the february 28 , 2017 , version of the puerto rico government's fiscal plan , puerto rico's capacity to issue debt at favorable rates postponed the implementation of fiscal reforms and controls necessary to balance puerto rico's budget . financial data limitations: a lack of comprehensive , timely , and accurate financial data from puerto rico may have limited the ability of some investors to anticipate or fully understand the economic crisis in the territory . for example , according to the government of puerto rico's february 28 , 2017 , version of the fiscal plan , audited financial statements for puerto rico were only issued on time three times from 2005 to 2014 . audited financial statements are still currently pending for fiscal years 2015 and 2016 . in addition , forecasts routinely overestimated revenue . recession and outmigration: recession and outmigration have resulted in reduced tax revenue . a recession in puerto rico began in 2006 and continued through the period we reviewed . outmigration also accelerated most years since 2005 as puerto ricans migrated to the u.s. mainland and elsewhere . according to u.s. census bureau estimates , puerto rico lost 14 percent of its population , more than 550,000 individuals , between july 2009 and july 2016 .