gao - 16-242 . washington , d.c.: march 1 , 2016 . all figures are in 2015 dollars . we assessed the reliability of the data we used by reviewing relevant documentation and interviewing knowledgeable agency officials . we found the data to be reliable for the purposes used in this report . we made several assumptions in our scenario calculations , the most important of which is the life expectancy estimate for income groups . we identified and reviewed 11 relevant studies published in the past decade ( see app . i ) and ultimately used the life expectancy estimates from a 2007 study by ssa's hilary waldron . we chose this study primarily because it produced cohort life expectancy estimates at a number of ages at which an individual can claim social security retirement benefits . other advantages of the 2007 waldron study are that it relies on comprehensive data on social security - covered workers that is not generally available to other researchers , it describes patterns over several decades , and it measures earnings over a multi - year period rather than just over a single year . moreover , the study's life expectancy estimates are in - line with other estimates and they are used in two of nine studies we identified that describe the effects of life expectancy disparities . although we found it sufficient for our purposes , the 2007 waldron study had some notable drawbacks . first , it produces estimates only for social security - covered men . despite this drawback , we believe the estimates are appropriate for our purposes because the vast majority ( 94 percent ) of workers are covered by social security , according to ssa , and because a number of researchers have raised questions about the reliability of life expectancy estimates by income group for women . second , the estimates are broken - out by those in the top and bottom half of the earnings distribution . while it would have been useful to have a finer break - out by earning groups , the estimates were sufficient for our purposes to describe the effects on individuals with income at the 25th and 75th percentiles ( which we describe as lower - and higher - income , respectively ) . one final drawback is that the study produces life expectancy estimates for individuals born in 1941 , who are now past retirement age . it is possible that this cohort is different than past or future cohorts . in particular , given that most studies we reviewed found increasing disparities in life expectancy , our use of this study may underestimate the effect of life expectancy differences for more recent cohorts . in order to calculate lifetime benefits using ssa's quick calculator , we assumed a set of characteristics for two hypothetical individuals , both men ( given the limitations of life expectancy estimates for women ) . one individual was assumed to have an income in the bottom half of the individual income distribution , and the other an income in the top half . for the mid - point of each half of the income distribution ( i.e.