more than half of these employees worked at hhs . in contrast , 5 of these agencies do not have any series 1109 employees and an additional 7 have fewer than 20 ( see figure 1 ) . the way that an agency manages grants may explain whether , and to what extent , it has adopted the grants management specialist job series 1109 . in the four agencies we selected for further review , we saw differences in the extent to which they adopted the 1109 series , partly because of different grants management approaches . for example , although the commercial courses cover administrative requirements for grants management as set by omb , a goal of the hrsa program specialist training is to help program specialists understand how hhs policy relates to omb guidance . the program specialist course manual uses practice scenarios with specific hrsa examples to present the reasoning behind when and which policies should supersede others . hrsa officials told us that the program specialist training was developed , in part , with the goal of improving customer service to grantees by ensuring that staff receive specific training on how to manage hrsa grants . each of the agencies that we selected for a detailed review also used other approaches to impart agency - specific guidance on grant policies and procedures to the grant workforce . for example , state used a number of training mechanisms in addition to formal courses to train its grant workforce both domestically and overseas . these included informal training sessions and a variety of online information sharing . informal training included roundtable discussions facilitated quarterly by state's central grant policy office . these discussions allowed employees to share knowledge and perspectives with their peers on topics such as monitoring grant programs through site visits . state has several methods for sharing information , including an online platform where employees can find the latest information on policy guidance and regulations , grant reports , and grant systems as well as online repositories for frequently asked questions on agency grants policy and financial management of grants . state officials told us that because omb administrative guidance generally does not apply to the overseas grant environment , the agency has developed training for the grant workforce on agency - specific policies and procedures . using the training mechanisms described above , among other training methods , agency officials said they were able to provide employees with agency - specific training as issues arose and , through the use of online information sharing , easily reach those in the overseas bureaus . on a government - wide level , cofar plans to provide training on grants management core competencies by september 2014 . toward that end , omb staff told us that cofar has solicited feedback in town hall meetings with grant - making agencies , explored potential options for training venues , and is having hhs take the lead for cofar in this effort . certification programs are designed to ensure that individuals attain the knowledge and skills required to perform in a particular occupation or role by establishing consistent standards .