we provided a draft of this report to cci for comment . in accordance with the authority in 40 u.s.c . ยง 5108 , which authorizes gao to audit the accounts of a private organization that performs services or conducts activities on u.s. capitol grounds , you asked us to audit all concerts hosted by cci for the past 3 years . this report examines ( 1 ) how much funding , federal and nonfederal , was received and used by cci for the 2012 through 2014 memorial day and fourth of july concerts and ( 2 ) to what extent cci's recorded receipts and disbursements related to these concerts were supported by adequate documentation , approved by authorized management , and recorded in the appropriate year . for this review , we obtained the populations of receipt and disbursement transactions from cci's accounting system for 2012 through 2014 . the increases were mainly attributable to an increase in funding received through the license agreements with pbs . other funding sources remained consistent over the 3-year period . cci disbursed from $8.3 million to $8.9 million each year to produce the 2012 through 2014 memorial day and fourth of july concerts , approximately 1.1 to 3.7 percent less than the annual funding received . cci retains the excess of receipts over disbursements to use toward future concerts in accordance with the cooperative agreements to produce the concerts . cci records transactions in its accounting system under three main account series ( i.e. , memorial day concert , capitol fourth concert , and general and administrative ) and uses detailed subaccounts to classify transaction types . the largest change in proportion occurred in 2013 when technical equipment rose 3 percent . according to cci , this was due to upgrades made to the band shell . during our review , we found that the receipt transactions tested for all 3 years were supported by adequate documentation , approved by authorized management , and recorded in the appropriate year . similarly , we found that the disbursement sample items tested for all 3 years were supported by adequate documentation and recorded in the appropriate year . however , we found that cci did not effectively follow its existing policy for documenting the approval of payments made by check in 2013 . we found that all receipt transactions tested ( 21 transactions for 2012 , 27 transactions for 2013 , and 25 transactions for 2014 ) were supported by adequate documentation , approved by authorized management , and recorded in the appropriate year . to verify the completeness and accuracy of these transaction populations , we performed data reliability procedures by reconciling population totals to the trial balances and then comparing the trial balances to the audited financial statements . we then used the account descriptions in cci's accounting system to classify the transactions into categories for reporting purposes . we obtained cci management's concurrence with our classifications . to evaluate the controls over cci's receipt and disbursement transactions , we met with officials from cci to discuss the specific nature and characteristics of their organization's receipts and disbursements for concert - related activities .