( fig . 5 shows a decontamination team during the exercise. ) ncr 2000 consisted of previously planned exercises that complemented the topoff 2000 activities but did not involve agencies' top officials . the scenarios include incidents involving nuclear , radiological , chemical , and biological agents or devices . ( fig . 10 shows where this course was given during 1996-june 2000. ) this exercise - based course focuses on preparing local community officials who must respond to the consequences of a terrorist act . the integrated emergency management course: consequences of terrorism is presented at the institute and on location . two versions are offered based on the audience . a general iteration is presented to local officials from different venues , while a more tailored program is presented to officials from the same city or community . table 3 provides a nominal list of the participants for the tailored course . prior to presenting the tailored version on site , the institute sends an advance team to the receiving location to review its emergency operations plan and design the exercise phase based on the actual environment . classroom instruction , planning sessions , and exercises are intended to allow for structured decision - making in a realistic environment . every exercise evaluation ends with a meeting in which exercise evaluators provide immediate feedback to the community . further , a 45-day review and comment period is provided prior to finalization and distribution of the exercise report , which consists of a plan negotiated by regional , state , and local officials to correct deficiencies and identify responsibility for corrective actions . problems noted during exercises are addressed in future planning and training activities . fema is the lead federal agency for planning and preparedness for all types of peacetime radiological emergencies , including accidents at commercial nuclear power plants . dating back to the incident at three mile island in 1979 , fema has worked with state and local governments to ensure that emergency preparedness plans are in place for u.s. commercial nuclear power plants . fema issues policy and guidance to assist state and local governments in developing and implementing their radiological emergency response plans and procedures . much of this fema guidance is developed with the assistance of the federal radiological preparedness coordinating committee and its member agencies . rep has a goal of ensuring that the public health and safety of residents living around commercial nuclear power plants are adequately protected in the event of an accident . the program's responsibilities encompass only “off - site” activities — that is state and local government emergency preparedness activities that take place beyond the nuclear power plant's boundaries . on - site activities continue to be the responsibility of the nuclear regulatory commission .