on - site medical care costs . the amount and type of information that ice maintains on costs for medical care provided on - site varies by facility type . according to ihsc officials , ihsc employs a tasking system to document receipt of medical care related immigration complaints obtained from other entities and the tasking of those complaints to ihsc personnel for review and resolution . deficiencies found also require action plans for resolution , and officials stated that they record the implementation of those action plans . table 11 shows the number of over - 72-hour facilities that conducted orsas from 2012 through 2014 , as well as the number of medical care line item deficiencies found . in 2012 , one facility had three line item medical care deficiencies , one facility had two deficiencies , and one facility had one deficiency . the juvenile and family residential management unit within cmd oversees inspections of family residential facilities , and employs an inspections contractor other than that utilized for adult facility inspections . family residential facilities receive monthly , semiannual , and annual inspections , which use a checklist to assess compliance against the 2007 family residential standards . the family residential inspection process uses a checklist format , and also includes a narrative aspect to describe the substance of deficiencies . juvenile and family residential management officials stated that this narrative aspect allows for more in - depth analyses of results than those performed using only a compliance checklist . odo may inspect facilities against additional standards based on trends and areas of concern found in various sources , such as cmd inspection reports and previous odo inspection findings . the inspections also include interviews with a representative sample of detainees . odo staff lead all inspections , and they use contract subject matter experts as needed . medical care subject matter experts accompany odo staff on all facility inspections to conduct an inspection of the medical care - related detention standards . deficiencies found are sent to ero in the form of a narrative facility report . ihsc officials stated that , by practice , these entities that receive complaints — dhs oig , jic , and crcl — do not send complaints directly to ihsc , but notify ihsc , through ero or another ice entity , of medical care - related immigration complaints . ihsc maintains records of these notifications in an ihsc tasking e - mail inbox , and the notifications are saved in specific folders . ihsc officials told us that all complaints received are processed through this tasking system . ihsc officials also told us that in fiscal year 2014 , their tasking system included crcl and jic complaints , but not dril complaints ; however , in fiscal year 2015 , ihsc began including dril complaints in the tasking process . as the entity ultimately responsible for addressing medical - care - related complaints , ihsc officials acknowledged the need to have a more robust task management system and to maintain more comprehensive data on complaints .