the results of such a challenge are uncertain . wto rules , including relevant provisions of china's wto accession agreement , do not explicitly preclude the united states from pursuing either alternative . moreover , china's wto accession commitments ( 1 ) permit use of third - country information in cvd cases and ( 2 ) could facilitate commerce adjudication of cvd actions against state - owned enterprises in that country . the department of commerce has administrative authority to reclassify nme countries as market economy countries , or individual nme country industries as “market oriented” in character , provided that the country as a whole or the industries in question meet certain criteria . department of commerce officials explained that countries classified as nmes may ask that their status be reviewed either within the context of an ongoing import relief case or as an independent matter . commerce has responded to a number of requests for such reviews , granting some countries ( such as russia and estonia ) market economy status while classifying others ( such as vietnam ) as nonmarket economies . table 1 shows former nme countries that commerce has determined merit reclassification as market economy countries . in making decisions on such matters , u.s. trade law specifies that commerce shall take into account the following factors: the extent to which the country's currency is convertible into the currency of other countries , the extent to which wage rates are determined by free bargaining between labor and management , the extent to which joint ventures or other investments by foreign firms the extent of government ownership over the means of production , the extent of government control over the allocation of resources and enterprises' price and output decisions , and other factors that commerce considers appropriate . in april 2004 , the united states and china established a structural issues working group under the auspices of the u.s. - china joint commission on commerce and trade . among other things , this group is examining issues relevant to china's desire to be classified as a market economy country under the criteria set forth in u.s. antidumping law . u.s. officials involved with the group have observed that substantial additional reform will have to take place ( eg , in improving respect for labor rights and reducing or abandoning controls on currency convertibility ) before china can expect to be declared a market economy country under the criteria listed above . the chinese government regards recognition as a market economy among its trading partners as a desirable diplomatic goal . while acknowledging that this change in status may result in the united states ( and other countries ) applying countervailing duties , chinese officials we spoke with emphasized the political value of their country being officially declared a “market economy.” other trade experts pointed out that chinese officials may also be seeking this change because they believe it would generally result in lower antidumping duties being assessed against chinese products . china has actively sought change in its status among its trading partners . a number of them , including singapore and malaysia , have declared china to be a market economy .