or revenue bonds . bonds , also known as full faith and credit obligations , are secured by revenues obtained from the issuer's general taxing powers , including sales taxes , property taxes , and income taxes . bonds are used to build public infrastructure , such as school buildings , jails , police stations , and city halls , and are classified as governmental bonds for tax purposes . in contrast , revenue bonds are issued to finance specific projects or enterprises and investors get paid from the revenues generated by the financed projects . golf courses . we provide information on approximately 2,400 municipal golf courses listed in a national golf foundation database and tax - exempt financing details of golf facilities disclosed in selected state and local government financial reports . hotels and tourist accommodations . we provide the number of hotels financed with tax - exempt bonds identified by government finance experts and details of tax - exempt financings of resort facilities disclosed in selected state and local government financial reports . state - owned gaming support facilities . we provide a summary of gaming operations in 48 states . gaming details provided include lottery operations disclosed in state financial reports , other forms of gaming summarized in a national study of the american gaming association , and gaming trends reported in academic studies on gaming . in addition to the above information sources , we interviewed experts in the field of government finance from top law firms and investment banks specializing in bond financing , officials of the government finance officers association , a senior finance officer of a county government , and officials of the bond market association , and reviewed studies in the field of taxation and government finance . we determined that these data were reliable for the purpose of providing limited information on the eight types of facilities . appendix i has a detailed description of the methodology , data sources , and limitations . we conducted our work from february 2006 through august 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . for federal tax purposes state and local government bonds are classified as either “governmental bonds” or “private activity bonds.” in general , governmental bonds are used to build public capital facilities and serve the general public interest . governmental bonds are tax - exempt and can be issued for a variety of public facilities and projects . tax exemption lowers municipalities' borrowing costs and provides higher after - tax yields to investors . private activity bonds , on the other hand , provide financing to private businesses or individuals and are either tax - exempt or taxable depending on two tests . tax exemption is granted to certain qualified private activity bonds , such as those for certain housing projects and activities , but the borrowed amounts are limited and the interest earned by investors can be subject to alternative minimum tax . in addition , bonds issued by state and local governments can be structured as general obligation ( g.o. ) revenue bonds can be either private activity bonds or governmental bonds for tax purposes .