if so , under what terms ? realigning operations , networks , and workforce: how should usps optimize its operations , networks , and workforce to support changes in services ; how quickly can this happen ; and how can it work with its employees and customers to minimize potential disruption ? this is an area where congress may want to consider an approach similar to that used by the department of defense's base realignment and closure ( brac ) commission , which was established to realign military installations within the united states . usps's planned actions under its existing authority will not be enough to make it financially viable . therefore , congress , usps , and other stakeholders need to reach agreement on a package of actions to take so that usps can become financially viable . this agreement will need to address difficult constraints and legal restrictions that continue to hamper progress . such an agreement is urgently needed so that congress and stakeholders have confidence that the actions usps takes will be fair to all stakeholders . then usps could begin to plan and make the necessary changes , some of which may require several years to fully implement and realize potential cost savings . for example , restructuring operations and networks would require coordinated actions involving postal employees , mailers , and the public . to reach agreement on these difficult issues , congress could engage a panel of independent experts to develop a credible and comprehensive package of specific proposals , including the following: potential changes related to adapting universal postal services to the declining use of mail , such as removing the statutory requirements for 6-day delivery and restrictions on closing post offices . changes needed to realign usps operations , networks , and workforce with its declining workload , and how to address employee and community concerns and resistance to facility closures . improving opportunities to generate revenues , and whether that should include allowing usps to engage in new nonpostal areas . due to the urgency of usps's deteriorated financial condition and outlook , and the fact that it is rapidly approaching its statutory debt limit , congress may need to provide financial relief , for example , by revising the funding schedule for retiree health benefits . another action that congress could take in the near term , which would have a longer - term impact , would be to modify the collective bargaining process to ensure that any binding arbitration would take usps's financial condition into account . furthermore , congress may want assurance through regular reports that any financial relief it provides is met with aggressive actions to reduce costs and increase revenues , and that progress is being made toward addressing its financial problems . ultimately , congress may want to consider changing usps's ownership structure , but the resolution of these more pressing issues might afford a better understanding of whether the ownership structure should be modified . as communications and the use of the mail evolve , congress will need to revisit policy issues related to usps , the services it provides , and how to best position the organization for the future .