( see app . iii for a comprehensive list of modifications made to sba's disaster loan program for september 11 victims. ) sba officials believed that many of the complaints about the disaster program resulted from the mismatch between victims' expectations of sba's disaster program and the nature of the program . for example , when some victims were told that they could receive “assistance” from sba , they assumed that the assistance would be in the form of grants instead of loans . sba officials noted that the media usually does not draw distinctions among fema grants , sba loans , and other forms of assistance available . sba officials told us that they tried to minimize the public confusion about the nature of the assistance available from sba by working closely with the media and public officials so that disaster victims would receive accurate information about sba assistance . as stated earlier , the strategic plan describes the multiyear strategic goals . for 2 years following issuance . the performance plans describe the corresponding annual performance goals and the measures or indicators that will be used to assess progress in meeting them . during the past several years , we and sba's inspector general have reviewed sba's performance plans and found the plans had significant limitations . our review of the disaster lending portion of the 2003 performance plan found that the limitations identified in the previous reviews remain . we attribute some of these limitations to the specific nature of the measures sba uses to describe the performance of the disaster lending program , while other limitations can be attributed to the description of program's performance in the plan itself . in the past 5 years , sba has used nine different measures to assess the performance of the disaster loan program . both we and sba's inspector general have raised numerous concerns about these various measures in the past . the inspector general found that sba used inconsistent and subjective measures , and we found that the document used to report program performance to the congress lacked key information that would have provided a more accurate picture of both the disaster lending program's performance measures and the results . we observed in our june 2001 report that sba needed to improve the quality of the measures that it used to assess its performance . on the basis of our review of the 2003 performance plan , we have found that , as a group , the measures sba currently uses to assess performance — the current measures ( table 2 , measures 4 to 9 ) continue to have numerous limitations , despite the guidance provided in sba's performance primer . first , the three output measures do not capture the notable progress the program has made in improving its loan processing ; improvements that ultimately benefit disaster loan applicants and borrowers , such as better staffing processes and management of staff duties . second , two of the three outcome measures are actually output measures and the third — a customer survey — has an important limitation . third , other than the customer survey , sba does not have measures to assess the intermediate or end outcomes of its disaster lending program .