credit structure . after the risk assessment and due diligence is performed , the loan officer determines the financing terms and conditions to be recommended . the loan officer is generally required to structure the transaction to include a security interest ( collateral ) in the financed goods or other assets of the borrower . if it is determined that collateral is not necessary , the loan officer is to document the explanation and mitigating factors ( eg , exim support is small relative to a borrower's size ) . for all aircraft transactions , the loan officer is required to perform an assessment and loan - to - value analysis of the collateral , and the financing terms must include requirements for the borrower to maintain ownership and condition of the collateral . application screening . after an application is determined to be complete , it is assigned to the applicable exim division that oversees the applicable type of project . for example , an application for the purchase of an aircraft would be assigned to the transportation division . once assigned , a loan officer in that division is to assess the eligibility of the transaction . to ensure compliance with laws and regulations , the loan officer is to obtain and assess various certifications from transaction participants . loan officers are also required to submit the corporate and individual names and addresses of lenders , borrowers , guarantors , and other transaction participants to the exim library . library staff are then to conduct a character , reputational , and transaction integrity ( crti ) review — a procedure designed to provide a level of due diligence over various risks and to help prevent fraud by checking loan participants' information against 28 databases . risk assessment and due diligence . once the transaction is considered minimally eligible for exim support , the loan officer is required to perform a series of due diligence activities to determine ( 1 ) whether the transaction provides a reasonable assurance of repayment , ( 2 ) any potential material issues regarding the transaction or the participants that would preclude exim support , and ( 3 ) the appropriate risk level and pricing for the transaction . as part of the financial evaluation of the transaction , the loan officer is required to obtain and analyze the borrower's financial statements , credit reports or rating agency reports , financial projections , and other relevant information . as applicable , the loan officer is required to obtain input from other exim staff , such as attorneys or engineers , to conclude on the legal , technical , economic , or environmental risks of the transaction . based on this due diligence , the loan officer is to assess the transaction for risk and assign an overall risk rating . application intake . when an application is initially received , it is screened for basic completeness , follow - up on incomplete or unacceptable applications is performed , and it is assigned to a processing division . this rating is used to calculate the exposure fee exim will charge the borrower for guaranteeing the transaction . greater perceived risks result in higher fees . credit decision .