they had relatively successful outcomes . the other dod programs — the f - 22 , atircms , and pac - 3 — did not closely approximate best practices in capturing design or manufacturing knowledge during product development . they took on greater design challenges , had program reviews that were not supported by critical design and manufacturing knowledge , and made decisions to advance to the next phases of development without sufficient design and manufacturing knowledge . a key to the success of commercial companies was using an evolutionary approach to develop a product . this approach permitted companies to focus more on design and development with a limited array of new content and technologies in a program . it also ensured that each company had the requisite knowledge for a product's design before investing in the development of manufacturing processes and facilities . companies have found that trying to capture the knowledge required to stabilize the design of a product that requires significant amounts of new content is an unmanageable task , especially if the goal is to reduce cycle times and get the product into the marketplace as quickly as possible . design elements not achievable in the initial development were planned for subsequent development efforts in future generations of the product , but only when technologies were proven to be mature and other resources were available . commercial companies have implemented the evolutionary approach by establishing time - phased plans to develop new products in increments based on technologies and resources achievable now and later . this approach reduces the amount of risk in the development of each increment , facilitating greater success in meeting cost , schedule , and performance requirements . in effect , these companies evolve products , continuously improving their performance as new technologies and methods allow . these evolutionary improvements to products eventually result in the full desired capability , but in multiple steps , delivering a series of enhanced interim capabilities to the customer more quickly . historically , dod's approach has been to develop new weapon systems that often attempt to satisfy the full requirement in a single step , regardless of the design challenge or the maturity of technologies necessary to achieve the full capability . under this single - step approach , a war fighter can wait over 15 years to receive any improved capability . figure 5 shows a notional comparison between the single - step and evolutionary approaches . each commercial company we visited used the evolutionary approach as the primary method of product development . general electric builds on the basic capability of a fielded product by introducing proven improvements in capability from its advanced engineering development team . general electric considers the introduction of immature technologies into fielded products or new engine development programs as a significant cost and schedule risk . its new product development process is primarily focused on reducing and managing risk for design changes and product introductions . cummins and hewlett packard managers indicated that , in the past , their companies learned the hard way by trying to make quantum leaps in product performance and by including immature technologies .