dhs concurred with this recommendation . in january 2013 , cbp notified gao it had developed a survey of incumbent officers to seek feedback on possible gaps in training . cbp is currently analyzing the survey results and preparing a report , which will recommend a path forward to address training needs . according to cbp , if an additional training need is identified and funding is available , cbp will develop or revise the current training program . in february 2013 , cbp officials stated it plans to complete this process by april 15 , 2013 . illegal cross - border activity remains a significant threat to federal lands protected by doi and usda law enforcement personnel on the southwest and northern borders and can cause damage to natural , historic , and cultural resources , and put agency personnel and the visiting public at risk . we reported in november 2010 that information sharing and communication among dhs , doi , and usda law enforcement officials for example , interagency forums were had increased in recent years.used to exchange information about border issues , and interagency liaisons facilitated exchange of operational statistics . however , gaps remained in implementing interagency agreements to ensure law enforcement officials had access to daily threat information to better ensure officer safety and an efficient law enforcement response to illegal activity . for example , in border patrol's spokane sector on the northern border , coordination of intelligence information was particularly important because of sparse law enforcement presence and technical challenges that precluded border patrol's ability to fully assess cross - border threats , such as air smuggling of high - potency marijuana . we recommended dhs , doi , and usda provide oversight and accountability as needed to further implement interagency agreements for coordinating information and integrating operations . these agencies agreed with our recommendations , and in january 2011 , cbp issued a memorandum to all border patrol division chiefs and chief patrol agents emphasizing the importance of usda and doi partnerships to address border security threats on federal lands . while this is a positive step , to fully satisfy the intent of our recommendation , dhs would need to take further action to monitor and uphold implementation of the existing interagency agreements to enhance border security on federal lands . dhs has stated that partnerships with other federal , state , local , tribal , and canadian law enforcement agencies are critical to the success of northern border security efforts . we reported in december 2010 that dhs efforts to coordinate with these partners through interagency forums and joint operations were considered successful , according to a majority of these partners we interviewed . in addition , dhs component officials reported that federal agency coordination to secure the northern border was improved . however , dhs did not provide oversight for the number and location of forums established by its components , and numerous federal , state , local , and canadian partners cited challenges related to the inability to resource the increasing number of forums , raising concerns that some efforts may be overlapping .