dod's comments are reprinted in appendix i . other comments provided by dod were incorporated in the report as appropriate . the section on performance discusses these areas in more detail . the comanche's most recent cost estimate was made in april 2000 , when dod approved the program for entry into the engineering and manufacturing development phase . at that time , dod's cost analysis improvement group estimated that the comanche program would need an additional $180 million for its engineering and manufacturing development phase . however , the higher costs estimated by the cost analysis group were not included in the cost estimate when the program office established a new baseline for the comanche program in april 2000 . the comanche program is scheduled for an in - progress program review in january 2003 to review , among other things , its cost estimate . dod believes that this january 2003 review , along with other major program reviews and oversight processes will permit successful management of program risks . the deputy program manager acknowledged that the army's cost estimate for the comanche may need to be revised at this point . the comanche program office also maintains a list of unfunded requirements . the additional funds recently added to the program have reduced these funding requirements , but the revised list still has unfunded requirements in the amount of $68 million . table 2 identifies where the cost estimate has changed . the $75.3 million increase in research , development , testing , and evaluation resulted from added testing for the comanche program . during the milestone ii decision process , the defense acquisition executive directed that the comanche testing program be expanded by adding more testing to fully demonstrate the aircraft's reliability before completion of its engineering and manufacturing development phase . since we last reported on the comanche program , the aircraft's projected empty weight has increased by 653 pounds — from 8,822 pounds to 9,475 pounds . at the current projected design weight of 9,475 pounds , the comanche program office has acknowledged that the helicopter cannot achieve the required vertical rate of climb of 500 feet per minute without increasing the horsepower of the current engine . consequently , the program office has assessed its achievement of the weight requirement as high risk . the army offered its prime contractor for comanche's development , boeing - sirkosky , an award fee of $1.4 million to reduce its projected weight to 9,250 pounds . however , the contractor did not achieve the first iteration of weight reduction in december 2000 . the program office is considering increasing the incentive fee to $5 million for the contractor to reduce the projected weight to 9,300 pounds in december 2001 . the program office believes that it can achieve its vertical rate of climb , even with the increase in comanche's weight , by increasing the horsepower of comanche's t - 801 engine from its current horsepower rating of 1131 to 1201 . the program office estimates that the increase in the engine's power can be obtained at a cost of about $13 million , and this approach will be less costly than other weight reduction efforts .