consequently , we maintain that our recommendation should be addressed . with respect to the second recommendation , sba officials said that sba has developed a procedure that includes a prepublication review process for procurement scorecards . the officials said the procedure identifies responsibilities , provides for an independent peer review , and includes supervisory review . officials said the procedure also includes measures for post - publication review and corrections . we will review supporting documentation for this new procedure to assess whether this recommendation can be closed as implemented . chairman rubio , ranking member cardin , and members of the committee , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact william shear , director , financial markets and community investment at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or shearw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony are andrew pauline ( assistant director ) , paige smith ( assistant director ) , winnie tsen ( assistant director ) , and jennifer schwartz . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . more details on our methodology can be found in the three reports on which this testimony is based . sba has not fully addressed deficiencies we have previously identified for the wosb program , and these deficiencies are affected by sba's ongoing implementation of changes to the program authorized by the national defense authorization act of 2015 ( 2015 ndaa ) . as of early june 2019 , sba had implemented one of the three changes to the program authorized in the 2015 ndaa . specifically , in september 2015 sba published a final rule to implement sole - source authority ( to award contracts without competition ) , effective october 2015 . the two other changes — authorizing sba to implement its own certification process for wosbs and requiring sba to eliminate the option for firms to self - certify that they are eligible for the wosb program — had not been implemented . on may 14 , 2019 , sba published in the federal register a proposed rule that eliminates the self - certification option and describes a potential certification process to be administered by sba . sba officials have stated that the agency will not eliminate self - certification until the new certification process for the wosb program is in place , which they expect to implement by june 2021 . in addition , sba has not fully addressed wosb program oversight deficiencies described in our march 2019 report and first identified in our 2014 report .