postal service ( usps ) operations . my statement will ( 1 ) update usps's financial condition and outlook and explain our recent decision to place usps's financial condition on our high - risk list , and ( 2 ) discuss the need for usps to restructure its mail processing , retail , and delivery networks and its efforts to improve their efficiency . my statement is based upon on our past and ongoing work , including the report being released today on usps efforts to improve delivery efficiency , and our report adding usps to the high - risk list , as well as our continued monitoring of usps's financial condition and outlook . we conducted our work from may 2009 to july 2009 in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that are relevant to our objectives . i am pleased to participate in this hearing on u.s . the framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work . we believe that the information and data obtained , and the analysis conducted , provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions in this product . usps's financial condition and outlook continue to deteriorate with a worsening outlook for mail volume and revenue . usps currently projects a mail volume decline of 13.7 percent for fiscal year 2009 , triple the 4.5 percent decline in fiscal year 2008 and the largest percentage decline since the great depression . as a result , usps is projecting the following for fiscal year 2009: a net loss of about $7 billion , even if it achieves record cost savings of about $6 billion ; an increase in outstanding debt by the annual statutory limit of $3 billion ; and , despite this borrowing , an unprecedented $1 billion cash shortfall . according to usps , it has 50 percent excess capacity for processing first - class mail . usps is using the area mail processing process to propose consolidating some mail processing operations ( see app . usps has reported that it does not expect to generate sufficient cash from operations to fully make its mandated payment of $5.4 billion for future retiree health benefits that is due by september 30 , 2009 . further , usps recently reported to congress that — due to the need to maintain sufficient cash to cover costs — it will not fully make this payment , even if it receives $2 billion in relief from fiscal year 2009 retiree health benefits payments that would be provided by h.r . 22 , which has been reported out of the house committee on oversight and government reform . usps also expects continued financial problems in fiscal year 2010 , with a similar deficit even if it achieves larger cost savings , and an even larger cash shortfall . under this scenario , usps would increase its outstanding debt by an additional $3 billion , which would bring its total debt to $13.2 billion at the end of fiscal year 2010 — only $1.8 billion less than its $15 billion statutory limit .