mex . ; university of california , lawrence livermore national laboratory , calif. ; university of california , los alamos national laboratory , n . mex . ; and ut battelle , oak ridge national laboratory , tenn . collectively , these 13 contractors had subcontracts worth about $4.2 billion in fiscal year 2004 ( or 64.2 percent of the total subcontracting dollars for all 34 facility management contractors ) . of that amount , over $2.1 billion went to small businesses , accounting for nearly two - thirds of the almost $3.3 billion in subcontract dollars that the 34 contractors directed to small businesses that year . during our visits to these 13 facility management contractors , we looked at the reliability of the fiscal year 2004 small business subcontracting achievement data that the contractors provided in the data collection instrument . even though our data covered fiscal years 2001 through 2004 , for our more detailed review of data reliability , we focused on fiscal year 2004 , because we performed most of our analyses on data from that year . although individual contractors may manage thousands of small business subcontracts in a given year , for each of the 13 contractors , we chose separate nonprobability samples of 5 small business subcontracts — for a total of 65 subcontracts — that the facility management contractors had included in the fiscal year 2004 small business subcontracting achievements . we selected each nonprobability sample from a complete list of the contractors' fiscal year 2004 small business subcontracts , which we obtained prior to visiting the contractors . the criteria we used for selecting contracts was the subcontract amount and the goods and services provided . we selected subcontracts that received among the largest dollar commitments in fiscal year 2004 and that encompassed a variety of the types of goods and services provided by small business subcontractors . in total , the 65 subcontracts in our nonprobability samples accounted for 17.2 percent ( $368.1 million ) of the $2.1 billion dollars committed to small business subcontracts in fiscal year 2004 by the 13 facility management contractors . at each contractor's facility , we reviewed documents for each of the five subcontracts , in order to verify the dollar commitments to those subcontracts in fiscal year 2004 , that the contractor included in their response to the data collection instrument . we also reviewed any documents certifying the small business status of those subcontractors at the time the subcontracts were awarded . in addition , to understand the effect of excluding certain subcontracts from the contractors' small business subcontracting achievement calculations , these 13 contractors provided us with data on the dollar amount of their excluded subcontracts in fiscal year 2004 . for all 65 of the small business subcontracts we reviewed , we were able to verify through documents in the subcontract files that the amount of dollars committed to the selected subcontracts in fiscal year 2004 equaled the dollar amounts that the facility management contractors had taken credit for when reporting their small business subcontracting achievements for that year . also , for 63 of the selected subcontracts , we were able to find documents that certified the subcontractor's status as a small business at the time the subcontract was awarded .