the second challenge is ensuring the credibility of offsets . our prior work identified four general criteria for credible carbon offsets — they must be additional , quantifiable , real , and permanent . a carbon offset project is generally considered “additional” if it decreases emissions of greenhouse gases below the quantity that would have been emitted in a projected business - as - usual scenario . “quantifiable” means the reductions can be measured , and “real” means the reductions can be verified . “permanent” means the emissions reduced , avoided , or sequestered by a project will not be released into the atmosphere in the future . providing assurance that offsets are credible is inherently challenging because it involves measuring the reductions achieved through an offset project against a projected baseline of what would have occurred in its absence . for example , if a facility that emitted 200 tons of carbon dioxide per year implemented a project that reduced its emissions by 100 tons , it may have created 100 tons of offsets . see figure 2 for a hypothetical depiction of an offset project measured against a projected business - as - usual scenario . this concern underscores the importance of using quality assurance mechanisms to ensure the credibility of any offsets allowed into a compliance scheme . using offsets in a compliance scheme could also increase administrative costs because of increased government oversight of quality assurance mechanisms used to ensure the credibility of offsets . concerns associated with using offsets for compliance in a regulatory system to limit emissions could be minimized by restricting the use of offsets or including policy options for enhancing oversight of the market such as applying discounts or imposing insurance requirements on offsets with greater uncertainty or potential for failure . certain stakeholders suggested imposing limits on the use of offsets in a compliance scheme to address some of these challenges , but stakeholders held different opinions about the potential effectiveness of this approach . some said it may be necessary to place restrictions on the use of offsets in order to achieve internal emissions reductions from regulated sources . if all the effort to reduce emissions is in the form of offsets , then the compliance system may not provide the price signals necessary for long - term investment in technology at domestic industrial facilities and power plants , according to multiple stakeholders . they said that domestic abatement is central to achieving the long - term goal of any emissions reduction system . however , other stakeholders said that incorporating offsets into a compliance scheme will enable greater overall climate benefits to be achieved at a lower cost , as long as offsets are additional and are not double - counted . our november 2008 report discussed the environmental and economic effects of the cdm and identified lessons learned about the role of carbon offsets in mandatory programs to limit emissions . first , with respect to environmental effects , the overall effect of the cdm on international emissions is uncertain , largely because it is nearly impossible to determine the level of emissions that would have occurred in the absence of each offset project .