selection . the population of data from which acf selected its sample — the adoption and foster care analysis and reporting system ( afcars ) — were not reliable because acf's sampling methodology did not provide for up - front data quality control procedures to ( 1 ) ensure that the population of cases was complete prior to its sample selection and ( 2 ) identify inaccuracies in the data field used for sample selection . specifically , acf had to replace a high percentage of cases sampled from the database of foster care cases for the fiscal year 2010 reporting period because of inaccurate information in afcars . of the original 4,570 sample cases acf selected for testing in its primary and secondary reviews for fiscal year 2010 , 298 cases ( almost 7 percent ) had to be replaced with substitutes because the selected cases had not received title iv - e foster care maintenance payments during the period under review . of the 298 over - sampled cases used to replace the cases initially selected , 63 cases ( more than 21 percent ) then had to be replaced again because those cases had also not received title iv - e foster care maintenance payments during the period under review . further , although we were able to determine how many sampled ( or over - sampled ) cases had to be replaced because available records showed no title iv - e payment was received during the reporting period , neither gao nor acf were able to determine the extent to which the opposite occurred — cases that had received a payment ( and therefore should have been included in the sample population ) had not been coded as receiving title iv - e payments . without developing a statistically valid sampling methodology that incorporates up - front data quality controls to ensure complete and accurate information on the population , including payment data , acf cannot provide assurance that its reported improper payment estimate accurately and completely represents the extent of improper maintenance payments in the foster care program . evaluation . although acf's methodology identified some errors related to underpayments and duplicate or excessive payments , it did not include procedures to reliably determine the full extent of such errors . in its fiscal year 2010 agency financial report , acf reported that underpayments and duplicate or excessive payments represented 19 percent and 6 percent , respectively , or 25 percent of the errors that caused improper payments . however , the extent of underpayments and duplicate or excessive payment errors identified varied widely by state , and in some instances were not identified at all . for example , acf did not identify underpayments in 31 of 51 state eligibility reviews and did not identify duplicate or excessive payments in 36 of 51 state eligibility reviews.did not assess the validity of the reported data . however , the absence of such errors for some states seems inconsistent with the general distribution of errors reported elsewhere . further , the lack of detailed we procedures for identifying any such payment errors may have contributed to the variation or to whether the teams found any errors .