grant management systems in the department . see 42 u.s.c . § 3712h ( g ) ( providing that the oaam director shall establish and maintain such a system in consultation with the chief information officer of the office ) . and monitoring , such as through remote access to cms . the ig concluded that oversight agencies should have direct , instant , and complete access to grant information , which is not provided using the current system , which relies on hard copies of documents . ( 2 ) to what extent has doj taken steps to reduce overlap in its grant programs and the potential for unnecessary duplication in grant awards ? ( 3 ) to what extent does doj use grant monitoring and assessment to determine grant program effectiveness and use the results to enhance its grant programs ? — this report addresses the following three questions: using the framework established in our prior work addressing overlap and duplication , we use the following definitions for purposes of assessing doj's grant programs: overlap occurs when multiple granting agencies or grant programs have similar goals , engage in similar activities or strategies to achieve these goals , or target the same or similar beneficiaries . overlap may result from statutory or other limitations beyond an agency's control . duplication occurs on multiple levels . it occurs when a single grantee uses grant funds from different federal sources to pay for the exact same expenditure . duplication also occurs when two or more granting agencies or grant programs engage in the same or similar activities or provide funding to support the same or similar services to the same beneficiaries . duplication thus stems from overlap . when granting agencies do not identify overlap , assess its impact , or coordinate their activities in acknowledgment of the overlap , there is a heightened risk of unnecessary duplication because one granting agency may not be knowledgeable of the ways in which its funding decision duplicates another's . at times , federal funding is leveraged by design to achieve a single purpose through multiple federal funding streams . these funding arrangements are not characterized as unnecessary duplication for purposes of this review so long as federal agencies are aware of them or have deliberately planned for grant programs to be complementary . to determine potential areas of overlap across doj's grant programs , we identified a total of 253 doj grant solicitations — announcements to applicants of funding opportunities — for fiscal year 2010 by reviewing the solicitation lists posted on the ojp , ovw , and cops office websites and confirming the accuracy of the information with doj officials . we established 10 categories of criminal justice areas and then sorted the solicitations into each category to determine whether these solicitations were announcing grant funding available for similar purposes . we developed these 10 categories after reviewing comparable justice areas identified within doj materials , such as a website it operates to discuss criminal justice research and strategic planning documents .