other reasons . three of the most frequently cited reasons for higher - than - average amounts of paid administrative leave are specific to the policies and practices of one or two of the selected agencies . these reasons include physical fitness - related activities . both gsa and dod reported that selected employees charged paid administrative leave for physical fitness - related activities , with gsa having the most selected employees granted paid administrative leave for fitness - related activities . an agency official at a gsa subcomponent told us that it was following a policy allowing employees up to 3 hours per week in paid administrative leave for the purposes of physical fitness - related activities . gsa reported that this policy was abolished in fiscal year 2014 , outside the time period of the data collected for this analysis ( fiscal years 2011 through 2013 ) . vacation . a specific group of contract employees at a subcomponent of interior recorded authorized vacation time as paid administrative leave . interior indicated that it plans to explore other options for recording authorized vacation time for these employees . professional development . our decisions . we have issued numerous decisions on the permissible use of administrative leave . our decisions recognize that in the absence of a generally applicable statutory or regulatory framework authorizing administrative leave , agencies have the discretion to grant brief periods of administrative leave . however , our decisions have found granting administrative leave for lengthy periods of time is inappropriate unless it is in connection with furthering a function of the agency . under a range of situations , our decisions have addressed the appropriate usage of administrative leave . in the context of official travel , we have recognized several circumstances in which administrative leave may be granted , including brief periods of acclimatization rest following travel , in connection with a transfer , and in connection with extended temporary duty to attend training . a number of our decisions have addressed the use of administrative leave during the investigation of an employee or in the context of taking an adverse action against an employee . for example , to process an employee's suspension ( where it was in the interest of the government to have the employee off the job ) , we approved of placing the employee on administrative leave during an investigation for wrongdoing for the short time needed ( 24 hours or so ) . however , under circumstances when it would not be feasible to reassign the employee ( or when information to initiate an adverse action against the employee was insufficient ) , we concluded that an agency's proposed regulations were unauthorized where those regulations provided up to 45 days of administrative leave while investigating allegations of employee misconduct . administrative tribunal decisions . the merit systems protection board ( mspb ) has recognized the authority of agencies to place employees on short - term administrative leave while instituting adverse action procedures . unenforceable where , under its terms , the agency was to place the employee on administrative leave for extended periods of time . see , brown v. united states postal service , 64 m.s.p.r .