proprietary trading can take a number of forms . proprietary traders often take positions in securities or other products that they think will rise or fall in value over a short period of time in order to profit from a trader's view of the direction of the market . proprietary traders also use more complex strategies such as relative value , in which a trader identifies differences in prices between two related securities or other financial products and takes positions in those products to make a profit . for example , a proprietary trader might identify a discrepancy between the pricing of a stock index and the pricing of its underlying stocks , and then take a long position in one and a short position in the other to profit when the discrepancy corrects itself . banking entities can conduct proprietary trading in desks organized with the specific purpose of trading a firm's own capital ( stand - alone proprietary - trading desks ) , but some have also conducted what could be considered proprietary trading in conjunction with their market making activities by accumulating positions in a particular asset at levels that exceed the amount of the firm's typical or necessary inventory in that asset used to facilitate customer trades . a trader at a market - making desk may anticipate that the price of a particular stock will increase over the short term and purchase and hold more shares of that stock in order to make a larger profit than he or she would otherwise from buying and selling the product as a market maker . for example , one regulator described the activities of one of the trading desks at one of the bank holding companies we reviewed as making markets for clients but that the firm also allowed that desk's traders to hold inventory positions exceeding the amount necessary to facilitate client trades when the traders had a particular view on the direction of the market . also , as discussed later in the report , debate exists about the full scope of activities that should be considered proprietary trading , and some define the term to include not only trading activities but other activities conducted by a firm as a principal , such as long - term investments . trading activities , including proprietary trading , like other banking activities , can create revenues for bank holding companies . we deemed the data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . ( we discuss the recent levels of revenue from trading activities — including stand - alone proprietary trading — in the next section of this report. ) however , trading also poses several types of risks to bank holding companies:  market risk: the potential for financial losses due to an increase or decrease in the value or price of an asset or liability resulting from movements in prices , such as interest rates , commodity prices , stock prices , or the relative value of currencies ( foreign exchange ) .