reg . 22178 ( may 27 , 1992 ) . to date , epa has not established a new effective date . in addition to the contact named above , steve elstein , assistant director ; brian m. friedman ; nathan a. morris ; kelly a. richburg ; and jeanette soares made key contributions to this report . also contributing to this report were mark braza , ellen chu , erin lansburgh , and minette richardson . in addition , matthew drerup , paige gilbreath , susannah hawthorne , stephen j. jue , foster kerrison , patricia lentini , robert marek , angela pun , carrie w. rogers , pam tumler , and cheryl a. williams provided assistance in collecting bottled water labels for our review . 57 fed . ( app . iii shows the questions that we asked and a summary of the responses that we received. ) we also examined bottled water labels and contacted companies to determine the information they provide consumers about the source , treatment , and quality of their products . we did not evaluate whether label information was false or misleading . to obtain bottled water labels , we asked gao staff in each of our 11 field offices and at headquarters to collect about 10 labels per office from bottled water that is specific or unique to their region . after removing duplicate bottled water labels and labels that were not for bottled water but for some other beverage , such as “electrolyte - enhanced” waters , we were left with 83 labels for bottled water sold in containers ranging in size from 8 ounces to 1 gallon . this sample does not represent the universe of bottled water available to consumers in the united states . we systematically reviewed the labels and recorded whether contact information was provided — such as a telephone number , web address , e - mail , or complete postal address — that would allow a consumer to contact the bottled water company and readily obtain more information about the product than what is listed on the label . we also recorded whether the source of the water , treatment method , and any quality test results were included on the label , or whether this information was available by accessing the company's web site or by telephoning the company . we used the web addresses and telephone numbers listed on the label , if available . three of the four pretests were administered over the telephone . next , we administered our survey by telephone to state officials responsible for bottled water oversight in all of the remaining states and the district of columbia . we made the telephone calls in december 2008 and january 2009 . all states responded to our questions . some state officials were unable to answer all of the questions during our first call ; they subsequently provided the information later via telephone or e - mail . we contacted 61 companies by telephone and conducted web site reviews for 47 companies .