the benefits have been enormous . vast amounts of information are now literally at our fingertips , facilitating research on virtually every topic imaginable ; financial and other business transactions can be executed almost instantaneously , often on a 24-hour - a - day basis ; and electronic mail , internet web sites , and computer bulletin boards allow us to communicate quickly and easily with a virtually unlimited number of individuals and groups . in addition to such benefits , however , this widespread interconnectivity poses significant risks to our computer systems and , more important , to the critical operations and infrastructures they support . for example , telecommunications , power distribution , water supply , public health services , and national defense — including the military's warfighting capability - - - law enforcement , government services , and emergency services all depend on the security of their computer operations . the speed and accessibility that create the enormous benefits of the computer age likewise , if not properly controlled , allow individuals and organizations to inexpensively eavesdrop on or interfere with these operations from remote locations for mischievous or malicious purposes , including fraud or sabotage . reports of attacks and disruptions abound . the march 2001 report of the “computer crime and security survey,” conducted by the computer security institute and the federal bureau of investigation's san francisco computer intrusion squad , showed that 85 percent of respondents ( primarily large corporations and government agencies ) had detected computer security breaches within the last 12 months . disruptions caused by virus attacks , such as the iloveyou virus in may 2000 and 1999's melissa virus , have illustrated the potential for damage that such attacks hold . a sampling of reports summarized in daily reports by the fbi's national infrastructure protection center during two recent weeks in march illustrates the problem further: a hacker group by the name of “poizonb0x” defaced numerous government officials are increasingly concerned about attacks from individuals and groups with malicious intent , such as crime , terrorism , foreign intelligence gathering , and acts of war . according to the fbi , terrorists , transnational criminals , and intelligence services are quickly becoming aware of and using information exploitation tools such as computer viruses , trojan horses , worms , logic bombs , and eavesdropping sniffers that can destroy , intercept , or degrade the integrity of and deny access to data . as greater amounts of money are transferred through computer systems , as more sensitive economic and commercial information is exchanged electronically , and as the nation's defense and intelligence communities increasingly rely on commercially available information technology , the likelihood that information attacks will threaten vital national interests increases . in addition , the disgruntled organization insider is a significant threat , since such individuals often have knowledge that allows them to gain unrestricted access and inflict damage or steal assets without a great deal of knowledge about computer intrusions . since 1996 , our analyses of information security at major federal agencies have shown that federal systems were not being adequately protected from these threats , even though these systems process , store , and transmit enormous amounts of sensitive data and are indispensable to many federal agency operations .