va is considering how to implement improvements to its acquisition policies . these improvements are intended to minimize local purchases , accelerate standardization , and create greater purchasing power . if implemented , the improvements will place the department in a better position to jointly purchase with dod . the industry contends it is too costly and there is a lack of demand from purchasers . to address the cost concerns , va is in the process of performing an economic analysis to determine the cost and benefits of requiring vendors to include upns and associated bar codes for all medical and surgical supplies on fss . concerning demand , however , purchasers have presented a different perspective from that held by the manufacturing and distribution industry . for example , the healthcare edi coalition — which represents 20 major health care buying groups , including va and dod — endorsed the use of upns for medical and surgical items in february 1998 . at that time , this group represented over 90 percent of all health care group contract purchases in the nation . in june 2000 , a group of four health care purchasing groups , with annual purchases of over $38 billion and whose membership includes more than 5,800 health care facilities , teamed with three e - commerce companies to endorse upns for medical supplies . according to a va official , one of the largest group purchasing organizations ( gpo ) for health care products , which represents over 1,800 nonprofit hospitals and health systems and about $14 billion in annual purchases , recently began an effort to require upns for all medical and surgical items purchased through its organization — an initiative we believe is consistent with best business practices . in 1998 , we recommended that the administrator of the health care financing administration , now the centers for medicare and medicaid services , require suppliers to identify the specific medical equipment , supplies , and devices they bill to medicare by including upns on their medicare claims . va and dod are also making improvements to their automated information systems . however , it is uncertain whether data from the new systems will be compatible . such capability would assist both departments in identifying joint procurement opportunities . in may 2002 , va's procurement reform task force issued its report on improving the efficiency and effectiveness of va's acquisition system , which included 65 recommendations . recognizing that standardizing medical and surgical supplies is critical to achieving cost savings , the task force recommended that va establish a contract purchasing hierarchy that would require its facilities to purchase supplies first from national bpas ; then multiregional , regional , or local bpas ; and then from fss . only when items are not available from these sources can facilities enter into local agreements or purchase them directly from the manufacturers . this recommendation is timely because va recently estimated that from 30 to 35 percent of facilities' purchases are not from bpa contracts . to further enhance va national standardization , the task force also recommended that va continue standardizing medical and surgical products to obtain maximum benefits by focusing on high - volume , high - dollar medical and surgical items .