this process was completed in late november . the extended data collection and verification process contributed to a delay in the mailing of user fee bills , which did not occur until mid - december 1999 . the timing of activities is summarized in table 4 . since operator assessments are calculated based on the annual appropriation , the calculation of individual user fee assessments can begin after the appropriation is enacted , which has been in the month of october for the last several years . in recent years , ops' operator billing has occurred considerably earlier in the fiscal year . for example , in fiscal year 1994 , ops assessed user fees in july 1994 , whereas by fiscal year 1997 , ops was successful in moving the user fee assessment date up to december 1996 . since 1997 , ops has billed operators in mid - december of each fiscal year . however , since the user information on which bills are based is as of december 31 of the previous year , there is still room for improvement in ops' data collection and verification process . according to ops officials , this delay is due to resource limitations . rspa is planning to improve its current billing procedures . for example , in the summer of 2001 , an internet - based system is scheduled to be implemented that will allow operators to electronically enter pipeline mileage , ownership , and other necessary information directly into the database . this will relieve ops of a considerable amount of data input and reduce the amount of reconciliatory and investigative efforts for pipeline ownership and mileage . based on information provided directly by pipeline operators , ops would be able to generate and mail bills electronically , further reducing the time necessary to bill and collect fees . in addition , in fiscal year 2001 , rspa implemented a new accounting system that includes features anticipated to improve ops' billing and collection process . these features include invoicing , payment tracking , maintaining individual customer account balances , and generating follow - up notices for delinquent balances . this should free up ops resources so staff can concentrate on issuing user fee assessments earlier , which would likely accelerate the collection of fees and reduce the minimum balance needed in the psf . the use of incorrect or unreliable data and inappropriate assumptions in rspa's calculation of the minimum psf balance resulted in rspa overstating the necessary minimum balance . crucial to a reasonable calculation of the psf minimum balance is an analysis of expected receipts as compared to expected obligations . this process results in delayed billings and likely delays cash receipts , resulting in a larger required minimum psf balance . ops' current efforts to implement a new internet - based data collection and billing system have the potential to shorten what is currently an extended billing process . finalizing the operator data on which the fee assessments are based at an earlier date would allow billing to take place shortly after the agency received its appropriation for the fiscal year . accordingly , fee revenue would likely be available for obligation in a more timely manner and help reduce the required minimum psf balance .