are some eligible families falling through ? the emphasis on work participation rates as a measure of program performance has helped change the culture of state welfare programs to focus on moving families into employment , but weaknesses in the measure undercut its effectiveness . are the work participation rates providing the right incentive to states to engage parents , including those difficult to serve , and help them achieve self - sufficiency ? the flexibility of the tanf block grant has allowed states to shift their spending away from cash assistance and toward other programs and services for low - income families , potentially expanding the ability of states to combat poverty in new ways . however , we do not have enough information about the use of these funds to determine whether this flexibility is resulting in the most efficient and effective strategies at this time of scarce government resources and great need among the nation's low - income families . chairman baucus , ranking member hatch , and members of the committee , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have . for questions about this statement , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or brownke@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include alexander g. galuten , gale c. harris , sara s. kelly , kathryn a. larin , and theresa lo . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we used multiple methodologies to develop our findings for these reports . we reviewed and analyzed state tanf data reported to the department of health and human services ( hhs ) ; reported on microsimulation analyses conducted for us by the urban institute ; reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and guidance and relevant research on the factors affecting the decline of cash recipient families ; interviewed hhs officials ; and collected information from tanf officials using different methods for different studies , including surveying and interviewing state tanf administrators and conducting site visits in selected states . we assessed the data we received for data reliability and concluded that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this testimony . ( see related reports cited throughout for more information on scope and methodology of our work. ) we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards required that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .