( see app . interior officials said that the united states used to actively coordinate and monitor federal grants . prior to the compact , before the fsm and the rmi gained political independence , a large u.s. staff located in the region managed federal programs . for example , in 1985 , the year before the compact was signed , 31 u.s. officials provided management , coordination , oversight , and reporting for u.s. programs to the region . in addition , these officials could modify or suspend programs for poor performance . once the compact was signed , the fsm and the rmi began direct grant relations with each federal department , and the regional u.s. staff disbanded . now interior has only one official in the region , trying to help coordinate and monitor programs formerly managed by 31 staff members . the state department , whose chief of mission was responsible for direction and coordination of u.s. agency officials in foreign countries , could not meet its responsibility because the u.s. program managers often bypassed the state department and u.s. embassies . the foreign service act of 1980 ( p.l . 96-465 ) states that the department of state chief of mission was responsible for the direction and coordination of all u.s. government employees in the country . further , presidential instructions to u.s. chiefs of mission charge them with the direction , coordination , and supervision of all executive branch offices and personnel in their nation . however , both the former ambassador to the fsm and the current ambassador to the rmi said that most u.s. departments ignored this requirement and bypassed state because of their long - standing relationships with fsm and rmi ministries . as a result , the department of state , through its embassy , could not direct , coordinate , or supervise employees of other federal agencies in either the fsm or the rmi . we found that most federal departments have not provided adequate oversight of their programs in the fsm and the rmi . while weather and federal aviation services' accountability requirements included independent verification of work performed by others , as well as tests , inspections , and frequent visits to the islands to ensure that services were meeting u.s. standards , most programs provided far less oversight . of the educational , job training , and health programs , only head start and the special education program required on - island assessments . the job training and mch programs simply reviewed information submitted by each nation , and u.s. program managers said that this information was too unreliable to determine program effectiveness . we found that many program managers knew little about the programs , as illustrated by the following examples: the seppie program manager reported that she had never conducted a program assessment in the region , could not discuss the fsm or the rmi's program objectives or accomplishments , and had no idea whether the programs were operating as intended . moreover , the manager was not aware that any on - island assessments were conducted , even though this was the only program in our review that conducted on - island assessments annually .