activities . this includes , for example , the mail fraud statute , which makes it a crime to use the u.s. mail to commit a fraud , such as facilitating the sale of a shortage drug with a fake pedigree through the u.s. mail . consistent with the october 31 , 2011 , executive order on drug shortages , three federal agencies — fda , doj , and ftc — review information concerning possible gray market sales of shortage drugs from a number of sources and have taken other steps to respond to relevant directives contained in the order.agencies told us that their authorities in relation to the gray market are limited . they explained that the selling of shortage drugs by suppliers not authorized by the manufacturer alone , even at exorbitant prices , does not itself violate federal law . though gray market sales may violate agreements between manufacturers and wholesale distributors , such sales may not violate federal law unless they are made outside the legal distribution system . for one incentive related to exempting certain products from medicaid rebates and 340b discounts , we also obtained comments from relevant stakeholder groups whose members would be affected by this exemption . “shortages of systemic antibiotics in the u.s.a.: how long can we wait ? ” journal of pharmaceutical health services research , vol . therefore , proponents of expediting fda review of regulatory submissions — including applications and supplements — note that increasing the speed of such reviews could provide an incentive to manufacturers to establish redundant manufacturing capacity to which production could be shifted in the event of manufacturing problems at a primary production facility , thereby avoiding a shortage . born , k. “time and money: an analysis of the legislative efforts to address the prescription drug shortage crisis in america.” the journal of legal medicine , vol . department of health and human services . one stakeholder cautioned that the resource - intensive nature of building in redundancy means it is a long - term solution , the implementation of which could hinder efforts to address current shortages . office of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation , economic analysis of the causes of drug shortages . washington , d.c.: october 2011 . however , fda officials cautioned that expanding the pool of submissions eligible for expedited review , without regard to the risk of shortage , could slow down review of all submissions and make expediting reviews meaningless . department of health and human services . food and drug administration . fda officials also noted that , although redundancy can help prevent a shortage if production stops , many shortages are the result of production disruptions driven by failures in manufacturing quality systems . a review of fda's approach to medical product shortages . silver spring , md: october 2011 . flexibility in meeting regulatory requirements: a few manufacturers proposed that fda could allow for flexibility in meeting regulatory requirements for manufacturers with a strong history of compliance with current good manufacturing practice regulations or robust risk management plans to prevent shortages . dorsey , e. r. , j. p. thompson , e. j. dayoub , b. george , l. a. saubermann , and r. g. holloway .