gao - 14-431 . several agencies have also implemented certain practices designed to help ensure they meet their spending requirements . examples of such practices include the following: budgeting more than the minimum required amount for the program . education officials told us that they budget more than the minimum amount they calculate as required for the sbir program , which increases the likelihood that the agency will meet or exceed the spending requirement . in addition , if appropriations are higher than anticipated , the officials review their planned budget for the sbir program and determine if the program budget should be increased . dhs officials told us that their agency also obligates additional funds beyond those budgeted for the sbir program . as we found for previous years in past reports , some agencies did not provide all the information required in their methodology reports for fiscal year 2013 . as discussed in the sbir policy directive , agencies are required to submit reports to sba each year that itemize the programs excluded from their extramural r&d calculations and explain the reasons sba also requested that agencies provide the dollar for the exclusions.amounts of the programs excluded from their extramural r&d . for fiscal year 2013 , all 11 agencies submitted a methodology report to sba . however , three agencies did not itemize the specific programs they excluded from their extramural r&d , or did not explain the reasons for the exclusions from their calculations of extramural r&d , or both . specifically , dod , epa , and nsf either did not itemize the specific programs that they excluded , did not explain the reasons why they excluded the programs , or both . two of these three agencies' methodology reports — dod and epa — included general categories of exclusions but did not itemize the programs that were excluded . for example , dod's fiscal year 2013 report stated that some of its programs were exempted by the small business act , which exempts programs in the intelligence community . however , dod's report did not itemize the specific programs or subunits that were excluded , as required by the policy directives . in addition , four agencies did not indicate to sba whether they had exclusions for some or all of their programs . specifically , the departments of agriculture ( usda ) , education , and commerce , and hhs did not indicate in their methodology reports to sba whether they had exclusions for some or all of their programs . agencies are not explicitly required to state if they have no exclusions , but without that information it will be difficult for sba to determine whether these agencies may have had exclusions that were not included in their reports to sba . two of the participating agencies — the department of transportation ( dot ) and dhs — provided the dollar amounts associated with each of their exclusions , consistent with sba guidance . additionally , 10 of the 11 agencies submitted their methodology reports for calculating extramural r&d to sba later than the date required in the small business act .