pub . 110-69 , 121 stat . competes also focused on stem research programs . reauthorization approved new funding for some stem education programs and made substantive changes to others by reducing certain nonfederal matching requirements . additionally , it repealed many of the programs that went unfunded following the original competes passage . the competes reauthorization also sought to address coordination and oversight issues , including those associated with the coordination and potential duplication of federal stem education efforts . specifically , congress required the director of ostp to establish a committee under nstc to inventory , review , and coordinate federal stem education programs . congress also directed this nstc committee to specify and prioritize annual and long - term objectives for stem education , and to ensure that federal efforts do not duplicate each other , among other things . nstc is required to report to congress annually . beyond stem - specific efforts , the federal government as a whole is seeking to identify programmatic areas that could be better tracked and coordinated . one such effort revolves around the government performance and results act ( gpra ) modernization act of 2010 . gpra modernization act established a new framework aimed at taking a more crosscutting and integrated approach to focusing on results and improving government performance . it requires omb , in coordination with agencies , to develop — at least every 4 years — long - term priority goals , including outcome - oriented goals covering a limited number of crosscutting policy areas . on an annual basis , omb is to provide information on how these long - term crosscutting goals will be achieved . this approach could provide a basis for more fully integrating a wide array of federal activities as well as a cohesive perspective on the long - term goals of the federal government . pub . 111-352 , 124 stat . in 2010 , congress directed gao to conduct routine investigations to identify programs , agencies , offices , and initiatives with duplicative goals and activities within departments and governmentwide and report annually to congress . in march 2011 , gao issued its first annual report in that report , we identified to congress in response to this requirement.81 areas for consideration — 34 areas of fragmentation , overlap , and potential duplication and 47 additional areas — where agencies or congress may wish to consider taking action in an effort to reduce the cost of government operations or enhance revenue collections . using the framework established in the march 2011 gao report , we examine the extent to which federal stem education programs are fragmented , overlapping , and duplicative . for the purposes of this report , the key terms are defined as follows: fragmentation occurs when more than one federal agency ( or more than one organization within an agency ) is involved in the same broad area of national need . overlap occurs when multiple programs offer similar services to similar target groups in similar stem fields to achieve similar objectives . duplication occurs when multiple programs offer the same services to the same target beneficiaries in the same stem fields . thirteen agencies administered 209 stem education programs in fiscal year 2010 .