as a result , this project has been canceled . ( see app . iii for more details about the loan program. ) eight , or about one - third , of the nci projects we reviewed are designed to develop sustainable commercial ventures . to date , only one of these has had success in creating jobs ; it involves a small company started in snezhinsk to market and service bar - code technology and other automated devices that are used to identify and inventory property . the russian company was formed in february 2000 by six former weapons institute employees . according to a national laboratory official , these employees left the institute to form the company . the nci program allocated $395,000 to the project in fiscal years 1999 and 2000 . according to a national laboratory official , the russian company has used the funds to pay for office space , equipment , and salaries . it also used nci funds to enter into one contract to receive training and has entered into agreements to distribute and service bar - code and auto - identification technologies manufactured by three u.s. companies . doe has canceled several nci projects that were intended to create jobs for weapons scientists for a variety of reasons . according to doe , many projects were designed to “jump - start” the program with the expectation that not all would evolve into large - scale jobs creation projects . furthermore , several of these projects were subsequently determined to not be viable , have run into difficulties , and have either been canceled or stalled . for example , the program funded one project in zheleznogorsk to expand the capacity for recycling luminescent tubes that contain mercury . doe allocated $250,000 to this project but spent only $2,000 . the national laboratory official responsible for overseeing the project said that minatom was not willing to bring the recycling technology out of the restricted part of the city . because access restrictions prevented doe from working to expand the recycling capacity within the secure area of the institute , the department canceled the project . doe funded another project to determine the viability of producing canola oil in the zheleznogorsk region . the oil can be used for cooking and animal feed and can be used industrially to make lubricants , fuels , and soaps . initial work under the project would have been to determine whether or not the crop could be successfully grown in the area . according to the national laboratory official responsible for overseeing the project , doe and officials from the weapons institute in zheleznogorsk were interested in the idea , but the city's mayor was not . the national laboratory official told us that the mayor was more interested in promoting the production of barley for livestock that could also be used to make beer and vodka to bring in tax revenues for the city . the national laboratory official was denied access to the city when she tried to promote the project . doe allocated $302,000 to the project and spent about $114,000 before canceling it . other nci projects have been canceled or delayed due to a lack of russian support and cooperation .