length . officials from four colleges identified survey length as another factor they considered . officials from three of these colleges specifically noted that longer surveys may result in lower response rates . in addition , officials from one of these colleges stated that because longer surveys collect more data , the college would need more time to analyze the results . an official from another college expressed concern that longer surveys with multiple follow - up questions about incidents of sexual violence risk re - traumatizing victims . modifying the survey instrument . six of the seven colleges modified their survey instruments to some extent . officials at five of the six colleges reported adding questions to their survey instruments . for example , two colleges reported adding questions to comply with a state survey requirement , while another college reported adding follow - up questions to collect information on events prior to an incident of sexual violence . officials at three of the five colleges reported limiting the number of questions they added to keep the survey short . officials at two of these colleges noted that lengthening the survey could result in fewer students completing it . officials at one of these colleges cited additional fees that the vendor charged for such modifications as another factor in their decision to limit the number of questions they added . officials from two colleges also said they modified the language in the survey instruments to reflect the names of specific offices and programs on their campuses . in contrast , officials at one college reported making no changes to their survey instrument because they planned to use the original survey as a baseline against which to compare future survey results . identifying the survey population . six of the seven selected colleges that conducted a campus climate survey distributed their surveys via email to all students in the target population ( i.e. , a census approach ) , and one worked with a third party to select a representative sample of students to receive the survey . as previously discussed , surveying a sample of students can reduce the amount of follow - up work needed to obtain sufficient responses to provide information about the student body as a whole . however , officials at four of the seven colleges cited other considerations for choosing a census approach . specifically , officials from three of these colleges said that a census approach provided every student the opportunity to share their experiences and perspectives through the climate survey . comparability . officials from four colleges noted that comparability was a consideration when selecting a survey instrument , including the potential to compare survey results across colleges that share similar characteristics or at their own colleges over time . however , as previously discussed , stakeholders noted that differences across survey instruments can limit the comparability of survey results . cost . officials from four colleges said the cost of conducting campus climate surveys informed their selection of a survey instrument . for example , officials at one college said they used a free , publicly available survey instrument because the college lacked the resources to pay for an instrument .