ii. ) in the comments , opm agreed with our recommendations and stated that it had begun to address them . to this end , the director stated that the agency had , among other actions , begun revising its retirement modernization plans , developing a new program cost estimate , planning for accurate evm reporting , incorporating recognized guidance in requirements management planning , and planning test activities during requirements development . if the recommendations are properly implemented , they should better position opm to effectively manage its retirement modernization initiative . the agency also provided comments on the draft report regarding our description of the federal retirement application process , as well as our characterizations of opm's evm and requirements management capabilities vis - à - vis the retirement modernization program . in each of these instances , we made revisions as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the director of the office of personnel management , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6304 or melvinv@gao.gov . figure 1 summarizes the estimated number of employees eligible and likely to retire . opm and employing agencies' human resources and payroll offices are responsible for processing federal employees' retirement applications . the process begins when an employee submits a paper retirement application to his or her employer's human resources office and is completed when the individual begins receiving regular monthly benefit payments ( as illustrated in fig . once an employee submits an application , the employing agency's human resources office provides retirement counseling services to the employee and augments the retirement application with additional paperwork , such as a separation form that finalizes the date the employee will retire . then the agency provides the retirement package to the employee's payroll office . after the employee separates for retirement , the payroll office is responsible for reviewing the documents for correct signatures and information , making sure that all required forms have been submitted , and adding any additional paperwork that will be necessary for processing the retirement package . once the payroll office has finalized the paperwork , the retirement package is mailed to opm to continue the retirement process . payroll offices are expected to submit the package to opm within 30 days of the retiree's separation date . upon receipt of the retirement package , opm calculates an interim payment based on information provided by the employing agency . the interim payments are partial payments that typically provide retirees with 80 percent of the total monthly benefit they will eventually receive . opm then starts the process of analyzing the retirement application and associated paperwork to determine the total monthly benefit amount to which the retiree is entitled . this process includes collecting additional information from the employing agency's human resources and payroll offices or from the retiree to ensure that all necessary data are available before calculating benefits . after opm completes its review and authorizes payment , the retiree begins receiving 100 percent of the monthly retirement benefit payments .