grant programs . dhs has developed and administered grant programs for various surface transportation modes , although stakeholders have raised concerns regarding the current grant process . for example , the dhs office of grants and training , now called the grant programs directorate , has used various programs to fund passenger rail security since 2003 . through the urban areas security initiative grant program , the grant programs directorate has provided grants to urban areas to help enhance their overall security and preparedness level to prevent , respond to , and recover from acts of terrorism . the grant programs directorate used fiscal year 2005 , 2006 , and 2007 appropriations to build on the work under way through the urban areas security initiative program , and create and administer new programs focused specifically on transportation security , including the transit security grant program , intercity passenger rail security grant program , and the freight rail security grant program . however , some industry stakeholders have raised concerns regarding dhs's current grant process , including the shifting of funding priorities , the lack of program flexibility , and other barriers to the provision of grant funding . for example , transit agencies have reported that the lack of predictability in how tsa will assess grant projects against funding priorities makes it difficult to engage in long - term planning of security initiatives . specifically , transit agencies have reported receiving funding to begin projects — such as retrofitting their transit fleet with security cameras or installing digital video recording systems — but not being able to finish these projects in subsequent years because tsa had changed its funding priorities . the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act codifies surface transportation grant programs and imposes statutory requirements on the administration of the programs . checkpoint screening . tsa has taken steps to strengthen passenger checkpoint screening procedures to enhance the detection of prohibited items and strengthen security ; however , tsa could improve its evaluation and documentation of proposed procedures . passenger prescreening . over the past several years , tsa has faced a number of challenges in developing and implementing an advanced prescreening system , known as secure flight , which will allow tsa to assume responsibility from air carriers for comparing domestic passenger information against the no fly list and selectee list . in february 2008 , we reported that tsa had made substantial progress in instilling more discipline and rigor into secure flight's development and implementation , including preparing key systems development documentation and strengthening privacy protections . however , challenges remain that may hinder the program's progress moving forward . specifically , tsa had not ( 1 ) developed program cost and schedule estimates consistent with best practices ; ( 2 ) fully implemented its risk management plan ; ( 3 ) planned for system end - to - end testing in test plans ; and ( 4 ) ensured that information - security requirements are fully implemented . to address these challenges , we made several recommendations to dhs and tsa to incorporate best practices in secure flight's cost and schedule estimates and to fully implement the program's risk - management , testing , and information - security requirements .