for those products . experts agree that npes have a variety of business models , which makes it difficult to fit them neatly into any one of these categories . for example , even companies that produce products related to their patents — known as practicing patent owners , or operating companies — sometimes assert patents that they own but that are not related to the products they produce , which further complicates defining an npe . some legal commentators , technology companies , the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , and congress , among others , have raised concerns that patent infringement litigation by npes is increasing and that this litigation , in some cases , has imposed high costs on firms that are actually developing and manufacturing products , especially in the software and technology sectors . among the concerns of some technology companies and legal commentators is that because npes generally face lower litigation costs than those they are accusing of infringement , npes are likely to use the threat of imposing these costs as leverage in seeking infringement compensation . these technology companies and legal commentators also have noted that npes often claim that their patent covers an entire technology when in fact it may cover just a small improvement in an existing technology , and that it can be difficult for judges and juries to determine the patent's scope when complex technologies are involved . the leahy - smith america invents act ( aia ) , signed into law september 16 , 2011 , made several significant changes to the u.s. patent system . section 34 of the aia mandates that gao conduct a study on the consequences of patent litigation by npes.this study were to determine: ( 1 ) what is known about the volume and characteristics of recent patent litigation activity ; ( 2 ) the views of stakeholders knowledgeable in patent litigation on what is known about the key factors that have contributed to recent patent litigation ; ( 3 ) what developments in the judicial system may affect patent litigation ; and ( 4 ) what actions , if any , has pto recently taken that may affect patent litigation in the future . we identified some of these stakeholders from patent infringement litigation data from 2000 through 2011 that we reviewed . representatives of companies and pmes we talked with had regularly been sued or had regularly sued others over the past decade . other stakeholders we identified through our review of academic literature on patent litigation and the patent system and were knowledgeable in the issues we were asked to study . because stakeholders varied in their expertise with various topics , not every stakeholder provided an opinion on every topic . no more than plus or minus 5 percentage points over all these years and no more than plus or minus 10 percentage points for any particular year . lex machina used a variety of characteristics from court records , u.s. securities and exchange commission ( sec ) filings , and corporate websites to categorize litigants , including as an operating company or likely operating company , pme or likely pme , university , or an individual or trust .