customers . certain customers may pose heightened risk because of the nature of their business , occupation , or anticipated transaction activity . additionally , in certain instances , they may be able to launder money while remaining anonymous . for example , customers may use false identities or straw men ( individuals hired to conduct transfers on behalf of others ) to keep from being identified as the original source of the funds . examples of suspicious customer activity that may indicate money laundering include identification documents that cannot be easily verified ; the use of different taxpayer identification numbers with variations of the same name ; frequent or large transactions with no record of past or present employment ; and reluctance to provide identification for transactions subject to identification requirements . geographic location . agents . money transmitters often work with multiple agents , and maintaining adequate oversight can be challenging , given the decentralized nature of the agent system . according to data collected by the conference of state bank supervisors , as of december 31 , 2018 , 204 money transmitters reported that they had more than 440,000 agents — with nine of these money transmitters reporting that they had at least 10,000 agents . these agents present money - laundering risks if they knowingly or unknowingly fail to follow bsa / aml requirements or the policies and programs established by the money transmitter . for example , an agent may not follow the recordkeeping requirements for transfers above the regulatory funds transfer threshold or above lower thresholds that a money transmitter has self - imposed . msb principals are required to conduct risk - based monitoring of their agents . certain geographic locations may be more vulnerable to money laundering or terrorist financing via money transfers . high - risk geographic locations can be either international or domestic . according to fincen's msb examination manual , examples of international high - risk geographic locations include countries subject to sanctions by the office of foreign assets control or countries and territories identified as being noncooperative . domestic high - risk geographic locations include high intensity drug trafficking areas ( hidta ) and high intensity financial crime areas ( hifca ) . products . according to the ffiec and fincen msb examination manuals , certain products and services , such as money transfers , may pose a higher risk of money laundering because of the degree of anonymity they can offer . for example , the financial action task force identified money - laundering and terrorist - financing risks associated with mobile payments because these services can sometimes allow for anonymous transactions , depending on the level of aml measures the mobile payments provider has in place . the task force also reported that virtual currency — digital representations of value such as bitcoin that are not government - issued legal tender — could facilitate international remittances as virtual - currency - based products and services are developed .