accordance with ipera . for example , ipera requires agencies to perform a risk assessment in the year after enactment ( fiscal year 2011 ) and at least once every 3 years thereafter . however , the fmr chapter states that components are required to conduct risk assessments only for those programs or activities for which the risk level is unknown or is not currently measured and reported . dod's fmr does not provide a systematic approach to ensure that all programs and activities are reviewed to determine susceptibility to improper payments . moreover , although dod's fmr states that components' risk assessment methodologies must be documented and maintained , the fmr does not provide detailed requirements on what should be documented and maintained . as discussed previously , dod's lack of a risk assessment makes it difficult for the department to fully identify root causes and develop a comprehensive , effective , corrective action plan . while dod has a policy for developing and reporting on corrective actions , it did not have detailed procedures for identifying root causes and related corrective actions . also , the department's corrective action plan , included in its fiscal year 2011 afr , did not contain all elements of corrective action plans required by ipera and omb guidance , such as establishing accountability for reducing improper payments and including completion dates for implementing corrective actions . dod's corrective action plan reported reasons that improper payments occurred for all eight programs and included corrective actions to address them , but the reported reasons identified the type of errors that resulted in the improper payments , rather than the root causes — the underlying conditions that caused the errors to occur . dod's identified reasons do not consider possible underlying systemic causes of the errors , such as whether manual and automated controls were either not sufficient or not operating as intended . as a result , the related corrective action ( s ) addressed specific errors and not necessarily the underlying condition that gave rise to the error . agencies , when developing corrective action plans , can use the results of risk assessments to ensure that the root causes leading to improper payments are identified . as a result , the fmr chapter did not account for the expansion of recovery audits beyond commercial payments , as called for by ipera . in addition , dod cited its difficulties in tracing transactions back to source documentation as a major obstacle to conducting effective recovery audits . in lieu of conducting cost - effective recovery audits , dod's payment recapture audit plan stated that the department would rely on efforts such as random sampling of improper payments , dod inspector general ( ig ) and other auditor findings , self - reporting by recipients , and other activities , such as periodic independent reviews of commercial payments , to identify overpayments for potential recovery for seven programs . however , dod did not describe any improper payment recovery effort in place for travel pay in the payment recapture audit plan . also , the corrective actions reported were not sufficiently detailed to assess whether they would address the errors that were identified for dod's reported programs .