however , this problem is about more than finances . reform proposals should be evaluated as packages . the elements of any package interact ; every package will have pluses and minuses , and no plan will satisfy everyone on all dimensions . if we focus on the pros and cons of each element of reform by itself , we may find it impossible to build the bridges necessary to achieve consensus . it is also important to establish the appropriate comparisons or benchmarks against which reforms should be measured . given the current projected financial shortfall of the program , it is important to compare proposals to at least two benchmarks — one that raises revenue to fund currently scheduled benefits ( promised benefits ) and one that adjusts to current tax financing by reducing benefits ( funded benefits ) . comparing the benefit impact of reform proposals solely to currently scheduled social security benefits is inappropriate since all current scheduled benefits are not funded over the longer term . estimating future effects on social security benefits should reflect the fact that the program faces a long - term actuarial deficit and that benefit reduction and / or revenue increases will be necessary to restore solvency . ( see table 1. ) cbo uses a 100-year horizon to project social security's future actuarial deficit , while the social security administration utilizes both 75-year and infinite horizon projections to estimate the future deficit . in addition , both the social security administration and cbo have different economic assumptions for variables such as real earnings , real interest rates , inflation , and unemployment . while their estimates vary due to different horizons and economic assumptions , each identifies the same long - term challenge: the social security system is unsustainable in its present form over the long run . taking action soon on social security would not only make the necessary action less dramatic than if we wait but would also promote increased budgetary flexibility in the future and stronger economic growth . some of the benefits of early action — and the costs of delay — can be seen in figure 4 . this figure compares what it would take to keep social security solvent through 2078 , if action were taken at three different points in time , by either raising payroll taxes or reducing benefits . if we did nothing until 2042 — the year ssa estimates the trust funds will be exhausted — achieving actuarial balance would require changes in benefits of 30 percent or changes in taxes of 43 percent . as figure 4 shows , earlier action shrinks the size of the necessary adjustment . as i have already discussed , reducing the relative future burdens of social security and health programs is essential to a sustainable budget policy for the longer term . it is also critical if we are to avoid putting unsupportable financial pressures on americans in the future . reforming social security and health programs is essential to reclaiming our future fiscal flexibility to address other national priorities . changes in the composition of federal spending over the past several decades have reduced budgetary flexibility , and our current fiscal path will reduce it even further .