l. 111-203 , sec . some researchers said in eastern drc it can be because villages are inaccessible because of security concerns or lack of transportation infrastructure , especially in remote villages in eastern drc where violence is ongoing or likely . according to researchers , accessing insecure and / or remote locations to conduct surveys could require procuring security services , which can drive up the cost of the survey . surveys that suffer from undercoverage are limited because their results can be generalized only to certain areas . for example , as previously noted , the survey conducted by mcgill university is generalizable only to certain territories surveyed in eastern drc ; the territories of mwenga and walikale in eastern drc are not represented in this survey , and the survey's results cannot be generalized to these territories . in addition , several un officials and ngo representatives said that conducting population - based surveys on sexual violence is especially challenging in eastern drc because of the sensitive nature of asking survey respondents to reveal that they have been victims of sexual violence and the fear of social stigma that can result from revealing such victimization . thus , according to u.n. officials , ngo representatives , and researchers , data from population - based surveys may suffer from underreporting because response rates depend , in part , on whether or not victims are willing to discuss experiences of sexual violence . in addition , survey respondents may hesitate to report if they do not expect that health services would be provided . however , some un officials noted that the service provider case data that unfpa collects are verified by un officials and are subject to more stringent review processes than service provider case data collected by other organizations . un officials and ngo representatives said service providers generally are hesitant to share their case file data with each other or outside parties , such as the un . there are other organizations that provide analyses of sexual violence in eastern drc using case file data from service providers . notably , a report produced by the harvard humanitarian initiative with support from oxfam america reviewed case file data on sexual violence victims that had received medical care from panzi hospital in bukavu , south kivu . also , some advocacy ngos , such as human rights watch , publish reports that include information on sexual violence in eastern drc that is based on case file data from service providers . other organizations that provide services to sexual violence victims , including doctors without borders and the international committee of the red cross , collect and track their own case file data , but will not share their data outside their organization because of security concerns , including fear of retribution against victims or their families and the possibility that victims could be ostracized by their families and / or communities if their identities or experiences were revealed . besides unfpa , there are other un agencies that publish reports with information on reported cases of sexual violence . in 2010 , monuc was renamed the united nations organization stabilization mission in the democratic republic of the congo ( monusco ) to reflect an increased emphasis on stabilization .