ii. ) the process broadly requires a company to 1. determine whether it manufactures , or contracts to be manufactured , products with “necessary” conflict minerals ; 2. conduct a reasonable country - of - origin inquiry concerning the origin of those conflict minerals ; and 3. exercise due diligence , if appropriate , to determine the source and chain of custody of those conflict minerals , adhering to a nationally or internationally recognized due diligence framework , if such a framework is available for these necessary conflict minerals . if companies choose to disclose that their products are “drc conflict free” in a conflict minerals report , the sec disclosure rule requires companies to obtain an independent private - sector audit . following an appellate court decision that a portion of the disclosure required by the sec disclosure rule violated the first amendment , sec staff issued guidance on april 29 , 2014 , indicating that , pending further action by the sec or a court , companies required to file a conflict minerals report would not have to identify their products as “drc conflict undeterminable,” “not found to be ‘drc conflict free,'” or “drc conflict free.” in april 2017 , following the entry of the final judgment in the case , the sec's division of corporation finance issued revised guidance , indicating that , in light of the uncertainty regarding how the commission would resolve those issues and related issues raised by commenters , the division of corporation finance had determined that it would not recommend enforcement action to the commission if companies did not report on specified due diligence disclosure requirements . however , the sec staff told us that the guidance is not binding on the commission and that the commission could still initiate enforcement action if companies did not report on their due diligence in accordance with the rule . according to sec staff , the 2017 guidance , while temporary , is still in effect , pending review of the rule by the commission . as of june 2019 , the rule was on the sec's long - term regulatory agenda , which means — according to sec staff — that any action would likely not take place until after march 2020 . in 2018 , 1,117 companies filed conflict minerals disclosures — slightly fewer than the number of companies that filed in 2017 and 2016 ( 1,165 and 1,230 , respectively ) . our analysis of a generalizable sample of the 1,117 filings found that an estimated 85 percent of the companies filed as domestic , while the remaining 15 percent filed as foreign . this domestic - to - foreign ratio is similar to the ratio in 2017 and 2016 . overall , when reporting on the conflict minerals used in their products , an estimated 62 percent reported using tantalum ; 63 percent , tungsten ; and 66 percent , gold — percentages similar to those reported in 2017 and 2016 . an estimated 76 percent reported using tin , which was similar to the 69 percent reported in 2017 and significantly higher than the 61 percent in 2016 . an estimated 24 percent did not specify the minerals they used .