( recommendation 1 ) . this could result in delayed launch readiness . as a result , mature v&v plans are needed to ensure there are no gaps in planned testing . esd officials indicated that a nasa engineering and safety center review of their v&v plans , requested by esd's chief engineer to address concerns about v&v planning , would help define the path forward for maturing v&v plans . v&v issues add to cost and schedule risk for the program because they may take more time and money to resolve than esd anticipates . in some cases , they may have a safety impact as well . for example , if the structural models are not sufficiently verified , it increases flight safety risks . each of the programs bases its individual analyses on the models of the other programs . as a result , any deficiencies discovered in one can have cascading effects through the other systems and programs . we will continue to monitor esd's progress mitigating risks as nasa approaches em - 1 . nasa is at the beginning of the path leading to human exploration of mars . the first phase along that path , the integration of sls , orion , and egs , is likely to set the stage for the success or failure of the rest of the endeavor . establishing a cost and schedule baseline for nasa's second mission is an important initial step in understanding and gaining support for the costs of sls , orion , and egs , not just for that one mission but for the mars plan overall . moreover , in its response , nasa does not address the dual - hat technical authority role for safety and mission assurance . we continue to believe that similar changes for this role would be appropriate as well . further , in response to this recommendation , nasa makes two statements that require additional context . first , nasa stated that gao's recommendation was focused on overall agency technical authority management . while this review involved meeting with the heads of the office of chief engineer and the office of safety and mission assurance , the scope of this review and the associated recommendation are limited to esd . second , nasa stated “as you found , we agree that having the right personnel in senior leadership positions is essential for a technical authority to be successful regardless of how the technical authority is implemented.” to clarify , this perspective is attributed to nasa officials in our report and does not represent gao's position . we are sending copies of this report to nasa's administrator and to appropriate congressional committees . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or chaplainc@gao.gov .