urban growth . dod says that unplanned or “incompatible” commercial or residential development near training ranges compromises the effectiveness of training activities . local residents have filed lawsuits charging that military operations lowered the value or limited the use of their property . to the extent that encroachment adversely affects training readiness , opportunities exist for the problems to be reported in departmental and military service readiness reports . the global status of resources and training system is the primary means units use to compare readiness against designed operational goals . the system's database indicates , at selected points in time , the extent to which units possess the required resources and training to undertake their wartime missions . in addition , dod is required under 10 u.s.c . 117 to prepare quarterly readiness reports to congress . the reports are based on briefings to the senior readiness oversight council , a forum assisted by the defense test and training steering group . in june 2000 , the council directed the steering group to investigate encroachment issues and develop a comprehensive plan of action . the secretaries of the military services are responsible for training personnel and for maintaining their respective training ranges and facilities . within the office of the secretary of defense , the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness develops policies , plans , and programs to ensure the readiness of the force and provides oversight on training ; the deputy under secretary of defense for installations and environment develops policies , plans , and programs for dod's environmental , safety , and occupational health programs , including compliance with environmental laws , conservation of natural and cultural resources , pollution prevention , and explosive safety ; and the director , operational test and evaluation , provides advice on tests and evaluations . on the basis of what we have seen , the impact of encroachment on training ranges has gradually increased over time , reducing some training capabilities . because most encroachment problems are caused by urban development and population growth , these problems are expected to increase in the future . although the effects vary by service and by individual installation , encroachment has generally limited the extent to which training ranges are available or the types of training that can be conducted . competition for airspace . increased airspace congestion limits the ability of pilots to train as they would fly in combat . clean air act requirements for air quality . dod officials believe the act requires controls over emissions generated on defense installations . new or significant changes in range operations also require emissions analyses , and if emissions exceed specified thresholds , they must be offset with reductions elsewhere . laws and regulations mandating noise abatement . dod officials stated that weapon systems are exempt from the noise control act of 1972 , but dod must assess noise impact under the national environmental policy act . as community developments have expanded closer to military installations , concerns over noise from military operations have increased . this limits units' ability to train as they would expect to fight and causes workarounds that may limit the amount or quality of training . installations overseas all reported facing similar training constraints .