gao - 13-283 . washington , d.c.: february 2013 . medicaid: more transparency of and accountability for supplemental payments are needed . gao - 13-48 . washington , d.c.: november 26 , 2012 . we have encountered issues with data in all three states . the upl is based on what medicare would pay for the same services . typically , state medicaid payment rates are lower than what the medicare program would pay , and so many states make supplemental payments under the upl . unlike regular medicaid payments , which are generally based on claims submitted by providers for services rendered , supplemental payments often consist of large , lump sum payments made on a monthly , quarterly , or yearly basis and can be targeted to small groups of providers , such as local government hospitals . supplemental payments totaled at least $43 billion in federal fiscal year 2011 , including $26 billion made under the upl , but reporting was incomplete . supplemental payments have been growing in size , as they totaled at least $23 billion in federal fiscal year 2006 . our prior work has raised concerns about gaps in the oversight of supplemental payments made under the upl . as part of its oversight responsibilities , cms is responsible for ensuring that state medicaid payments are consistent with federal requirements , including that medicaid payments are economical and efficient . in recent years , we have found several instances of payments that raise concerns about compliance with these requirements . for example , in november 2012 , we reported that 39 states had made supplemental payments to 505 hospitals that , along with their regular medicaid payments , exceeded those hospitals' total costs of providing medicaid care by $2.7 billion . although medicaid payments are not required to be limited to a provider's costs of delivering medicaid services , payments that greatly exceed these costs raise questions ; for example , as to whether payments are being used for allowable medicaid expenditures . we have previously made recommendations to cms — including recommendations to require states to report the amounts of upl supplemental payments that they make to individual providers — to review all state supplemental payment programs , and enhance the oversight of payments made to government providers.cms has not implemented all of these recommendations . we have also suggested that the congress consider requiring cms to require states to submit annual independent audits of supplemental payments made under the upl , which are not currently subject to audit . cms uses a range of tools to oversee state medicaid payments , including review and approval of states' medicaid plans and amendments . state plans describe , among other things , who and how much states will pay for particular services . for any new payment or payment change , a state must submit a state plan amendment , for which cms asks the state to provide information and data showing that state medicaid provider payments ( regular and supplemental payments combined ) do not exceed the upl for the category of service and type of provider ownership ; and a written response to a set of standard questions intended to gauge the appropriateness of state payments and financing .