businss . or comainanin thisase told the inveigator tht his emloer hsale of $1.5ll in 2007 , but the inveigator claimed tht he hd oained inform abt the businss from an irsabashowing tht the fctus businssot meet the ross revenue threhold for coveragunder federl l. or fctus businssot fled tax retns and whd offia told us tht theinveigator do ot hve ccess to irsabass . a revew of the case fle how thinform from the irsas revewed by the inveigator . iform relted to thisase was referred to labor's offce of the inspector geerl for frther inveigan . whd successll inveigated businss tht hd mltiple comainled againsbyr fctus comainans . whd deed two pate coiansnging against the same fctus businss , oth originaing from comainled byr fctus comainans . thee coians were combined into an inveiga , the correct rocedre for handling comain ffectingltiple emloees . the inveigator coinued the inveiga fter the fctus emloer claimed tht the businssd fled for bankruptc anttemted to visit the businss whe the emloer topped retning hoe clls . the inveigator dot uspubc record to ver tht the emloer hd fled for bankruptc , but otherwise mde reasnable effort to locte aninveigate the businss . rotectns of the fair labor sanrd act app to emloeengaged in interte commerce or in the rodct of ood for interte commerce . the ct app to ll emloee of anterise tht has t least $in annuasale or businss and has emloeengaged in interte commerce or in the rodct of ood for interte commerce , or tht has emloeeandling , elling , or otherwise working ood or mteria tht hve ee moved in or rodced for interte commerce by any ern . eve thouganterise mayve pate locns , is considered single eterise for the $00,000 coverage determina f relted ct re erformed througunied oer or commo cotrol by any er or erns for commo businss pu . reted in appix ii . table 2 rovde summ of 10 cas cloed by whd etwee octoer 1 , 2006 anstemer 31 , 2007 . shandelman v. schuman , 92 f. supp . unl over ofter the comaint was receved , incling chld abor comainffecting over 0 minors . because the e of lns to collect back wag under flsa is , whd is ing comainan t risk of collecting frct of the back wag the wold hve ee able to collect t the tme of the comain . whd o failed to comel record and other inform from emloers . whle whd rginal administrtor re legall able to issusubpoenas , whd has ot eteded this abi to inuainveigator , who therefore ded o emloer to rovde record and other docme voluny . ias where pubc record re aiable to ver emloer teme , whd inveigator do ot hve certain tool tht wold fte ccess to thee docmes . for exale , we used pubcl - aiable oine dabase , pubc access to crt electronirecord ( pacer ) , to determine than emloer who claimed to hve fled for bankruptcot ctuall do . however , there is o evdece in the case fle tht the whd inveigator erformed this check .