gsa denied this request . gao found in 2006 that the federal judiciary's rental obligations to gsa for courthouses had increased 27 percent from fiscal year 2000 through fiscal year 2005 , after controlling for inflation , and that these increasing rent costs were primarily due to the judiciary's simultaneous 19-percent increase in space . much of the net increase in space was in new courthouses that the judiciary had taken occupancy of since 2000 . in 2010 , we found that the 33 federal courthouses completed since 2000 include 3.56 million square feet of unneeded space — more than a quarter of the space in courthouses completed since 2000 . this extra space consists of space that was constructed as a result of ( 1 ) exceeding the congressionally authorized size , ( 2 ) overestimating the number of judges the courthouses would have , and ( 3 ) not planning for judges to share courtrooms . overall , this space is equal to the square footage of about 9 average - sized courthouses . the estimated cost to construct this extra space , when adjusted to 2010 dollars , is $835 million , and the annual cost to rent , operate , and maintain it is $51 million . in our 2010 report on federal courthouse construction , we found that 27 of the 33 courthouses completed since 2000 exceeded their congressionally authorized size by a total of 1.7 million square feet . fifteen exceed their congressionally authorized size by more than 10 percent , and 12 of these 15 also incurred total project costs that exceeded the estimates provided to congressional committees . however , there is no statutory requirement to notify congressional committees about size overages . according to our analysis , a lack of oversight by gsa , including not ensuring its space measurement policies were understood and followed , and a lack of focus on building courthouses within the congressionally authorized size , contributed to these size overages . for example , all 7 of the courthouses we examined in case studies for this 2010 report included more building common and other space — such as mechanical spaces and atriums — than planned for within the congressionally authorized gross square footage . the increase over the planned space ranged from 19 percent to 102 percent . regional gsa officials involved in the planning and construction of several courthouses we visited stated that they were unaware until we told them that the courthouses were larger than authorized . further indicating a lack of oversight in this area , gsa relied on the architect to validate that the courthouse's design was within the authorized gross square footage without ensuring that the architect followed gsa's policies on how to measure certain commonly included spaces , such as atriums . although gsa officials emphasized that open space for atriums would not cost as much as space completely built out with floors , these officials also agreed that there are costs associated with constructing and operating atrium space . in fact , the 2007 edition of the u.s. courts design guide , which reflects an effort to impose tighter constraints on future space and facilities costs , emphasizes that courthouses should have no more than one atrium .