hhs generally concurred with our recommendations . it also discussed several concerns . hhs concurred with our recommendation to improve estimates of manufacturers' vaccine and antiviral production capacity and to develop strategies to ensure adequate production levels in the event of a pandemic . however , hhs commented that it believed the draft report inappropriately emphasized the development and use of antiviral drugs and pneumococcal vaccine over the use of pandemic influenza vaccine . hhs also stated that the wording of our recommendation in the draft report to fill knowledge gaps about vaccines and drugs placed undue and potentially misleading emphasis on the role of antiviral drugs and pneumococcal vaccines in pandemic influenza preparedness . we agree with hhs that influenza vaccine is the first line of defense against an influenza virus , but to the extent that it is in short supply , antiviral drugs and , to a lesser extent , pneumococcal vaccine become important interventions . our recommendation was intended to include steps to enhance all three interventions , including the availability of influenza vaccine . we have expanded the recommendation to include resolving knowledge gaps surrounding influenza vaccine production and distribution . in a related comment , hhs stated that the draft did not convey the appropriate use of pneumococcal vaccine . hhs said that the availability of the vaccine will not be a major factor of the federal response plan for pandemic influenza . rather , it stated that efforts should be directed toward increasing pneumococcal vaccination rates among high - risk groups before the health care delivery system is overwhelmed by a pandemic crisis . we agree that hhs' strategy has merit and gave it greater prominence in the final report . in its general comments hhs stated that the draft report did not address the full range of activities it considers essential to ensure prepandemic preparedness and an adequate pandemic response capability . hhs cited as examples three important aspects of pandemic preparedness that were not addressed in the report: ( 1 ) a robust disease surveillance system , ( 2 ) the presence of community emergency preparedness protocols , and ( 3 ) good public health practices to minimize and control the spread of disease . we recognize that these factors are important aspects of pandemic preparedness and response capability . however , our work focused on the production and distribution of vaccines and drugs , which are also widely regarded as direct and critical interventions needed to help protect the population from an influenza pandemic . hhs concurred with our recommendation to establish a deadline to complete and publish a federal response plan for pandemic influenza and stated that it will keep the congress informed of the proposed timetable and progress toward the milestones established . hhs also agreed that the plan needs to include key decisions such as those related to the private and public sector responsibilities for vaccine purchase and delivery . hhs said that it is working to create a flexible plan that will accommodate a wide variety of contingencies . hhs' comments are reprinted in appendix i . the results from our analysis of state efforts are illustrative and cannot be generalized to other states .