( see fig . these low spending rates may reflect both the rapid decline in the number of abawds participating in the food stamp program , as well as states' decisions about how to structure their programs . the 2002 farm bill repealed some of the funding provisions enacted by the balanced budget act . the bill eliminated the additional bba funds for 2002 and provided $90 million for each year between 2002-2007 . in addition , the bill provided an additional $20 million in each of these years for states that provide a work activity to every abawd who would otherwise be subject to the 3- out of 36-month time limit . fiscal year 2001 and unspent prior year funds were rescinded , unless states already had obligated them . the farm bill also repealed the requirement that states meet their maintenance - of - effort requirement . in addition , states no longer have to spend 80 percent of federal grant funds on work activities for abawds . however , the farm bill did not eliminate the 3- out of 36-month time limit for benefits or alter the work requirements for abawds . states continue to receive the 50-percent matching federal funds for program administrative costs , and the farm bill eliminated the cap on reimbursements to states for support services , such as transportation , allowing states to be reimbursed for 50 percent of all support service expenses . ( see fig . the workforce investment act , which was passed in 1998 , requires states and localities to coordinate many federally funded employment and training services through a single system , called the one - stop center system . through one - stop centers , individuals can access a range of services , including job search activities and employment - related activities . wia mandated that 17 categories of federal employment and training programs across four federal agencies be coordinated through the one - stop system , including three wia - funded programs — wia adult , wia dislocated worker , and wia youth . these programs provide three tiers , or levels , of service for adults and dislocated workers: core , intensive , and training . core services include basic services such as job searches and labor market information and are available to anyone coming into a one - stop center . these activities may be self - service or require some staff assistance . intensive services include such activities as comprehensive assessment and case management — activities that require greater staff involvement . training services include such activities as occupational skills or on - the - job training . coordination between the 17 programs generally takes one of two forms: colocation , whereby clients access employment and training services at a local one - stop , or through referrals and electronic linkages to off - site programs . while other employment and training programs , such as tanf and the food stamp e&t program , are not required to be a part of the one - stop system , some states have required localities to include these programs in the one - stop system .