app . ii provides more information on our cm bill auctions analysis . treasury could maintain higher cash balances or issue regular treasury bills ( eg , the 4-week bill ) to avoid issuing a cm bill to meet short - term cash shortfalls . when evaluating cm bills relative to other alternatives , it is important to look at total borrowing costs — not just the yield . : mit press , 1996 ) : 181 – 197 . in addition to the contacts named above , jose oyola ( assistant director ) , richard krashevski , naved qureshi , and melissa wolf made significant contributions to this report . jennifer ashford also provided key assistance . garbade , kenneth d. , and jeffrey f. ingber , “the treasury auction process: objectives , structure and recent adaptations.” current issues in economics and finance , vol . 2 , federal reserve bank of new york ( february 2005 ) . garbade , kenneth d. , john c. partlan , and paul j. santoro . “recent innovations in treasury cash management.” current issues in economic and finance , vol . 11 , federal reserve bank of new york ( november 2004 ) . malvey , paul f. and christine m. archibald . uniform - price auctions: update of the treasury experiences . department of the treasury , office of market finance ( oct. 26 , 1998 ) . nyborg , kjell g. and suresh sundaresan . “discriminatory versus uniform treasury auctions: evidence from when - issued transactions.” journal of financial economics , vol . seligman , jason . “does urgency affect price at market ? an analysis of u.s. treasury short - term finance.” journal of money , credit , and banking ( forthcoming ) . simon , david p. “segmentation in the treasury bill market: evidence from cash management bills.” journal of financial and quantitative analysis , vol . 1 ( march 1991 ) : 97 – 108 . simon , david p. “further evidence on segmentation in the treasury bill market.” journal of banking and finance , vol . treasury's borrowing costs are based on the amount borrowed , the yield it pays to borrow , and the time the debt is outstanding . we found that cm bills are generally less costly than currently available alternatives despite their higher yield . to avoid issuing a cm bill , treasury could run higher cash balances to bridge cash financing gaps . however , it is generally more cost - efficient to repay debt and then issue a cm bill than run higher cash balances because the interest earned on excess cash balances is generally insufficient to cover borrowing costs . treasury's current cash balance target is $5 billion , which represents the amount to be held at the federal reserve . treasury invests excess cash above the $5 billion target in treasury tax and loan ( tt&l ) accounts . tt&l accounts are held at financial institutions and earn interest rates equal to the federal funds rate less 25 basis points . the rate earned on tt&l accounts is generally less than the average rate treasury pays on cm and regular short - term bills . as a result , treasury faces a negative funding spread .