( see fig . a program performance assessment system is an important component of effective program management and contains three key elements: 1 . when the veteran was stable , the vjo specialist was able to link him to permanent housing and va vocational training . after several years of treatment and assistance , the veteran was hired by va and purchased a home with a va loan . vjo specialists in another rural location said they have tried to address this challenge by hiring veterans who have received vjo program assistance to help drive other veterans to their medical appointments . va has not performed a comprehensive assessment of risks posed by the challenges the vjo program faces , which is inconsistent with federal standards for internal control and one component of effective program management . to what extent has va used performance assessment to help manage the veterans justice outreach program ? what key challenges , if any , has va identified and to what extent has the agency developed mitigation strategies , as necessary ? to address our objectives , we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations , as well as documents from va's central office , including the vjo program fiscal year 2012-2016 strategic plan ( the most recent available ) , policies , procedures , guidance , and program fact sheets . we did not independently verify the actions described in such documents . we obtained data about the number and characteristics of veterans served by the vjo program from va for fiscal years 2012 through 2015 ( the most recent data available ) . we determined that va's compilation of data about veterans served by the vjo program were sufficiently reliable to include in our report . specifically , we obtained and assessed official documentation such as user guides , frequently asked questions , and disclaimers ; and we discussed our planned use of the data and any limitations with va officials . to assess the degree to which va uses program performance assessment — setting program goals , using performance measures , and evaluating programs — to manage the vjo program , we compared va's use of performance assessment against best practices for assessing program performance and federal standards for internal control . we compared va's efforts to identify challenges and respective mitigation strategies with criteria established in the federal standards for internal control . for example , regarding the significance if va medical centers were to de - prioritize outreach to veterans , va found that the program's relationship with its criminal justice system partners could be weakened and justice - involved veterans may suffer . specifically , we chose to use risk assessment — one of five key components in standards for internal control — because analyzing risk provides the basis for developing appropriate mitigation strategies . we also conducted semi - structured interviews with stakeholders in nine areas served by va medical centers .