( recommendation 2 ) . we provided a draft of this report to the departments of agriculture and health and human services for review and comment . the regulations contain requirements related to date labels . among other requirements to obtain a grademark , the cartons or consumer packaging containing these eggs must show the day of the year on which the eggs were packed . specific introductory phrasing for the date label — such as sell by , best by , or use before — is not required , but if these terms are used , ams policies restrict the number of days from the pack date that can be used on a date label . an egg producer may choose to not use an expiration date and still receive ams certification , but the lot number must be present on each carton . cartons not identified with a usda grademark are not subject to federal regulation ; however , regardless of whether the eggs bear a usda grademark , they are subject to state and local date labeling requirements . furthermore , usda's food and nutrition service , which administers 15 federal nutrition assistance programs , policy , last updated in 2017 , clarifies that date labels indicate quality , not safety . this policy references the agency's regulation that prohibits distributors of food assistance from providing food with expired date labels or food that is “out - of - condition,” regardless of the date on the label , to recipients of any food and nutrition service programs . the policy states that , to give program recipients the opportunity to eat all donated foods before their expiration dates , distributors and recipient agencies should use an inventory - management system that distributes products marked with the earliest end date first , even if they were received after other similar products . from 2008 through 2018 , usda provided funding for two grants related to date labels , resulting in three studies: one grant resulted in a 2008 study , and the other grant resulted in studies in 2017 and 2018 . the 2008 study assessed participant understanding of date labels on ready - to - eat meat and poultry products to minimize the risk of listeriosis in vulnerable populations . the study found that participants paid attention to the date labels but varied highly in their interpretation of the statements . however , they generally interpreted “sell by” date labels as primarily intended for the retailer's use on when to pull stock and “best if used by” labels as pertaining more to quality than safety considerations . figure 3 shows excerpts from the 2019 fact sheet . in addition , fsis offers a smartphone application ( app ) , called foodkeeper , that provides information for consumers on the shelf life of products , how to use food when it is at peak quality , and how to store food properly . fsis developed the foodkeeper app in 2015 in partnership with cornell university and the food marketing institute . the app offers users advice on how to store more than 650 food and beverage items , with specific storage timelines for the refrigerator , freezer , and pantry , depending on the nature of the product .