countries or regions . nspd - 44 directed the secretary of state to coordinate and lead u.s. government stabilization and reconstruction operations . the secretary of state delegated the implementation of this directive to the office of the coordinator for reconstruction and stabilization ( s / crs ) . in addition , the directive established a national security council ( nsc ) committee to lead interagency efforts to improve planning and coordination for reconstruction and stabilization operations and to develop a strong civilian response capability . the committee is co - chaired by the coordinator for reconstruction and stabilization and nsc . in this report , we review s / crs's efforts to improve ( 1 ) interagency planning and coordination for stabilization and reconstruction operations , and ( 2 ) the deployment of civilians to these operations . to complete our work , we reviewed the legislation that created s / crs , national security presidential directives , the national security strategy of the united states , the foreign affairs manual , s / crs planning guidance , plans for several ongoing stabilization and reconstruction operations , budget requests , and funding allocations . in addition , we interviewed officials from eight executive agencies , including the departments of agriculture , commerce , defense ( dod ) , homeland security , justice , state , and the treasury , and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) ; former senior s / crs officials ; and experts from u.s. government and private research centers . we asked agency officials about their agencies' roles and responsibilities for planning and executing stabilization and reconstruction operations , the development of a proposed framework for planning and executing such operations , and the development of new capabilities for deploying u.s. federal government personnel to overseas crises . finally , we reviewed related gao reports . we conducted our review from july 2006 to october 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . a detailed description of our scope and methodology is included in appendix i . following problems with reconstruction efforts in iraq in the fall of 2003 , an internal state report concluded that the u.s. government had no standing civilian capacity to plan , implement , or manage stabilization and reconstruction operations ; and the united states had relied on ad hoc processes for planning and executing these efforts . state recommended the establishment of a new office to provide a centralized , permanent structure for planning and coordinating the civilian response to stabilization and reconstruction operations . accordingly , in august 2004 , secretary of state powell announced the creation of s / crs to coordinate u.s. efforts to prepare , plan , and resource responses to complex emergencies , failing and failed states , and post - conflict environments . such efforts could involve establishing security , building basic public services , and supporting economic development . the consolidated appropriations act of 2005 granted statutory authorization for s / crs within the office of the secretary of state . in december 2005 , president bush issued nspd - 44 to improve the coordination , planning , and implementation of reconstruction and stabilization operations .