we provided a draft of this report to cfpb and ftc . cfpb provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate . we also provided selected relevant portions of the draft for technical review to carecredit , llc ; citibank , n.a . card companies contract with participating providers to offer financing products to consumers . card companies enroll providers into their card networks by marketing to them through trade shows , direct marketing sales calls , trade journal advertisements , direct mail , and e - mail . in some cases , card companies paid trade organizations to endorse specific products and promote them to their members . a more extensive discussion of our scope and methodology appears in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from july 2013 to june 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . medical credit cards are private - label credit cards that may be used across a network of participating providers ( such as dental offices or veterinary clinics ) that have contractual relationships with the card company . consumers typically learn about medical credit cards , or related products such as installment loans , from participating providers , who give information about the product and the available financing options . consumers often can apply immediately at the provider's office , sometimes with the assistance of the office staff , either online , by telephone , or using a printed application . the card company determines eligibility and , if the application is approved and an account is opened , is required to provide the consumer with the account - opening disclosures with the full terms and conditions , including fees , percentage rates , and rate terms . once enrolled , consumers generally interact with the card company — rather than the participating provider — regarding use of the card , and they direct their payments to the card company . medical credit cards can be used to pay for elective ( planned , nonemergency ) services , such as dental and orthodontic procedures , eye correction surgery , audiology care , cosmetic procedures , and hair removal or restoration , as well as for veterinary services . some medical credit cards also may be used to pay for insurance copayments and deductibles or to finance medical care for people who do not have health insurance . the products generally are subject to the same state and federal statutory provisions as other lending products , which under federal law include but are not limited to the following: truth in lending act and its implementing regulation z , which requires certain disclosures about a card's terms and cost . the credit card accountability responsibility and disclosure act of 2009 amended the truth in lending act to require certain disclosures about rates and fees on credit cards and prohibit certain practices ( such as raising the rate on an existing balance ) .