( see fig . costs for the reactor conversion program are broken into four categories: fuel development includes all of the activities associated with testing and analyzing new leu fuels , such as the leu dispersion and monolithic fuels that are currently under development . this activity also includes developing the methods for manufacturing new leu fuels . most of the reactor conversion program costs over the life of the program are in this category . reactor analysis includes studying the conversion of individual research reactors , both domestic and foreign , once a suitable leu has been developed . for example , argonne provides technical assistance to research reactors to determine the impact of conversion on the reactors' performance and safety . this category does not include the cost of purchasing leu fuel for research reactors . for example , the responsibility for purchasing leu fuel for u.s. university reactors belongs to another program in doe that is separate from the reactor conversion program . development of leu for medical isotope production includes activities associated with testing and analyzing leu materials to replace heu in the production of medical isotopes . this activity also includes development of manufacturing and waste management processes for using leu instead of heu and technical assistance to medical isotope producers . assistance to russia includes funding to support research and development on new leu fuels for russian - supplied reactors . it also includes analysis of the impact of conversion to leu on russian - supplied reactors . the assistance to russia was previously funded through a one - time grant of approximately $1.7 million , about two - thirds of which has been spent , from the state department's nonproliferation and disarmament fund ( ndf ) . in addition to the $139 million spent by the reactor conversion program , doe's university reactor support program spent approximately $10 million between 1984 and 2000 to convert 11 university research reactors in the united states , according to an official at the idaho national engineering and environmental laboratory ( ineel ) . the cost of converting each reactor varied from around $400,000 to $1.6 million and was primarily for the cost of fabricating the fuel . the costs varied depending on the type of fuel and where it was manufactured . additional testing could reveal problems that have not yet surfaced . furthermore , this fuel requires development of a new manufacturing method because the methods used to manufacture other research reactor fuels are not suitable for monolithic fuel . argonne is conducting research on different manufacturing options but has not yet demonstrated that monolithic fuel can be manufactured on a large scale . three reactor operators hoping to convert to this fuel told us it is impossible to predict whether the new leu fuel will be successfully developed and that creating a reliable leu fuel could take many years more than expected . development of monolithic fuel may be delayed if argonne encounters any problems in the fuel development process . argonne officials said they have already delayed projected completion from 2008 to 2010 to allow time for additional testing .