actions . establish and implement formal written accounting and reporting ( 1 ) comparing cmp receivables reported in cms' audited financial statements and hhs' accountability report , ( 2 ) reconciling cmp receivables between cms' general ledger and the detailed subsidiary systems , ( 3 ) recording of ltc receivables in facs since ltc cmp receivables currently are not recorded in facs until a collection is made , and ( 4 ) ensuring the accurate recording of information into facs . determine an approach for assessing the collectibility of outstanding amounts so that a meaningful allowance for uncollectible accounts can be reported and used for measuring debt collection performance . in addition , establish formal written policies and procedures to ensure that the allowance for uncollectible cmp debts is properly determined using such an approach . establish and implement formal written debt collection policies and ( 1 ) handling instances in which a discount greater than 35-percent is allowed , including the documentation , review , and approval of such settlements , and ( 2 ) referring eligible ltc cmp debt to treasury as required by dcia . in commenting on these briefing slides , cms agreed with all but one of our recommendations . cms did not agree with our recommendation to establish and implement debt collection policies and procedures for instances in which a discount greater than 35-percent is allowed . according to cms , flexibility is needed in the settlement process and issuing policies and procedures on settlements would add rigidity to the process . it was not our intent that a rigid process for determining settlement amounts would be implemented . however , consistent with good management practices and the standards for internal control in the federal government , when exceptions to a stated management policy occur , typical control practices are to document , review , and approve such exceptions to ensure that management's objectives are being met . cms also stated that the non - cmp issues reported by cms' external financial statement auditors have no correlation to the cmp issues discussed in the slides . we disagree . even though these are two different types of debt , the underlying financial accountability and reporting issues are similar . for example , as discussed on slide 18 , the external financial statement auditors reported that non - cmp contractors are unable to reconcile reported ending balances to the contractors' subsidiary records . our review also found reconciliation problems with the cmp receivables . as discussed on slide 32 , as of september 30 , 2000 , cmp receivables balances in facs and the detailed subsidiary systems differed by a net of about $22 million . the following are our comments on the centers for medicare and medicaid services' letter dated august 30 , 2001 . we subsequently combined recommendations 1 and 3 together under recommendation 1 in order to group related topics . cms agreed with both recommendations . recommendation 4 was subsequently renumbered as recommendation 3 due to the combining of recommendations 1 and 3 . see the “agency comments and our evaluation” section .