sustaining u.s . global leadership: priorities for 21st century defense the sustaining u.s . global leadership: priorities for 21st century defense report ( also referred to as the defense strategic guidance ) , released in january 2012 , was directed by the president to identify the strategic interests of the united states . the document states that it was an assessment of the defense strategy prompted by the changing geopolitical environment and fiscal pressures . the defense strategic guidance was developed by senior officials from dod — including the office of the secretary of defense , the joint staff , the armed services , and the combatant commands — and the white house . the document outlines security challenges the united states faces and is intended to guide the development of the joint force through 2020 and during a period of anticipated fiscal constraints . the defense strategic guidance identified 10 primary missions of the armed forces: counter terrorism and irregular warfare ; deter and defeat aggression ; project power despite anti - access / area denial challenges ; counter weapons of mass destruction ; operate effectively in cyberspace and space ; maintain a safe , secure , and effective nuclear deterrent ; defend the homeland and provide support to civil authorities ; provide a stabilizing presence ; conduct stability and counterinsurgency operations ; and conduct humanitarian , disaster relief , and other operations . it also identified several principles to guide the force and program development necessary to achieve these missions . for example , it noted the need for the department to continue to reduce costs through reducing the rate of growth of manpower costs , and the identification of additional efficiencies . in march 2013 , the secretary of defense directed the completion of a strategic choices management review . the strategic choices management review was to examine the potential effect of additional , anticipated budget reductions on the department and develop options for performing the missions in the defense strategic guidance . specifically , the review was to inform how the department would allocate resources when executing its fiscal year 2014 budget and preparing its fiscal year 2015 through fiscal year 2019 budget plans . according to the secretary of defense , the purpose of the strategic choices management review was to understand the effect of further budget reductions on the department and develop options to deal with these additional reductions . the secretary of defense further emphasized that producing a detailed budget blueprint was not the purpose of this review . in addition to the contact named above , key contributors to this report were margaret morgan and kevin l. o'neill , assistant directors ; tracy abdo ; darreisha m. bates ; elizabeth curda ; leia dickerson ; gina flacco ; brent helt ; mae jones ; amie lesser ; travis masters ; judy mccloskey ; terry richardson ; and sabrina streagle . specifically , dod commented on the four recommended principles of a comprehensive process: regarding a planned approach , the department stated that it determined that using other , ongoing strategic planning efforts to complete the roles and missions assessment met the review's statutory requirement . as noted in the report , there were some benefits to dod's taking advantage of other processes .