ii ) . to describe recent national trends in prescription pain reliever abuse and misuse , we interviewed officials from cdc , dea , fda , nih , ondcp , and samhsa ; conducted a literature review to identify relevant data sources and explanations for trends in prescription pain reliever abuse and misuse ; and analyzed data related to prescription pain reliever abuse and misuse from several data sources representative of the u.s. population aged 12 years and older . we included data in our review from the drug abuse warning network ( dawn ) , nsduh , the national vital statistics system ( nvss ) , and the treatment episode data set ( teds ) . we selected these four data sources because they are the data sources that the responsible agencies use for monitoring trends in prescription pain reliever abuse and misuse , and because they are nationally representative . we analyzed data for calendar years 2003 to 2009 , the most recent years for which data from at least three data sources were available . ( see app . iii for more information about these data sources. ) to assess the reliability of these data for our purposes , we reviewed related documentation and conducted interviews with knowledgeable agency officials from cdc and samhsa to learn about data collection , quality control , and any limitations of these data sources . we also conducted electronic and manual data testing to ensure the quality of the data . we determined that all data we assessed were sufficiently reliable to provide overall trends for the purposes of our review . to describe how federal agencies are educating prescribers about prescription pain reliever abuse and misuse , we reviewed documents and interviewed officials from fda , nih , and samhsa to identify and describe educational strategies used during fiscal year 2011 . because they are involved in federal prevention efforts , we also interviewed officials from dea , hrsa , ondcp , and the american medical association to gain their perspective on gaps in current prescriber education and efforts to fill these gaps . we excluded agencies that support their own health care systems , such as the bureau of prisons , department of defense , indian health service , and department of veterans affairs , from the scope of our review as they serve special populations , rather than the general public . we also excluded educational efforts related to drug abuse treatment , including education about the use of the prescription pain relievers methadone or buprenorphine for the treatment of opioid addiction . to assess the extent to which federal agencies follow key practices for developing public education efforts about prescription pain reliever abuse and misuse , we reviewed agency websites and interviewed officials from dea , fda , nih , samhsa , and ondcp to identify educational efforts . we then assessed the development of those educational efforts against key practices for developing consumer education efforts identified in our prior work . we limited our scope to efforts that target the general public , rather than special populations , such as educational efforts pursued by the department of veterans affairs , department of defense , or indian health service .