pub . ( ofpp ) in the office of management and budget , to implement the required provisions , including the extent to which the actions achieved the section's objectives . for this report , we identified ( 1 ) ofpp's strategy to improve the number and quality of contractor past performance evaluations and implement provisions of section 853 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2013 , and ( 2 ) changes in the compliance rates for required performance evaluations from april 2013 to april 2014 for selected agencies . to identify government - wide actions taken or planned to improve the number and quality of contractor past performance evaluations and implement provisions of the ndaa for fiscal year 2013 , we reviewed ofpp memoranda and reports to agency senior procurement executives related to documenting contractor performance as well as government - wide guidance and recent changes to the far related to documenting contractor performance and revising the contractor comment process . see appendix i for a listing of ofpp past performance policy guidance and past performance related far cases . we also interviewed an ofpp official on actions taken or planned and interviewed officials at dod , the largest procuring agency , on their actions taken or planned . to identify the changes in compliance rates for required performance evaluations for selected agencies , we reviewed compliance metrics from the past performance information retrieval system ( ppirs ) as of april 2014 and compared them to april 2013 metrics . we identified changes in the compliance rates for the top 10 agencies based on number of evaluations due as of april 2014 . to assess the reliability of these data , we reviewed system documentation and the programs used to generate the compliance metrics , and interviewed officials who manage the system . we found these data to be sufficiently reliable for the purpose of this report . we conducted this performance audit from june 2014 to august 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . when selecting contractors , the far generally requires agencies to consider past performance as a factor in most competitive procurements . during source selection , contracting officials often rely on various sources of past performance information , such as the prospective contractor's performance on prior government or industry contracts for efforts similar to the government's requirements , and the past performance information housed in the government - wide ppirs database . improving contractor past performance assessments: summary of the office of federal procurement policy's review , and strategies for improvement ( january 21 , 2011 ) : included ofpp's initial assessment of agencies' reporting of contractor performance information and additional steps and strategies for improving the collection of past performance information . http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / sites / default / files / omb / procurement / contract_p erf / pastperformancememo - 21-jan - 2011.pdf .