as mandated in pub . 109-102 , section 567 , this report provides an analysis of u.s. - funded international basic education programs . specifically , this report ( 1 ) describes u.s. agencies' basic education activities and how the agencies plan these activities ; ( 2 ) examines u.s. coordination of basic education efforts among u.s. agencies , and with host governments and international donors ; and ( 3 ) examines how u.s. agencies assess the results of their basic education programs . in conducting our work , we analyzed strategic , budget , and programmatic documents describing u.s. international basic education programs and activities provided by state , usaid , usda , dod , dol , the mcc , and the peace corps that covered fiscal years 2001 through 2006 . in addition , we conducted audit work in washington , d.c. , as well as the dominican republic , egypt , honduras , liberia , mali , morocco , peru , south africa , and zambia . we selected a nonprobability sample of foreign countries designed to ensure geographic diversity and representation of basic education programs from multiple u.s. agencies and international donors . we met with representatives from state , usaid , usda , dod , dol , the mcc , and the peace corps ; officials representing embassies and usaid missions in the countries visited ; officials administering international basic education programs ; and officials from foreign governments , ngos , the united nations ( un ) , and other international organizations . furthermore , to assess u.s. mechanisms for monitoring u.s. activities , we analyzed key project agreement documents , performance reports , and evaluations for 40 ongoing basic education projects in the eight countries visited . we performed our work from december 2005 through march 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . appendix i provides a more detailed description of our scope and methodology . basic education is defined in this report as all program efforts aimed at improving early childhood development , primary education , and secondary education , as well as training in literacy , numeracy , and other basic skills for adults or out - of - school youth . basic education also includes efforts that facilitate and support such learning activities , including building host countries' institutional capacity to manage basic education systems and measure results , constructing and rehabilitating schools , training teachers , increasing parent and community involvement in schools , providing learning materials , and developing curricula . education for all is a major goal of the international donor community . at jomtien , thailand , in march 1990 , representatives of the global education community held the “world conference on education for all” and declared universal access to education as a fundamental right of all people . in april 2000 , the “world education forum” met in dakar , senegal , where delegates from 181 nations adopted a framework for action committing their governments to achieve quality basic education for all — including ensuring that by 2015 , all children - - especially girls , children in difficult circumstances , and those from ethnic minorities - - have access to completely free primary education of good quality .