fps . fps identifies providers with suspect billing patterns and prioritizes leads based on provider risk - scores . the program integrity contractors generally have a triage process to review leads and determine whether the leads are indicative of potential fraud ( see fig . 2 for information on program integrity contractor investigation processes ) . leads that are determined to be suspect become formal investigations , and the program integrity contractors perform a range of investigative activities to gather evidence and determine if providers are engaged in potential fraud . these activities include conducting beneficiary and provider interviews , site visits of provider facilities , and manual reviews of provider claims . based on their investigations , the program integrity contractors may take corrective actions by referring providers engaged in potential fraud to law enforcement and initiating administrative actions . specifically , if the program integrity contractors uncover evidence of potential fraud , they refer the investigation to the department of health and human services office of inspector general ( hhs oig ) for further examination , which may lead to possible criminal or civil prosecution by the department of justice . the program integrity contractors may also recommend a range of administrative actions to cms for approval and implementation . such actions include revocation of providers' billing privileges and payment suspensions ( table 1 describes the administrative actions the program integrity contractors may recommend against providers ) . cms's claims processing systems apply prepayment edits to all medicare fee - for - service claims in an effort to pay claims properly . most of the prepayment edits are automated , meaning that if a claim does not meet the criteria of the edit , it is automatically denied . other prepayment edits flag claims for manual review , in which trained clinicians and coders examine claims and associated medical records to ensure that the claims meet medicare rules and requirements . many improper and potentially fraudulent claims can be identified only by manually reviewing associated medical records and beneficiary claim histories , and exercising clinical judgment to determine whether services were reasonable and necessary . whereas automated edits are applied to all claims , manual edits are applied to very few — less than 1 percent of claims undergo manual review . cms contracts with the macs to process and pay medicare fee - for - service claims and implement prepayment edits in the medicare claims processing systems . the claims processing systems consist of three systems — the mac front - end systems , shared systems , and common working file — that carry out a variety of functions and execute prepayment edits ( see fig . when implementing fps , cms integrated fps with the claims processing systems and claims are screened by fps prior to payment . unlike the claims processing systems , cpi maintains fps . hfpp is a voluntary public - private partnership established by hhs and the department of justice to facilitate collaboration in addressing healthcare fraud .