citizenship and immigration services . such events could include , for example , delays in immigration court cases or an increase in the number of asylum cases , which could increase adp . when asked to provide documentation for the fiscal year 2018 adp projection of 51,379 , ice provided us a document containing tables and justification that explained the factors that impact adp , but did not provide us the calculations or methodology used to arrive at the projected adp . while the adp used in its budget requests may be developed based on policy decisions , documenting the calculations and rationale by which the figure was developed would help to demonstrate how the number was determined and that it was based on sound decisions . although ice officials stated that adp is difficult to forecast , the agency has developed a statistical model that may help predict the adp . ero's law enforcement systems and analysis ( lesa ) office has developed a statistical model that uses population data directly pulled from ice's enforcement information database to forecast the adp in upcoming years . ( see sidebar for more information. ) ero began using the model in 2014 , and according to officials , ice currently uses it to estimate how much funding the agency will need for detention costs for the remainder of the fiscal year . the model describes historical trends , seasonal fluctuations , and random movement in the adp , and then uses these historical patterns to make forecasts . based on our evaluation , we found that this type of model was a reasonable method to forecast adp , and that lesa's particular modeling choices were generally consistent with accepted statistical practices and appropriate for the data and application . using lesa's model , ice can produce a range of adp forecasts under different scenarios , as well as confidence intervals for any particular forecast . confidence intervals indicate the level of certainty around the model's forecast , depending on how wide the range is for the adp forecast . confidence in the model's forecasts decreases when the adp range is smaller and when forecasting for later time periods . because the model relies on historical data in making adp forecasts , lesa is able to incorporate separate analysis of external or unexpected events to help inform the effects of similar events on adp in the future . for example , according to ice officials , lesa can conduct ad hoc analysis outside of the model of how potential policy decisions , such as a change in the number of field officers , may affect future adp , if a similar event occurred in the past . further , we found that because ice did not appropriately calculate the percentage change for each year , the average of year - over - year changes , which ice uses as its inflation factor , is not correct . for example , ice's inflation factor for the bed / guard rate is 2.74 percent , while the appropriate calculation is 3.28 percent . ( see table 1. ) ( see appendix i for more information and calculations. )