( see fig . 1 for a map of the counties ihs designates as chsdas . residence in these counties is generally a requirement for obtaining contract health services. ) about 46 percent of chs program funds are distributed by ihs to federal chs programs , and the other 54 percent to tribal chs programs . officials from all six of the area offices said that a cap on nonhospital services , including physician services , at medicare rates would reduce payments to providers and they believed that the overall effect for the chs program would be positive . officials from all six area offices specifically cited the resulting financial savings from the cap and indicated that this would allow the chs programs to pay for more care . officials from four area offices noted that a cap would be particularly beneficial in lowering the cost of certain high - cost nonhospital services , such as cancer treatments , dialysis , and air ambulance services . officials from some of these areas said that providers of these services have been less likely to negotiate contracts . tribal chs programs must meet the same statutory and regulatory requirements as federal chs programs , but they are not generally subject to the same policies , procedures , and reporting requirements established for federal chs programs . funds permitting , federal and tribal facilities use chs program funds to pay for eligible patients to receive services from external providers if the services are not available at ihs - funded facilities . the services purchased include hospital , specialty physician , outpatient , laboratory , dental , radiology , pharmacy , and transportation services . patients must meet certain requirements to have their services paid for by the chs program . for example , patients must be members of federally recognized tribes and live in specific areas . if these requirements are met , chs program committees at each federal or tribal facility evaluate the medical necessity of each patient case and assign it a priority level . facilities first pay for the highest priority services . if there are other health care resources available to the patient , such as medicare , medicaid , or private health insurance , these resources must first be used to pay for services before the chs program covers any remaining costs because the chs program is generally the payer of last resort.once the service has been approved and the care provided , providers obtain payment for chs program services by sending their claims to ihs's fiscal intermediary , bluecross blueshield of new mexico ( bcbsnm ) . bcbsnm processes claims for all of the federal chs programs . the tribal chs programs process their own claims or contract with a fiscal intermediary of their choosing ; a small number of tribal programs contract with bcbsnm . the rate that a chs program pays a provider is determined by several factors , including whether the provider is a hospital subject to mlr reimbursement or the provider has negotiated reduced payment rates with ihs or the tribe . ( see fig . chs program payments for hospital services — inpatient and outpatient services provided in medicare - participating hospitals — are subject to the mlr requirement .