doe generally agreed with these recommendations . to obtain information on doe's contractor protective forces , we visited three of the sites with enduring category i snm missions — pantex , the savannah river site , and los alamos national laboratory — because each site represented one of the three different types of protective force contracts currently in place . we also met with protective force contractors , federal site office officials , and protective force union representatives at these sites . we also distributed a data collection instrument to protective force contractors and federal site office officials at each of these sites and at the other three sites with enduring category i snm missions — y - 12 , the nevada test site , and the idaho national laboratory . from this instrument , we received site information about the protective forces , the status of trf and dbt implementations , views on doe options for managing the protective forces , and the reliability of site data . prior to this testimony , protective force union officials provided us with updated information . we conducted our work from april 2008 to march 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards , which require us to plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in 2006 , doe issued its contractor pension and medical benefits policy ( notice 351.1 ) , which was designed to limit doe's long - term pension and postretirement liabilities . a coalition of protective force unions stated that this policy moved them in the opposite direction from their desire for early and enhanced retirement benefits . concerns over trf implementation and doe's efforts to limit long - term pension and postretirement liabilities contributed to a 44-day protective force strike at the pantex plant in 2007 . initially , pantex contractor security officials designated all of the plant's protective force positions as having to meet a more demanding doe combatant standard , a move that could have disqualified a potentially sizable number of protective forces from duty . under the collective bargaining agreement that was eventually negotiated in 2007 , some protective forces were allowed to meet a less demanding combatant standard . doe has also rescinded its 2006 contractor pension and medical benefits policy . however , according to protective force union officials , failure to resolve issues surrounding trf implementation and retirement benefits could lead to strikes at three sites with large numbers of protective forces — pantex , the savannah river site , and y - 12 — when their collective bargaining agreements expire in 2012 . to manage its protective forces more effectively and uniformly , over the past decades doe has considered two principal options — improving elements of the existing contractor system or creating a federal protective force . we identified five major criteria that doe officials , protective force contractors , and union officials have used to assess the advantages and disadvantages of these options . overall , in comparing these criteria against the two principal options , we found that neither contractor nor federal forces seems overwhelmingly superior , but each has offsetting advantages and disadvantages .