standards are critical to enabling this interoperability . at your request , today i will summarize ( 1 ) our previously issued reports and recommendations on health it standards and ( 2 ) recent actions taken by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) to develop health it standards . in preparing this testimony , we summarized our prior reports and updated progress toward implementing recommendations in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards . according to the institute of medicine , health care delivery in the united states has long - standing problems with medical errors and inefficiencies that increase health care costs . the u.s. health care delivery system is an information - intensive industry that is complex and highly fragmented , with estimated spending of $1.7 trillion in 2003 . hence , the uses of it — in delivering clinical care , performing administrative functions , and supporting the public health infrastructure — have the potential to yield both cost savings and improvements in the care itself . information technologies such as electronic health records ( ehr ) have been shown to save money and reduce medical errors . it standards , including data standards , enable the interoperability and portability of systems within and across organizations . many different standards are required to develop interoperable health information systems . this reflects the complex nature of health care delivery in the united states . vocabulary standards , which provide common definitions and codes for medical terms and determine how information will be documented for diagnoses and procedures , are an important type of data standard . it passed hipaa , which calls for the industry to control the distribution and exchange of health care data and begin to adopt electronic data exchange standards to uniformly and securely exchange patient information . according to the national committee on vital and health statistics ( ncvhs ) , significant progress has occurred on several hipaa standards , however , the full economic benefits of administrative simplification will be realized only when all of them are in place . in 2000 and 2001 , the ncvhs reported on the need for standards , highlighting the need for uniform standards for patient medical record information , and outlining a strategy that included their development and use . the institute of medicine and others had also reported on the lack of national standards for the coding and classification of clinical and other health care data , and for the secure transmission and sharing of such data . in 2001 , the office of management and budget created the consolidated health informatics ( chi ) initiative as one of its e - government projects to facilitate the adoption of data standards for , among others , health care systems within the federal government . the coordinator also assumed responsibility for identifying standards for federal health programs as part of the chi initiative . while plans for the chi initiative called for it to be incorporated into hhs's federal health architecture by september 2004 , many issues — such as coordination of the various standards - setting efforts and implementation of the standards that had been identified — were still works in progress .