we would be pleased to answer any questions you may have . the company's owner has been investigated for embezzlement and fraud . federal law and regulations , as reflected in the far , do not prohibit contractors with unpaid federal taxes from receiving contracts from the federal government . although the far provides that federal agencies are restricted to doing business with responsible contractors , it does not require federal agencies to deny the award of contracts to contractors that abuse the federal tax system , unless the contractor was specifically debarred or suspended by a debarring official for specific actions , such as conviction for tax evasion . the far specifies that unless compelling reasons exist , agencies are prohibited from soliciting offers from , or awarding contracts to , contractors who are debarred , suspended , or proposed for debarment for various reasons , including tax evasion . conviction for tax evasion is cited as one of the causes for debarment and indictment for tax evasion is cited as a cause for suspension . the deliberate failure to remit taxes , in particular payroll taxes , is a felony offense , and could result in a company being debarred or suspended if the debarring official determines it affects the present responsibility of the government contractor . most of the contractors in our case studies owed payroll taxes , for which willful failure to remit payroll taxes , a criminal felony offense , or failure to properly segregate payroll taxes , a criminal misdemeanor offense , may apply . at the time of our review , none of the 122 federal contractors described in our previous case study work were debarred from government contracts , despite conducting abusive and potentially criminal activities related to the tax system . as part of the contractor responsibility determination for prospective contractors , the far also requires contracting officers to determine whether a prospective contractor meets several specified standards , including determination as to whether a contractor has adequate financial resources and a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics . however , the far does not require contracting officers to consider tax debt in making this determination . because of statutory restrictions on the disclosure of taxpayer information , even if contracting officers were required to consider tax debts in contractor qualification determinations , contracting officers do not currently have access to tax debt information unless reported by prospective contractors themselves or disclosed in public records . consequently , unless a prospective contractor consents , contracting officers do not have ready access to information on unpaid tax debts to assist in making contractor qualification determinations with respect to financial capability , ethics , and integrity . further , contracting officers do not routinely obtain and use publicly available information on contractor federal tax debt in making contractor qualification determinations . federal law generally does not permit irs to disclose taxpayer information , including tax debts . thus , unless the taxpayer provides consent , certain tax debt information generally can only be discovered from public records when irs files a federal tax lien against the property of a tax debtor . however , contracting officers are not required to obtain credit reports .