in december 2010 , dndo issued a strategic plan for the gnda . as we reported in june 2010 , there is limited systematic radiation scanning of the roughly 4,800 loaded railcars entering the united states each day from canada and mexico . much of the scanning for radioactive materials that takes place at these ports of entry is conducted with portable , hand - held radioactive isotope identification devices . according to dhs officials , international rail traffic represents one of the most difficult challenges for radiation detection systems due to the nature of trains and the need to develop close cooperation with officials in mexico and canada . in addition , dhs officials told us that rail companies resist doing things that might slow down rail traffic and typically own the land where dhs would need to establish stations for primary and secondary screening . dhs is in the early stages of developing procedures and technology to feasibly scan international rail traffic . as we reported in 2010 , dhs is in the early stages of addressing the challenges of scanning for radioactive materials presented by air cargo and commercial aviation . dhs officials are also developing plans to increase their capacity to scan for radioactive materials in international air cargo conveyed on commercial airlines . dhs officials stated that their experience in scanning air cargo at a few major international airports in the united states has helped them develop scanning procedures and inform current and future deployment strategies for both fixed and mobile radiation detection equipment . these officials said that they believe that further operational experience and research is necessary before they can develop practical mobile scanning strategies and procedures . details on the scope and methodology for those reviews are available in our published reports . we conducted this work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , since december 2010 , dndo has issued both a strategic plan to guide the development of the gnda and an annual report on the current status of the gnda . the new strategic plan addressed some key components of what we previously recommended be included in a strategic plan , such as identifying the roles and responsibilities for meeting strategic objectives . however , neither the plan nor the annual report identifies funding needed to achieve the strategic plan's objectives or employs monitoring mechanisms to determine programmatic progress and identify needed improvements . dhs officials informed us that they will address these missing elements in an implementation plan , which they plan to issue before the end of this year . as we reported in september 2010 , dhs has made progress in deploying both radiation detection equipment and developing procedures to scan cargo entering the united states through land and sea ports of entry for nuclear and radiological materials . for example , according to dhs officials , the department scans nearly 100 percent of the cargo and conveyances entering the united states through land borders and major seaports . however , as we reported in july 2011 , dhs has experienced challenges in developing new technologies to detect nuclear and radiological materials , such as developing and meeting key performance requirements .