plan . furthermore , africom has postponed time frames for completing sever of its supporting plans . for example , completion of the regional engagement plans has been repeatedly delayed throughout our review — postponed by about 2 years — from february 2009 to october 2009 to may ad 2010 to the first quarter of fiscal year 2011 . while africom officials h previously told us that component support plans would be completed by december 2009 , officials later stated that they expect the plans to be completed within 60 days of the regional engagement plans . dod officials told us that africom held a planners' conference in april 2010 and tha draft plans , such as country work plans , were discussed at this meetin obtain the components' input . moreover , in the absence of plans , do stated that africom holds weekly meetings with the components to discuss activities . however , by conducting activities without h specific plans in place to guide activity planning and implementation , a fricom risks not fully supporting its mission or objectives . without having approved component support plans and regional engagement plans , africom and its components cannot be sure that they are conducting activities that align with the command's priorities . currently , each of the military service components has established priority countries / areas in africa , but in some cases they overlap or differ from each other and also differ from the priority countries that africom has identified . air force component officials told us , for example , that they used africom's designation of priority countries to inform their initial identification of priority countries , but they also considered where u.s. europe command's air force component had prior engagements or existing relationships with africans . these officials told us that they recently updated their priority countries based on their own objectives . the officials explained that , because the air force component has different objectives than africom's other military service components and because certain african countries have varying levels of air force capabilities , their designated priority countries would not necessarily coincide with those of other military service components . marine corps component officials said that their designated priority countries reinforce africom's designated “willing and capable” african nations ; however , our analysis shows that the priority countries identified by africom and those identified by its marine corps component also do not fully align . additionally , activities currently conducted by the military service components may overlap with africom's combined joint task force – horn of africa's operating area . however , at the u.s. embassy level , officials also expressed concern about some of africom's activities . for example , according to one u.s. embassy , africom's sociocultural research and advisory teams , which comprise one to five social scientists who conduct research and provide cultural advice to africom , seem to duplicate other interagency efforts . africom officials told us that they use the information provided by the teams to help guide operations in africa and obtain perspectives on cultural sensitivities among the local populations . however , the embassy expressed concern about the u.s. military performing this type of research itself instead of coordinating with interagency partners to gain sociocultural information .