these subsequent reviews are known as the process of reappointment . in a report we issued in may 2006 , we examined compliance with select credentialing and privileging requirements at seven va medical facilities we visited and made three recommendations designed to improve aspects of privileging and oversight of the process . although we cannot generalize from our findings , we found that these facilities were complying with credentialing requirements . however , they were not complying with aspects of certain privileging requirements . for example , va medical facilities were not submitting information on paid medical malpractice claims within the 60-day required time frame to va's office that reviews the claims information and makes a determination about whether physicians involved in the claims delivered substandard care to veterans . va generally agreed with our findings , conclusions , and recommendations . today , i will discuss the progress va has made in implementing our may 2006 recommendations to address noncompliance with va's privileging requirements . specifically , i will discuss ( 1 ) how va credentials and privileges physicians working in its medical facilities and ( 2 ) the extent to which va has implemented the three recommendations made in our may 2006 report that address va's privileging requirements . to perform our 2006 review , we selected four of va's credentialing requirements for review because they are requirements that — unlike others — address information about physicians that can change or be updated with new information periodically . as a result , va requires that this information be verified by medical facility officials when a physician initially applies for employment at va and at least every 2 years thereafter . under the four requirements we reviewed , va medical facility officials must 1. verify that all state medical licenses held by physicians are valid ; 2. query the federation of state medical boards ( fsmb ) database to determine whether physicians had disciplinary action taken against any of their licenses , including expired licenses ; 3. verify information provided by physicians on their involvement in medical malpractice claims at a va or non - va facility ; and 4. query the national practitioner data bank ( npdb ) to determine whether a physician was reported to this data bank because of involvement in va or non - va paid medical malpractice claims , display of professional incompetence , or engagement in professional misconduct . of the privileging requirements in va's credentialing and privileging policy , we selected four requirements that va identifies as general privileging requirements . in addition , we selected another privileging requirement about the use of individual performance information because of its importance in the renewal of clinical privileges .