we disagree . as we noted in our report , these standards have broad relevance to governing bodies seeking to facilitate accountability , transparency , and effective external communication in a range of contexts . further , in identifying the leading practices , we were mindful of choosing practices that would be pertinent to the board , given that it does not operate in a corporate setting . additionally , the board utilized an earlier version of these same practices in its 2003 report to congress , as we cited . relatedly , in the board's 2003 report , it noted that the board serves as the board of directors for the capitol police and indicated that following corporate governance standards would provide an effective model for the board in setting out its roles , functions , and processes for the future . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and the board . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or goodwing@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . in this report , we examine the following objectives: ( 1 ) what are the roles and responsibilities of the capitol police board ( board ) and the chief of the capitol police ( chief ) as set out in statute and in the board's manual of procedures and how does the board's scope compare to other law enforcement oversight entities ? ( 2 ) to what extent does the board's manual of procedures incorporate leading practices from internal control and other standardized governance principles to facilitate accountability , transparency , and effective external communication and in what ways is the board implementing these practices ? ( 3 ) what are congressional stakeholder perspectives on the degree to which the board is accountable , transparent , and effective in its communication approaches and what options exist to enhance the board's approaches ? to examine the roles and responsibilities of the board and the chief of the capitol police as set out in statute and in the board's manual of procedures ( manual ) and to determine how the board's scope compares to other law enforcement oversight entities , we reviewed the relevant statutes that set out the board and the chief's roles and responsibilities . we also reviewed the board's manual to identify areas where it identifies the board's roles and responsibilities , as well as those of the chief in relation to the board . we then analyzed the relevant statutory and manual provisions to inventory the various roles and responsibilities of the board and the chief .