borders . gao - 13-414t . washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2013 . border patrol: key elements of new strategic plan not yet in place to inform border security status and resource needs . gao - 13-25 . washington , d.c.: december 10 , 2012 . u.s. customs and border protection's border security fencing , infrastructure and technology fiscal year 2011 expenditure plan . gao - 12-106r . washington , d.c.: november 17 , 2011 . the agency concurred with our recommendation . as of december 2017 , officials reported that cbp plans to establish initial metrics by march 2018 and finalize them in january 2019 . in february 2017 , we also reported that cbp was taking a number of steps to sustain tactical infrastructure along the southwest border ; however , it continued to face certain challenges in maintaining this infrastructure . for example , cbp had funding allocated for tactical infrastructure sustainment requirements , but had not prioritized its requirements to make the best use of available funding , since cbp also required contractors to address urgent repair requirements . according to border patrol officials , cbp classifies breaches to fencing , grates , or gates as urgent and requiring immediate repair because breaches increase illegal entrants' ability to enter the country unimpeded . at the time of our february 2017 review , the majority of urgent tactical infrastructure repairs on the southwest border were fence breaches , according to border patrol officials . from fiscal years 2010 through 2015 , cbp recorded a total of 9,287 breaches in pedestrian fencing , and repair costs averaged $784 per breach . while contractors provide routine maintenance and address urgent repairs on tactical infrastructure , certain tactical infrastructure assets used by the border patrol — such as border fencing — become degraded beyond repair and must be replaced . for example , in february 2017 we reported that cbp had provided routine maintenance and repair services to the primary legacy pedestrian fencing in sunland park , new mexico . however , significant weather events had eroded the foundation of the fencing , according to the border patrol officials in the el paso sector , and in 2015 cbp began to replace 1.4 miles of primary pedestrian fence in this area . we also reported on several additional cbp projects to replace degraded , legacy pedestrian fencing with more modern , bollard style fencing . for example , in fiscal year 2016 , cbp began removing and replacing an estimated 7.5 miles of legacy primary pedestrian fencing with modern bollard style fencing within the tucson sector . in addition , from fiscal years 2011 through 2016 , cbp completed four fence replacement projects that replaced 14.1 miles of primary pedestrian legacy fencing in the tucson and yuma sectors at a total cost of approximately $68.26 million and an average cost of $4.84 million per mile of replacement fencing . we plan to provide information on additional fence replacement projects in a forthcoming report . in 2014 , the border patrol began implementing the requirements management process that is designed to facilitate planning for funding and deploying tactical infrastructure and other requirements , according to border patrol officials .