section 226 of h.r . 3995 seeks to use risk - based concepts to better assess the financial health of the fund . by defining the risk that the fund must withstand , h.r . 3995 will clarify what is meant by actuarial soundness and help fha manage the fund to achieve that goal . before i describe what the fund represents , let me provide a brief history of the fund's financial health . since 1990 the financial health of the fund has been assessed by measuring the fund's economic value — its capital resources plus the net present value of future cash flows — and the related capital ratio ( the economic value as a percent of the fund's insurance - in - force ) . for most of its history , the fund has been relatively healthy ; however , in fiscal year 1990 the fund was estimated to have a negative economic value , and its future was in doubt . to help place the fund on a financially sound basis , congress enacted legislation in november 1990 that required the secretary of hud to , among other things , take steps to achieve a capital ratio of 2 percent by november 2000 and to maintain or exceed that ratio at all times thereafter . the legislation also required the secretary to raise insurance premiums and suspend the rebates , called distributive shares , that fha borrowers had been eligible to receive under certain circumstances . the 1990 fha reforms required that an independent contractor conduct an annual actuarial review of the fund . using expected economic conditions , these reviews have shown that during the 1990s , the estimated economic value of the fund grew substantially . as figure 1 shows , by the end of fiscal year 1995 , the fund had attained an estimated economic value that slightly exceeded the amount required for a 2-percent capital ratio . since that time , the estimated economic value of the fund has continued to grow and has always exceeded the amount required for a 2- percent capital ratio . in the most recent review , deloitte & touche ( deloitte ) estimated the fund's economic value at about $18.5 billion at the end of fiscal year 2001 . this sum represents about 3.75 percent of the fund's insurance - in - force — well above the required minimum of 2 percent . the economic value of the fund consists of current capital resources and the net present value of future cash flows . current capital resources are largely composes of nonmarketable treasury securities . we are here today to discuss h.r . 3995 , the housing affordability for america act of 2002 , which amends certain laws concerning housing and community opportunity . among other things , the act would establish risk - based capital requirements for the mutual mortgage insurance fund ( fund ) of the department of housing and urban development's ( hud ) federal housing administration ( fha ) . through the fund , fha operates a single - family insurance program that helps millions of americans buy homes . the fund , which is financed through insurance premiums , operates without cost to the american taxpayer .