kenneth a . small is professor of economics at the university of california at irvine , where he served 3 years as chair of the department of economics and 6 years as associate dean of social sciences . he previously taught at princeton university and was a research associate at the brookings institution . thank you for participating in our survey ! the names and backgrounds of the panelists are as follows . brian taylor of the university of california , los angeles , served as moderator for the sessions . david j. forkenbrock is director of the public policy center , director of the transportation research program , professor in urban and regional planning , and professor in civil and environmental engineering at the university of iowa . his research and teaching interests include analytic methods in planning , and transportation policy and planning . from 1995 through 1998 , dr. forkenbrock chaired a national research council - appointed committee to review the fhwa's cost allocation study process . he is a member of the college of fellows , american institute of certified planners and a lifetime national associate of the national academies . he is chairman of the trb committee for review of travel demand modeling by the metropolitan washington council of governments and a member of the trb committee for the study of the long - term viability of fuel taxes for transportation finance . in 2004 , he received the first ever trb william s. vickrey award for best paper in transportation economics and finance for his work on mileage - based road user charges . he received the michael j. brody award for excellence in faculty service to the university and the state , from the university of iowa in 1996 . he earned a ph.d. , from the university of michigan ; a master of urban planning from wayne state university ; and a b.a. , from the university of minnesota . josé a. gómez - ibáñez is derek c. bok professor of urban planning and public policy at harvard university's john f. kennedy school of government and graduate school of design . his research interests are primarily in the area of transportation policy and urban development and in privatization and regulation of infrastructure . he has served as a consultant for a variety of public agencies . his recent books include regulating infrastructure: monopoly , contracts , and discretion ; regulation for revenue: the political economy of land use exactions ( with alan altshuler ) ; going private: the international experience with transport privatization ( with john r. meyer ) ; and essays on transport policy and economics ( ed. ) ronald f. kirby is director of transportation planning for the metropolitan washington area council of governments . he began his career in the united states as a senior research associate with planning research corporation . he joined the urban institute as a senior research associate and became a principal research associate and director of transportation studies . he has served on several trb committees and is currently a member of the trb executive committee . and a ph.d. , in applied mathematics , from the university of adelaide , south australia . david l. lewis is president and ceo of hlb decision economics .