payments reviewed . because the payment integration functionality is part of treasury's payment issuance process , payments that are made through other means — such as non - treasury disbursing offices or contractors — are not automatically matched . examples of these types of payments include department of defense payments disbursed through the defense finance and accounting service ( $477 billion in fiscal year 2015 ) and medicare fee - for - service payments ( $351 billion in calendar year 2014 ) . further , certain federal payments flow through various entities — such as state or local governments — before ultimately being spent for their intended purposes . for example , benefits for usda's supplemental nutrition assistance program are funded by the federal government , but states are responsible for determining individual and household eligibility for the program , calculating the amount of monthly benefits , and issuing benefits on an electric benefit transfer card . in these cases , only the payment from the federal agency to the first recipient is matched against dmf and sam exclusion records , and subsequent payments — those to the ultimate recipients , for example — are not matched through dnp's payment integration process , though they may go through other agency - specific reviews . figure 1 illustrates the payments reviewed through the payment integration process . timing of matching . the payment integration process is not consistent with the requirement in iperia to review databases prior to award or payment . while matching is conducted at the time of payment , agencies generally receive the results after payments have been made . as such , use of the payment integration process does not assist agencies in preventing improper payments before they occur . while treasury's do not pay agency implementation guide states that payment integration matching happens at the time of payment , the agencies we reviewed reported inconsistent interpretations of the timing of the process . because the guide is not clear that the results are generally received after payments have been made , about half of the agencies we reviewed considered the payment integration process to be a prepayment function , whereas others considered it to be a postpayment activity . further , omb guidance does not specifically reference the payment integration functionality or its timing . databases used in matching . the payment integration process matches against only two databases , dmf and sam exclusion records . any other database available through the dnp working system must be accessed outside of the payment integration process . some agencies we reviewed did not know which databases were included in the payment integration process , which may be a result of unclear guidance . while agency officials confirmed that it was their understanding that the objective of the process is to match against only dmf and sam exclusion records , treasury's do not pay agency implementation guide states that the objective of the payment integration process is to match all payment files against the data sources identified in iperia . the guide does not acknowledge that the process matches payments against only two of the data sources identified in iperia , dmf and sam exclusion records .