gao - 17-381 . washington , d.c.: may 2017 . ( recommendation 6 ) . dod provided written comments on a draft of this report . dod's comments are reprinted in appendix i and summarized below . dod and mda also provided technical comments which were incorporated as appropriate . in its response , dod concurred with five out of six of our recommendations , and partially concurred with one . in addition , dod recommends the closure of five recommendations . however , we believe that it is premature to close out four of the five recommendations until all of its planned actions are fully implemented . for the remaining recommendation , we agree with dod and will undertake the steps to close out the recommendation . dod partially concurred with our first recommendation to revise mda policy to require all integrated capabilities — capabilities requiring the integration of two or more elements — be declared and delivered via the technical capability declaration ( tcd ) process . while dod agreed with the intent of this recommendation , dod stated that the director , mda will determine which major integrated capabilities should be delivered via the tcd process . the department also noted that the agency developed a list of such capabilities that it will update annually . these actions are an improvement over the current process , but they do not meet the full intent of our recommendation . specifically , the list of future tcds that mda produced is not inclusive of all future integrated capabilities . in addition , mda's policy does not articulate definitive standards for identifying capabilities requiring a tcd and leaves this decision to the discretion of the director , mda . as we've identified in this report , some capabilities have been deleted from or added to planned tcds without explanation . the new policy leaves open the possibility of continued inconsistent application of the tcd process . this poses the risk that not all integrated capabilities will be delivered to warfighters with comprehensive information about their performance and limitations at the bmds level . we continue to believe that in order for the agency to meet the full intent of our recommendation , it should establish in policy a clear , definitive standard for which capabilities require a tcd for delivery . in addition , dod recommends the closure of the first two recommendations to ( 1 ) revise mda's policies to require that all integrated capabilities be included in a tcd ; and ( 2 ) clarify the exact requirements , process , and key milestones necessary to issue a tcd as it contends that its new policy memorandum 90 meets the intent of our recommendation . this memorandum is dated march 28 , 2018 and was provided to us on may 8 , 2018 . as such , we have not had an opportunity to fully assess the memorandum and the process laid out in it . however , as noted above , this new policy memorandum 90 leaves open the possibility of continued inconsistent application of the tcd process . this poses the risk that not all integrated capabilities will be delivered to warfighters with comprehensive information about their performance and limitations at the bmds level .