i for details ) . examples of completed activities covered by these action items include: the development of proposed common terrorism information sharing standards — a set of standard operating procedures intended to govern how information is to be acquired , accessed , shared , and used within the ise . according to the program manager , the proposed standards document the rules , conditions , guidelines , and characteristics of business processes , production methods , and products supporting terrorism - related information sharing . these standards are intended to address the presidential guideline that required the director of national intelligence — in coordination with the secretaries of state , defense , homeland security , and the attorney general — to develop and issue such standards . what efforts have been made to report on progress in implementing the ise ? to answer these questions , we identified and reviewed key statutes setting out requirements for the information sharing environment , including the intelligence reform act and the 9 / 11 commission act . we further considered the government performance and results act of 1993 , related guidance issued by omb , and our prior work on results oriented government , program management , and federal coordination and collaboration . we also reviewed literature on program management principles , such as the project management institute's the standard for program management and carnegie mellon's capability maturity model integration ( cmmi® ) . based on our review of these laws , guidance , and literature , we identified standard practices in program and project management for defining , designing , and executing programs . these practices focus on several critical aspects of program management , strategic planning , and performance measurement . the scope of our review was limited to those ise activities performed since the information sharing environment implementation plan ( implementation plan ) was issued in november 2006 through march 1 , 2008 . applying these identified standard practices in program management , we reviewed key ise planning and reporting documents — the november 2006 implementation plan and the september 2007 annual report to the congress on the information sharing environment ( annual report ) — as well as other ise - related strategic planning and performance measurement documents and activities . we further interviewed officials at the office of the program manager for the information sharing environment ( pm - ise ) and examined planning and reporting documents housed at the office to determine the extent to which actions listed in the implementation plan for the first phase of ise implementation were complete as of march 1 , 2008 . we also interviewed officials from five key federal agencies — the departments of defense , homeland security , justice , and state as well as the office of the director of national intelligence — who serve on the ise's information sharing council . these federal agencies were chosen because they were identified by the pm - ise as key participants expected to support the ise since they collect defense , homeland security , law enforcement , foreign affairs , and intelligence information deemed critical for homeland security . we conducted this performance audit from february 2007 through june 2008 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .