ii. ) this pattern of interest expenses and tax liabilities is largely consistent with tax haven contractors inflating interest costs to shift taxable income outside of the united states but does not prove that this has occurred . the differences may be due to such factors as the age and industry of the companies , their history of mergers or acquisitions , and other details of their financial structure and the markets for their products . furthermore , low or zero tax liability is not necessarily an indicator of noncompliance . companies may have low or zero tax liabilities for a variety of reasons , such as overall business conditions , industry - or company - specific performance issues , and the use of income shifting . the evidence on the extent to which income shifting is occurring is not precise . studies that compare profitability of foreign - controlled and domestically controlled companies show that much of the difference can be explained by factors other than income shifting . however , the range of estimates can be wide , contributing to uncertainty about the precise effect , and the studies do not focus on income shifting to parents in tax haven countries . the 1997 study by harry grubert showed that more than 50 percent , and perhaps as much as 75 percent , of the income differences could be explained by factors other than income shifting . a treasury report on corporate inversions did discuss income shifting to parents in tax haven countries but did not provide any quantitative estimates of the extent of such shifting . according to the report , the tax savings from income shifting are greatest in the case of a foreign parent corporation located in a no - tax jurisdiction . the treasury report cites increased benefits from income shifting among other tax benefits as a reason for recent corporate inversion activity and increased foreign acquisitions of u.s. multinationals . using tax liability as an indicator of ability to offset contract income , we determined that large tax haven contractors were more likely to have a tax cost advantage than large domestic contractors in both 2000 and 2001 . in both years , tax haven contractors were about one and a half times more likely to have no tax liability as domestic contractors . as table 2 shows , in 2000 , 56 percent of the 39 tax haven contractors reported no tax liability , while 34 percent of the 3,253 domestic contractors reported no tax liability . in 2001 , 66 percent of the 50 tax haven contractors and 46 percent of the 3,524 domestic contractors reported no tax liability . under the conditions of our model , contractors with no tax liability would have a tax cost advantage compared to the contractors that did have tax liabilities in these years . consequently , in 2000 , the tax haven contractors without tax liabilities were likely to have a tax cost advantage compared to the 17 other tax haven contractors and 2,132 domestic contractors that had tax liabilities . the 1,121 domestic contractors without tax liabilities were also likely to have a tax cost advantage compared to these same companies .