however , doe has taken some steps in this area . in written comments , doe's office of science's acting director , responding on behalf of doe , wrote that doe concurred with our recommendation . specifically , doe's letter states that to further address lithium - 7 utilization , demand , and inventory management , the isotope program has initiated the development of a more in - depth survey coordinated directly with the power industry through the electric power research institute — a new undertaking that we learned about after providing a draft of our report to doe for comment . we believe that this undertaking is especially important since we found that few people in industry were aware of the lithium - 7 supply risks . in its written comments , doe also states that the report includes several inaccurate descriptions of the federal role with respect to the response to lithium - 7 availability and demand . specifically , doe does not agree with our characterization that there is a lack of federal stewardship for assessing and managing risks to the lithium - 7 supply . doe states that it has been active in assessing and managing supply risks , including engaging with stakeholders , forming an internal working group , and identifying actions to be taken to mitigate a shortage . according to nuclear power industry representatives , making such a change would require about 10 years of research to test the resulting changes in the rate of corrosion of pipes and other infrastructure in the reactor . using enriched boric acid in the cooling water in place of natural boric acid would require less boric acid to be used , which would reduce the acidity of the water and result in less lithium - 7 being needed . according to industry representatives , however , enriched boric acid is expensive , and this change may require plant modifications and would only modestly reduce the amount of lithium - 7 needed . notwithstanding , isotope program officials told us that the program's mission includes isotopes that have the potential for being in short supply and that they see the isotope program's role as being the lead office within doe on issues related to lithium - 7 . additionally , an isotope program official told us that the program must be careful not to address lithium - 7 risks too aggressively because that may signal to industry stakeholders that doe is taking responsibility for mitigating these risks — risks that doe views as the responsibility of industry to manage . nrc officials also told us that they believe industry is better suited to address any problems with the lithium - 7 supply because the utilities are more likely to be aware of and have more information related to supply constraints than nrc or other federal government agencies . similarly , officials in doe's office of nuclear energy said that , in their view , industry is responsible for addressing lithium - 7 risks , and their office's role is to serve as liaison between doe and industry . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .