reform . congressional oversight through hearings held by the subcommittee on intelligence community management , house permanent select committee on intelligence , in february and july 2008 has helped focus attention on the need for security clearance reform . in addition , the chairman of the house permanent select committee on intelligence and the chairwoman of the subcommittee on intelligence community management asked us to examine the ongoing reforms relative to key practices gao has used to evaluate other reform efforts , and to review the criteria that the executive branch is using to assess the effectiveness of its efforts . specifically , in this report we address the following questions: ( 1 ) to what extent are joint efforts to reform the personnel security clearance process consistent with key practices — including setting outcome - focused implementation goals to show progress — that gao has identified for successful organizational transformations ? ( 2 ) to what extent do the three security clearance joint reform reports address essential factors for reforming the security clearance process ? to assess the extent to which efforts to reform the personnel security clearance process are consistent with key practices that gao has identified for successful organizational transformations , we collected and analyzed reports and documents related to the reform effort . we also analyzed additional guidance and executive branch policies , including executive orders and recently issued federal investigative standards . specifically , we compared the reports to factors we previously identified and two additional criteria established in irtpa that are essential to reforming the clearance process . we conducted this performance audit from august 2008 through may 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . since 1997 , federal agencies have followed a common set of personnel security investigative standards and adjudicative guidelines for determining whether servicemembers , federal workers , private industry personnel , and others are eligible to receive security clearances . security clearances are required for access to certain national security information , which is classified at one of three levels: top secret , secret , or confidential . the level of classification denotes the degree of protection required for information and the amount of damage that unauthorized disclosure could reasonably cause to national security . the degrees of expected damage that unauthorized disclosure could reasonably be expected to cause are “exceptionally grave damage” for top secret information , “serious damage” for secret information , and “damage” for confidential information . we have previously reported problems — including significant delays in processing clearances — associated with dod's security clearance processes , and in 2005 , 2007 , and again in 2009 , we identified not only delays in completing the end - to - end clearance processing but also incomplete investigative and adjudicative reports .