biowatch . we found that the biowatch program was generally consistent with the biological agents of significant concern identified in the btra . dhs documents state that the btra is to be used to update the list of threat agents monitored by biowatch . dhs deployed biowatch in 2003 , before the release of the first btra in 2006 . since then , dhs has reprogrammed biowatch detection efforts once , in response to the 2006 btra . the biowatch program manager told us that they review each iteration of the btra to ensure that the biowatch program is aligned with the biological agents of significant concern . we compared the lists of threat agents that have been programmed to be detected by the biowatch program since 2006 against the biological agents of significant concern in the 2006 , 2008 , and 2010 btras and found them generally consistent . the biowatch program manager also told us that future generations of biowatch are being developed to detect a larger number of biological threat agents . according to biowatch documents , these agents are to be determined by the btra's risk rankings . oha officials told us they use the btra to inform biowatch because it is the most relevant cbrn risk assessment available to them and because it allows oha to focus biowatch detection efforts on the biological agents of significant concern . national bioforensic analysis center ( nbfac ) . we found that the nbfac used the cbrn risk assessments to partially inform its capabilities . officials from nbfac told us that the center used information from the btra to inform its priorities for developing tools needed to support their work in biological forensic attribution . our analysis showed that the nbfac's forensic attribution capabilities were generally consistent with the biological agents of significant concern in the btra . however , nbfac officials stated that because the nbfac is mandated to maintain capabilities for other biological materials , including biological agents that are not considered high risk , future btra results would not necessarily lead to reprioritization of nbfac's attribution capability development efforts . national biosurveillance integration center ( nbic ) . we found that the nbic used the cbrn risk assessments to partially inform its activities . according to the oha branch chief responsible for the nbic , nbic personnel are aware of the information in dhs's cbrn risk assessments and consider this information at a strategic level . however , the nbic could not provide us with documentation of how it had used the cbrn risk assessments to inform its capabilities at the strategic level . the nbic branch chief also stated that nbic does not use information from the btra or biological mtas at an operational level to inform the management of their capability . the official provided documentation showing that the nbic's mission is to collect and integrate information about biological agent detection from a variety of federal government detection systems .