complaints . in addition to being able to complain directly to a covered entity , any person who believes a health care provider , health plan , or clearinghouse is not complying with the privacy rule may file a complaint with the secretary of hhs . covered entities are required to comply with privacy rule provisions and follow various procedures . they must do the following: develop policies and procedures for protecting health information . a covered entity must maintain administrative , technical , and physical safeguards . among other requirements , a covered entity must also designate a privacy official , train its employees on the entity's privacy policies , and develop procedures to receive and address complaints . limit information used and disclosed to the minimum necessary . covered entities must make reasonable efforts to limit their employees' access to identifiable health information to the minimum needed to do their jobs . when sharing protected health information with other entities ( such as collection agencies and researchers ) , they must make reasonable efforts to limit the information disclosed to the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the data request . however , providers may share the full medical record when the disclosure is for treatment purposes . account for disclosures of protected health information . upon request , covered entities must provide individuals with an accounting of disclosures of their protected health information made in the preceding 6 years . this requirement applies to most disclosures other than those for treatment , payment , or operations purposes , including those that are mandated by lawsuch as certain disclosures to public health entities and law enforcement agencies . the accounting must include the date of each disclosure ; the name and , if known , the address of the entity or person who received the information ; a description of the information disclosed ; and a statement of the purpose of the disclosure . ensure that “downstream users” protect the privacy of health information by implementing business associate agreements . covered entities must enter into a contract or other written agreement with any business associates with which they share protected health information for various purposes . a business associate performs certain functions or activities — such as claims processing and benefit management — on behalf of a covered entity involving the use or disclosure of individually identifiable health information . business associate contracts must establish conditions and safeguards for uses and disclosures of identifiable health information and authorize termination of contracts if the covered entities determine that business associates have violated the agreements . the regulation establishes requirements that apply to both federally and privately funded research that seeks to use protected health information: researchers may seek to obtain from covered entities health information without authorization if the data do not identify an individual and there is no reasonable basis to believe it could be used to identify an individual . researchers must use one of three options to gain access to protected health information: obtain patient authorization , obtain a waiver of authorization by having their research protocol reviewed and approved by an irb or privacy board , or use a limited data set provided by the covered entity .