( app . i contains a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology. ) we conducted our work between october 2003 and august 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the growth in state prekindergarten programs has occurred for various reasons , but three frequently cited reasons are ( 1 ) evidence of the importance of early childhood to later development , ( 2 ) the high rate of labor force participation by mothers of young children , and ( 3 ) increased concern over school readiness and subsequent achievement . much has been discovered about children's ability to learn more at an earlier age than previously believed . the early childhood years are commonly portrayed as formative . between the first day of life and the first day of kindergarten , development proceeds at a pace exceeding that of any subsequent stage of life . children from birth to age five engage in making sense of the world on many levels: language , human interactions , counting and quantification , spatial reasoning , physical causality , problem solving , and categorization . since the 1960s , the percentage of women in the labor force has increased dramatically . in 1960 , about 36 percent of women participated in the labor force , and by 2000 this figure had increased to 58 percent . moreover , in 2003 , about 69 percent of women with children aged three to five ( but none younger ) were in the labor force . this high rate of participation of women in the labor force has resulted in more children enrolled in preschool programs of varying quality and pressure being placed on schools to provide before - and after - school programs . to improve educational achievement for all children and reduce failure in lower grades , many states and school districts are placing a greater emphasis on the school readiness of younger children . for nearly a quarter century , many states have developed or expanded their investment in prekindergarten programs to increase the likelihood of children's success in school . prior to 1970 only 7 states funded preschool programs , and by 1988 , 28 states had programs and total spending was $190 million ; such programs generally targeted economically and educationally disadvantaged children . while most state - sponsored prekindergarten programs continue to serve such children , a few states are in the process of expanding their programs to include all four - year - olds , regardless of family income . according to the national institute for early education research ( nieer ) , 40 states ( and washington , d.c. ) had some form of state - sponsored prekindergarten program in the 2001-02 school year and enrolled over 700,000 children , mostly four - year - olds . while states spent more than $2.4 billion for prekindergarten during the 2001-02 school year , 10 states accounted for over 80 percent of this amount . generally , prekindergarten programs aimed to serve four - year - olds , but according to nieer estimates , most states served less than one - fifth of all their four - year - olds ( see fig .