ground forces . gao - 08-497t . washington , d.c.: february 14 , 2008 . force structure: need for greater transparency for the army's grow the force initiative funding plan . gao - 08-354r . washington , d.c.: january 18 , 2008 . the department agreed with each of our recommendations . dod's comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix ii . dod agreed with our recommendation that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the army to finalize an implementation plan for transitioning its reserve components to the operational role . in its comments , it cited dod directive 1200.17 that directs the secretaries of the military departments to manage their respective reserve components as an operational force such that they provide operational capabilities while maintaining strategic depth . however , this directive does not provide detailed direction on how the services should transition the reserve forces , and we believe that a detailed plan is necessary to ensure key tasks in managing the reserves as an operational force are completed . dod also drew a distinction between managing the reserve components as an operational force and transitioning reserves to an operational force . in this report , we defined transitioning reserves to an operational force as implementing those steps necessary to adapt the army's institutions and resources to support the cyclical readiness requirements and implement the “train - mobilize - deploy” model . we believe that completing a detailed implementation plan that describes key tasks necessary for the transition , assigns responsibility for these tasks , defines metrics for measuring success , and establishes time lines for full implementation is an essential part of transitioning the reserve components to an operational force . dod agreed with our recommendation that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the army to complete a cost estimate for the transition that includes a definition of costs , estimates for key cost drivers , and areas of uncertainties , such as pending policy decisions , that may affect costs . however , the department did not describe the steps it will take to complete the estimate . we therefore believe the secretary of defense should provide specific direction and guidance as outlined in our recommendation . dod agreed with our recommendation that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the army to include the costs of the transition in the army's budget and future years defense program . in its comments , dod noted its published guidance , directive 1200.17 , that resourcing plans should ensure visibility to track resources from formulation , appropriation , and allocation through execution . however , as discussed in the report , the army does not plan to include the majority of the estimated costs for transitioning its reserve components to an operational role until fiscal year 2012 . until the army includes the resources required in its future spending plans it will be hampered in its ability to transition its reserve components to the operational role . we are sending copies of this report to other appropriate congressional committees and the secretary of defense . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .