no other changes were made in the profit objective calculation . we also discussed these policies with dod officials who developed them . technology development contracts are typically awarded through competition . does “new” mean it is just out of the laboratory and has never been used before on any system , or does it refer to a recently developed technology that has been used on other products but not on the product in question ? should the incentive apply to demonstrated technology or to the promise to develop technology ? and if a contractor is awarded additional profit for developing , producing , or applying new innovative technology , when should the reward stop ? should it apply only to the immediate contract , or should a contractor receive the reward throughout some portion of production contracts ? although , at the time of our review , the new rule had not been widely used , we discussed with agency officials the circumstances under which they might apply the technology incentive . air force , army , and navy officials agreed that the technology incentive could apply to both research and development and production contracts , but they did not interpret the rule's guidance on when to apply the incentive in the same manner . for example , officials at two air force program offices judged that upgrades to their systems that included state - of – the - art technology used on other products would not qualify for the technology incentive , but those at an army office said that similar applications of state - of - the - art technology to their system would qualify . in fact , contracting officials at two army program offices told us that all weapon systems at their buying command incorporated state - of - the - art , leading edge technology and would , therefore , qualify for the incentive . on the other hand , officials for one air force system did not believe a future upgrade to their system that may incorporate brand - new technology developed by another military service would qualify for the incentive because the other service would have developed the new technology . finally , the contracting officer for a navy system that incorporated brand - new , never - before - used , technology that allowed the system to exceed performance requirements stated that the system would qualify for the incentive . these examples point to potential confusion over how the rule's broad definition of technological innovation should be applied . the officials were also uncertain about how long a contractor should be rewarded with the technology incentive for significant , new innovative technology introduced in the research and development phases of the acquisition process . for example , a procurement official for an army system currently in the latter stages of research and development stated that the system may qualify for the incentive during production , depending on how the language in the rule is interpreted . a technical official for this system at first stated that , hopefully , innovation and risk would be finished before the system enters production , and therefore , the system would not qualify for the incentive at that point .