paul . however , realizing these potential public benefits may be difficult because the prices people pay to drive do not reflect the true costs of driving , some of which are borne by others due to pollution and congestion . in addition , americans continue to have a strong attachment to cars as their principal transportation choice . the public benefits of intercity passenger rail service are also potentially greater between cities that have well - developed intracity mass transit systems because intercity passenger rail is more likely to be competitive with driving on those routes . one reason a traveler may choose driving between cities over using the train is the mobility a personal vehicle provides once the traveler has reached his or her destination . all else being equal , demand for intercity passenger rail service may potentially be greater between cities with efficient mass transit systems — for example , philadelphia and washington , d.c. — than between cities without or with less extensive intracity mass transit systems — for example sacramento and san jose , california — because there is potentially less of a need for a personal vehicle at the destination . comparatively , amtrak estimates that states will contribute $223 million in 2002 to support specific amtrak routes and improve infrastructure . maintaining current intercity passenger rail service will likely continue to cost a minimum of $1 billion per year according to amtrak and the department of transportation's inspector general . federal funding for intercity passenger rail service will continue to compete with other national transportation and non - transportation needs . most of the officials from the 17 state departments of transportation whom we contacted indicated that they would be willing to provide funds to continue intercity passenger rail operations in their states . however , the officials stated that continued federal investment would also be needed . moreover , to ensure that intercity rail was on equal footing with other transportation modes , they suggested that an 80 / 20-federal / state cost - sharing arrangement would be appropriate . however , the officials also expressed concerns about their ability to form partnerships with other states to finance intercity passenger rail , noting that determining fair cost - sharing arrangements for capital improvements among the states would be difficult . in addition , some officials commented that investing state funds in improvements in another state is often politically difficult and , in some cases , prohibited by law . the choice and design of tools for providing federal financial assistance have important consequences for performance , transparency , and accountability . governments have at their disposal a wide variety of funding mechanisms for providing financial assistance , such as grants , bonds , tax subsidies , loans , loan guarantees , and user fees .