action is complete . recommendation 5: the gao recommended that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the army , in conjunction with the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , to require army guard commands and unit commanders to carry out complete monthly pay and personnel records reconciliations and take necessary actions to correct any pay and personnel record mismatches found each month . ( p. 75 / draft report ) dod response: concur . within 60 days , the army will reinforce to all reserve commands the importance of this requirement . as noted by the gao , this requirement is already included in us army forces command regulation 500-3-3 , unit commander's handbook . recommendation 6: the gao recommended that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the army , in conjunction with the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , to update policies and procedures to reflect current legal and dod administrative requirements with enclosure respect to active duty pays and allowances and transaction processing requirements for mobilized army guard soldiers . ( p. 75 / draft report ) dod response: concur . in fiscal year 2004 , dfas , the army , and national guard will respectively update the cited regulations under their cognizance to the most current and accurate requirements . if they are waiting , then what happens to those who ( god forbid ) don't make it back ? ” the sergeant was killed in action in afghanistan on april 15 , 2002 , before he knew if his pay problems were resolved . the army will work with the national guard on resourcing the uspfos for mobilization / demobilization surges . however , the memorandum of understanding between dfas and the army pertains only to the management and resourcing of defense military pay offices , to include their role in support of mobilization / demobilization stations . as such , it is not the appropriate vehicle to address staffing of uspfo under the national guard . recommendation 8: the gao recommended that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the army , in conjunction with the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , to determine whether issues concerning resource allocations for the military pay operations identified at our case study units exist at all 54 uspfos , and , if so , take appropriate actions to address these issues . ( p. 76 / draft report ) dod response: concur . to support surge requirements , the national guard could use additional national guard soldiers being brought on active duty in a temporary tour of active duty status to augment the uspfo staff based on mobilization workload requirements . the additional requirement and funding will need to be addressed by the supplemental provided to army . normal manning at the uspfo , military pay section is based on full time support authorized state strength levels .