( see fig . 2 for a breakdown of the types of evaluations arbitrators received. ) although nasd supplements its evaluations by rating arbitrators on a quarterly basis , our review showed that ratings are often based on little or no information . every quarter nasd rates those arbitrators who have been active during that time , using a 3-point scale , with 1 being the lowest and 3 being the highest . staff bases the rating on evaluations and complaints received that quarter and any notes recorded during that time frame in the arbitrator database . in general , nasd reported that any arbitrator who did not have any evaluations during the quarter is likely to be rated adequate ( “2” ) . we estimate that the majority of the arbitrators that were rated received an adequate rating of 2 , whether or not they received any evaluations during this time , and 57 percent of arbitrators with a 2 rating had not received any evaluations during this time frame . ( see fig . some arbitrators without evaluations during this time frame were also rated excellent , which could be a result of the rating from the prior quarter . both nasd and nyse have mechanisms in place to address poor performance by arbitrators . if nyse or nasd receives either a poor arbitrator evaluation or complaints about an arbitrator on a case , staff will take steps to respond . for example , the staff member assigned to the case may be asked to corroborate the complaint or be asked to consult other arbitrators assigned to the case to see if they support the allegation . a staff member who confirms the complaint may then speak to the arbitrator and suggest how he or she could improve his or her behavior . if the complaint suggests no corrective action is possible , both sros reported that the arbitrator would be removed from the active roster immediately . all complaints are recorded in the arbitrator database , and both sros reported that staff input how the complaint will be resolved . in reviewing the records of nasd arbitrators , we found that staff did not always document how they responded to poor evaluations and complaints . we estimate that 10 percent of all 494 nasd arbitrators that heard cases between january 2001 and june of 2002 , received some kind of complaint , either from a staff member , a party member , or another arbitrator . in our sample , 6 of the 16 arbitrators that received negative complaints were permanently dropped from nasd's arbitrator list and 1 was temporarily made unavailable pending further review . one arbitrator , who had been permanently dropped in 2001 , appeared to have complaints going back to 1993 , yet the notes showed that no changes had been made to the adequate rating of 2 . for another permanently dropped arbitrator , staff noted they were concerned that no negative comments were recorded on the computer file since other staff and arbitrators had complained about this arbitrator's conduct . of the 9 remaining arbitrators , information provided by nasd indicated that staff had followed - up on the complaints raised for 5 arbitrators .