according to the u.s . global change research program's fourth national climate assessment , a significant portion of climate risk can be addressed by mainstreaming , which can provide many climate resilience benefits . however , according to the assessment , the practice may prove insufficient to address the full range of climate risks . additional , strategic federal investments in large - scale projects — such as those discussed in our report — may also be needed to manage some of the nation's most significant climate risks , since climate change cuts across agency missions and poses fiscal exposures larger than any one agency can manage . aim to reduce flooding and storm damage . these and other projects have the potential to convey climate resilience benefits by protecting communities from damage from flooding , storms , and other extreme weather events that may be exacerbated by climate change . the corps of engineers' policy is to integrate climate change preparedness and resilience in all activities — a concept known as mainstreaming . however , the corps' civil works program balances several diverse missions related to navigation , ecosystems management , and flood control , among others . as a result , while projects may individually incorporate consideration of climate change risk and resilience , they may not be prioritized to address the most severe expected future climate change risks . even with ad hoc agency efforts , federal investment in projects specifically designed to enhance climate resilience to date has been limited . as stated in our disaster resilience framework , most of the federal government's efforts to reduce disaster risk are reactive , and many revolve around disaster recovery . to a lesser extent , the federal government also invests in activities to reduce risks not associated with a specific , recent disaster . as we reported in april 2018 , since 1993 omb has reported more than $154 billion spread across the government for federal activities to understand and address climate change . however , over that time frame , omb reported only minimal funding directed specifically at climate resilience projects . we have issued multiple reports that review the federal government's approach to addressing climate change , and these reports demonstrate an absence of government - wide strategic planning for climate change . specifically , our past work identifies limitations related to strategic planning for climate change that include a lack of coordination , prioritization , and consolidation of strategic priorities . for example , we reported in october 2009 that the federal government's emerging climate resilience activities were carried out in an ad hoc manner and were not well coordinated across federal agencies . in may 2011 , we reported that federal officials did not have a shared understanding of strategic government - wide priorities related to climate change . in the same report , we found that there was not a consolidated set of strategic priorities integrating climate change programs and activities across the federal government .