improvements . this report builds on that earlier work , and is part of our response to a statutory requirement that we evaluate how the implementation of the gpra modernization act of 2010 ( gprama ) is affecting performance management in federal agencies , and whether performance management is being used by agencies to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of agency programs.examines ( 1 ) the extent to which agencies are conducting data - driven performance reviews in a manner consistent with gprama requirements , omb guidance , and leading practices for reviews ; and ( 2 ) how data - driven performance reviews have affected performance , collaboration , accountability , and efficiency within agencies , and how positive effects can be sustained . to address both objectives , we conducted a survey of performance improvement officers ( pios ) at 23 executive agencies . we asked pios for information about the frequency of review meetings ; leadership of , and participation in , review meetings ; preparation for , execution of , and follow - up on , review meetings ; challenges ; and perceived impacts on agency performance , collaboration , efficiency , and accountability for results . we received responses from all 23 agency pios . to further address both objectives , we selected five case - study agencies for a more in - depth assessment of their data - driven review processes . to provide additional detail and illustrative examples to supplement government - wide data collected through our survey , we used these more in - depth reviews to gather information about agency practices and officials' perceptions of effects that review meetings have had . we selected a sample of agencies that reflect a range of characteristics , including agency size and the extent to which agency leadership uses quarterly performance reviews to drive progress toward goals , as reported by respondents to our 2013 federal managers survey . we selected the departments of commerce ( commerce ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , and transportation ( dot ) ; the general services administration ( gsa ) ; and social security administration ( ssa ) . at each agency , we selected at least two agency priority goals ( apg ) to obtain the perspective of apg leaders and their staff on the agency's data - driven review process . to allow us to corroborate information collected through surveys , interviews , and observations , and strengthen our confidence in the reliability of the self - reported survey responses , we requested supporting documents from 12 agencies , representing more than 50 percent of the agencies surveyed , to verify survey responses related to review meeting frequency , leadership , participation , content , and follow - up . as omb guidance also clarifies , apgs are defined as a “near - term” result or achievement that agency leaders want to accomplish within approximately 24 months through focused leadership attention . while the guidance states that apgs can advance progress toward longer - term , outcome - focused strategic goals and objectives , the apgs are designed to be near - term improvements in outcomes , customer service , or efficiency .