not met . few , if any , actions towards meeting the criterion have been taken . figure 1 , which is based on a general example , shows a visual representation of varying degrees of progress in each of the five criteria for a high - risk area . we use this system to assess and track the progress of all agencies with areas on our high risk list . when we rate interior and hhs's progress on improving federal management of programs that serve tribes and their members for the first time in our 2019 high risk report , we will provide similar information . as we have previously reported , the office of the assistant secretary - indian affairs ( indian affairs ) , through bie , is responsible for providing quality education opportunities to indian students and oversees 185 elementary and secondary schools that serve approximately 41,000 students on or near indian reservations in 23 states , often in rural areas and small towns . about two - thirds of bie schools are operated by tribes , primarily through federal grants , and about one - third are operated directly by bie . bie's indian education programs originate from the federal government's trust responsibility to indian tribes . it is the policy of the united states to fulfill this trust responsibility for educating indian children by working with tribes to ensure that education programs are of the highest quality and , in accordance with this policy , interior is responsible for providing children a safe and healthy environment in which to learn . all bie schools — both tribally - and bie - operated — receive almost all of their operational funding from federal sources — namely , interior and the department of education ( education ) — totaling about $1.2 billion in 2016 . indian affairs considers many bie schools to be in poor condition . bie is primarily responsible for its schools' educational functions , while their administrative functions — such as safety , facilities , and property management — are divided mainly between two other indian affairs' offices: bia and the office of the deputy assistant secretary of management . as discussed below , we have made 23 recommendations to interior on indian education — including recommendations cited in gao's 2017 high risk report and included in two late may reports . interior generally agreed with our recommendations . however , none have been fully implemented . in our 2017 high risk report , we cited 3 recommendations from a 2013 report on management challenges facing indian affairs , with which interior agreed , and these recommendations remain unimplemented as of late august 2017 . these recommendations were based on our findings of indian affairs' poor management and lack of accountability for bie schools . in particular , we found that bie did not have procedures in place specifying who should be involved in making key decisions , resulting in inaccurate guidance provided to some bie schools about the appropriate academic assessments required by federal law .