staffing challenges . ntia and rus will need additional personnel to administer btop and bip . ntia is establishing a new program with btop and will for the first time award grants to commercial entities . ntia's initial risk assessment indicated that a lack of experienced and knowledgeable staff was a key risk to properly implementing the program in accordance with the priorities of the recovery act . in its fiscal year 2010 budget request to congress , ntia estimated that it will need 30 full - time - equivalent staff in fiscal year 2009 and 40 more full - time - equivalent staff for fiscal year 2010 . while rus already has some broadband loan and grant programs in place and staff to administer them , it also faces a shortage of personnel . rus's staffing assessments indicated that the agency will need 47 additional full - time - equivalents to administer bip . prior to the recovery act , rus had 23 full - time - equivalent staff in fiscal year 2008 for its broadband access loan program and no full - time - equivalent staff dedicated to the community connect program ; rus utilized personnel from the broadband access loan program for the community connect program . rus field accountants conduct financial audits primarily within its telecommunications and electric utility loan programs . two of the 30 general field representatives are dedicated to rus's broadband grant and loan programs , and rus reported that the other general field representatives would be available to assist with bip oversight if needed . of the 47 full - time - equivalent staff that rus has estimated needing to implement bip , it plans to hire a total of 10 general field representatives and 10 field accountants on a temporary basis . in addition , rus officials told us that rural development has an estimated 5,000 field staff available across the country that support a variety of rural development loan and grant programs . although these individuals do not have specific experience with telecommunications or broadband projects , according to rus , this staff has experience supporting rus's business and community development loan programs , and this workforce could be used for project monitoring activities if there was an acute need . recipient reports and audits . to help address the challenge of monitoring a large number of diverse projects , ntia and rus have developed program - specific reporting requirements that are intended to provide transparency on the progress of funded projects . based on our review of the requirements , if ntia and rus have sufficient capacity to review and verify that information provided by funding recipients is accurate and reliable , these requirements could provide the agencies with useful information to help them monitor projects . the following reporting requirements apply to btop and bip funding recipients: general recovery act reports . section 1512 of the recovery act and related omb guidance requires all funding recipients to report quarterly to a centralized reporting system on , among other things , the amount of funding received or obligated , the project completion status , and an estimate of the number of jobs created or retained through the funded project .