this manifests itself in important ways . for example , the marines have periodic conferences with all involved parties to work out exactly what their ships will carry and what the units will need to bring with them to the fight . such an effort to tailor the prepositioned equipment increases familiarity , allows for prewar planning , and thus minimizes surprises or last - minute adjustments . the marines also train with their gear periodically . by contrast , the army does not designate the sets for any particular unit and provides little training with the equipment , especially with the afloat stocks . personnel who used and managed the equipment agreed that the tanks , infantry fighting vehicles , and howitzers were in good condition when they were drawn from the prepositioned stocks ; moreover , the equipment generally stayed operational throughout the fight . such ideas seem to have merit , but are still in the conceptual phases , and it is not clear to what extent the concepts are being approached to maximize potential for joint operations . in our view , options will be needed to find ways to cost - effectively integrate prepositioning requirements into the transforming dod force structure requirements . for example , rand recently published a report suggesting that the military consider prepositioning support equipment to help the stryker brigade meet deployment timelines . such support equipment constitutes much of the weight and volume of the brigade , but a relatively small part of the costs compared to the combat systems . such an option may be needed , since our recent report revealed that the army would likely be unable to meet its deployment timelines for the stryker brigade . ensure that the program is resourced commensurate with its priority , and is affordable even as the force is transformed . in our view , dod must consider affordability . in the past , the drawdown of army forces made prepositioning a practical alternative because it made extra equipment available . however , as the services' equipment is transformed and recapitalized , it may not be practical to buy enough equipment for units at home station and for prepositioning . prepositioned stocks are intended to reduce response times and enable forces to meet the demands of the full spectrum of military operations . once the future role of prepositioning is determined , and program requirements are set , it will be important to give the program proper funding priority . congress will have a key role in reviewing the department's assessment of the cost effectiveness of options to support dod's overall mission , including prepositioning and other alternatives for projecting forces quickly to the far reaches of the globe . mr. chairman , i hope this information is useful to congress as it considers dod's plans and funding requests for reconstituting its prepositioned stocks as well as integrating prepositioning into the department's transformation of its military forces . this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to answer any questions that you or the members of the subcommittee may have .