but it is not a simple solution . the changes to satellite designs that are being contemplated could have far - reaching effects on requirements , supporting infrastructure , management and oversight of acquisitions , industry , and other areas . they could also require upfront investments — which , under dod's current fiscal constraints , may not be feasible — and more leadership attention . dod does not yet have the knowledge it needs to make changes on a wide scale nor has it addressed underlying challenges to space acquisition that could be exacerbated by disaggregation . without a determined and disciplined effort to develop information about the full range of disaggregation issues — including operations — decisions on future space capabilities could be under - informed and opportunities missed . for example , a premature decision to pursue a large - scale disaggregated design could lead to a poor investment . alternatively , aspiring programs could overlook the benefits of disaggregation in favor of status - quo approaches . dod is taking steps to gain knowledge , particularly in terms of technical feasibility , costs , and technical alternatives . the ongoing studies , including the aoas for protected satellite communications , sbirs , and space - based environmental monitoring , if comprehensively conducted , should help to determine some of the impacts of changing dod's current space system designs and find the right balance among system characteristics of affordability , capability , and resilience . however , until resilience measures are developed and agreed upon , resilience assessments — whether as part of the aoa studies or not — will be of limited value . further , even when these studies are completed , there may still be significant uncertainties about how disaggregation could work and there will still be significant risks in implementation if key challenges , such as aligning satellite and ground systems , are not addressed . because most of dod's knowledge about disaggregation resides in paper studies and a limited number of demonstration efforts , continued or expanded demonstration efforts — including those to provide operational capabilities or otherwise aimed at quantifying the benefits , limitations , and feasibility of space system disaggregation — conducted before wide - scale change is implemented could go a long way towards gaining empirical data to help dod develop quantifiable estimates and verify the wide range of potential benefits and limitations disaggregation may yield . before making decisions on whether to disaggregate dod's protected satellite communications , sbirs , or environmental monitoring satellite systems , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics to take the following three actions: 1 . comprehensively examine — either through the aoa studies or through other assessments — the full range of disaggregation issues , including those that go beyond the satellite systems themselves ; 2 . develop common measures for resilience ; and 3 . expand demonstration efforts to examine the operational feasibility of disaggregation by empirically quantifying its benefits and limitations as well as addressing longstanding barriers that could hinder its implementation . we provided a draft of this report to dod for comment .