lab ) . although in its audited fiscal year 2000 financial statements , nasa capitalized the cost of unity , destiny , and other items in orbit or awaiting launch at about $8 billion , according to nasa officials , these amounts are based primarily on cost estimates , not actual costs . nasa officials stated that its accounting systems were designed prior to the implementation of current federal cost accounting standards and financial systems standards that require agencies to track and maintain cost data needed for management activities , such as estimating and controlling costs , performance measurement , and making economic trade - off decisions . as a result , nasa's systems do not track the cost of individual space station subsystems or elements . according to nasa officials , the agency manages and tracks space station costs by contract and does not need to know the cost of individual subsystems or elements to effectively manage the program . to the contrary , we found that nasa estimates potential and probable future program costs to determine the impact of canceling , deferring , or adding space station content . these cost estimates often identify the cost of specific space station subsystems . however , because nasa does not attempt to track costs by element or subsystems , the agency does not know the actual cost of completed space station components and is not able to reexamine its cost estimates for validity once costs have been realized . we continue to believe that nasa needs to collect , maintain , and report the full cost of individual subsystems and hardware so that nasa can make valid comparisons between estimates and final costs and so that the congress can hold nasa accountable for differences between budgeted and actual costs . modernizing nasa's financial management system is essential to providing timely , relevant , and reliable information needed to manage cost , measure performance , make program - funding decisions , and analyze outsourcing or privatization options . however , technology alone will not solve nasa's financial management problems . the key to transforming nasa's financial management organization into a customer - focused partner in program results hinges on the sustained leadership of nasa's top executives . as we found in our study of leading private sector and state organizations , clear , strong executive leadership — combined with factors such as effective organizational alignment , strategic human capital management , and end - to - end business process improvement — will be critical for ensuring that nasa's financial management organization delivers the kind of analysis and forward - looking information needed to effectively manage nasa's many complex space programs . specifically , as discussed in the executive guide , to reap the full benefit of a modern , integrated financial management system , nasa must go beyond obtaining an unqualified audit opinion toward ( 1 ) routinely generating reliable cost and performance information and analysis , ( 2 ) undertaking other value - added activities that support strategic decision - making and mission performance , and ( 3 ) building a finance team that supports the agency's mission and goals .