gao - 14-7 . washington , d.c.: february 18 , 2014 . community colleges: new federal research center may enhance current understanding of developmental education . gao - 13-656 . “does merit aid program design matter ? a cross - cohort analysis.” research in higher education , vol . dougherty , kevin j. , rebecca s. natow , and blanca e. vega . “popular but unstable: explaining why state performance funding systems in the us often do not persist.” teachers college record , vol . fethke , gary.”a low - subsidy problem in public higher education.” economics of education review , vol . goldrick - rab , sara and nancy kendall . “redefining college affordability: securing america's future with a free two year college option.” ( madison , wisconsin: the education optimists , 2014 ) . hemelt , steven w. and dave e. marcotte . “the impact of tuition increases on enrollment at public colleges and universities.” educational evaluation and policy analysis , vol . hillman , nicholas w. , david a. tandberg , and alisa hicklin - fryar . “evaluating the impacts of ‘new' performance funding in higher education.” forthcoming . jacobs , christine , and sarah whitfield . “beyond need and merit: strengthening state grant programs.” ( washington , d.c.: brookings institution , 2012 ) . jones , jessika . “college costs and family income: the affordability issue at uc and csu.” ( sacramento , calif.: california postsecondary education commission , report 11-02 , 2011 ) . mendoza , pilar and jesse p. mendez . “the oklahoma's promise program: a national model to promote college persistence.” journal of college student retention: research , theory & practice , vol . o'brien , colleen . “expanding access and opportunity: the washington state achievers scholarship.” ( washington , d.c.: pell institute for the study of opportunity in higher education , 2011 ) . patel , reshma , lashawn richburg - hayes , elijah de la campa , and timothy rudd . “performance - based scholarships: what have we learned ? interim findings from the pbs demonstration.” ( new york , new york: mdrc , 2013 ) . poliakoff , michael , and armand alacbay . “best laid plans: the unfulfilled promise of public higher education in california.” ( washington , d.c.: american council of trustees and alumni , 2012 ) . rae , brian . “2013 alaska performance scholarship outcomes report.” ( juneau , alaska: alaska commission on postsecondary education , 2013 ) . sanford , thomas and james m. hunter.”impact of performance - funding on retention and graduation rates.” education policy analysis archives , vol . scott - clayton , judith . “on money and motivation: a quasi - experimental analysis of financial incentives for college achievement.”the journal of human resources , vol . serna , gabriel r. and gretchen harris . “higher education expenditures and state balanced budget requirements: is there a relationship ? ” journal of education finance , vol . tandberg , david a. and nicholas w. hillman . “state higher education performance funding: data , outcomes , and policy implications.” journal of education finance , vol . titus , marvin a. and brian pusser . “ states' potential enrollment of adult students: a stochastic frontier analysis.” research in higher education , vol .