uscis . to reduce the number of backlogged requests , uscis increased the number of its full - time foia staff from 188 to 201 , and the number of its total full - time equivalent staff from 195 to 227 from 2011 through 2013 . further , to reduce the backlog , the agency used temporary assignments of contractor staff ; it also conducted a lean six sigma project to improve processing throughput . the effort was successful , resulting in an increase in average monthly cases closed from 7,300 to 10,800 . specific actions taken under this initiative included: offering awards to staff for increased production ; establishing minimum page count standards for processors at enhancing communication and team development through monthly different grade levels ; creating a gs - 12 team leader position for high - performing staff ; and development sessions and leadership development . lastly , according to uscis officials , telework was expanded to 2 days a week , leading to increased productivity among staff who telework . as a result of these efforts , uscis reported that it had succeeded in reducing its backlogged requests from 35,780 in 2011 to 3,394 in 2013 . cbp . to assist with reducing its backlog , cbp developed a management plan for fiscal years 2013-2014 that included moving the foia function organizationally from its office of international trade to the privacy and diversity group ; hiring new permanent staff to help process requests ; using temporary staff ; and extending the agreement that allows uscis to process its documents . according to agency officials , the new organizational placement has enabled the foia office to get more management attention and better address issues related to its foia operations . nonetheless , cbp experienced a large increase in the number of its backlogged requests from fiscal year 2011 through fiscal year 2013 — from 4,356 requests to 37,848 requests . according to cbp officials , two problems , in particular , contributed to the higher numbers . the consequence , according to the foia office , is confusion , delays , backlogged requests , and errors . the coast guard also attributed inability to reduce its backlog to an increase in the complexity of the requests it received . figure 3 shows changes in the numbers of backlogged requests for the privacy office and the selected components from fiscal year 2011 through fiscal year 2013 . various foia amendments and guidance call for agencies such as dhs to use electronic systems to improve foia processing . in particular , the open government act of 2007 amended foia to require that federal agencies establish a system to provide individualized tracking numbers for requests that will take longer than 10 days to process and establish telephone or internet service to allow requesters to track the status of their request . further , the president's january 2009 “freedom of information act” memo instructs agencies to use modern technology to inform citizens about what is known and done by their government . beyond these requirements , a select group of federal agencies have collectively identified capabilities that they consider to be best practices for foia processing .