we have incorporated other nasf comments into our report as appropriate . in addition to the contact named above , david p. bixler , assistant director ; ellen w. chu ; jonathan dent ; janet frisch ; timothy guinane ; kevin jackson ; richard johnson ; chester joy ; winchee lin ; tom moscovitch ; and jena sinkfield made key contributions to this report . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . indirect costs can then be shared in the same proportions as these direct costs . according to the interagency policy , however , the cost - sharing terms of the master agreements take precedence . to facilitate an effective response to wildland fires — including those affecting both federal and nonfederal jurisdictions — firefighting entities in the united states use an interagency incident management system . this system provides an organizational structure that expands to meet a fire's complexity and demands and allows entities to share firefighting personnel , aircraft , and equipment . when a fire is first detected , firefighting entities normally follow a principle of “closest available resource,” whereby , regardless of jurisdiction , the closest available firefighting personnel and equipment respond to the fire . the firefighter managing the suppression efforts is called the incident commander . if you or your staff have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or nazzaror@gao.gov . some homeowners and homebuilders , for example , resist using fire - resistant landscaping and roofing because they are concerned about aesthetics , time , or cost . as a result , federal and nonfederal officials said , it can be politically difficult for state and local governments to adopt — and enforce — laws requiring such measures , and many at - risk areas have not done so . in 2004 , the western governors' association reported that greater use of protective measures was urgent , but the progress made was unknown . the states and communities we visited exhibited various degrees of progress in adopting laws requiring protective measures . since 1965 , for example , california has required homeowners in the wildland - urban interface to maintain 30 feet of defensible space around their homes , a requirement that was increased to 100 feet in 2005 . the forest service's and interior's letters are reprinted in appendixes iii and iv , respectively , along with our evaluation of specific forest service comments in appendix iii . in addition to these federal agencies , we also sought comments from nasf because of our report's potential financial implications for states and other nonfederal entities . nasf provided both oral comments and a written response to our report . nasf did not agree with our recommendations , stating that developing national guidance specifying appropriate cost - sharing methods and clarifying financial responsibility for fire suppression costs would not provide the flexibility needed by local federal and nonfederal officials to address the variability in local circumstances and state laws . we agree that a certain amount of flexibility is needed .