ii . in late 2014 , dod began a process to prioritize and allocate resources for defense institution building activities globally , including potential moda program deployments . as a result of this process and new authority in the fiscal year 2015 ndaa to assign moda advisors to regional organizations with security missions , dod has not finalized plans for the locations of future deployments . however , dod has obtained state concurrence for 4 more countries — botswana , indonesia , ukraine , and yemen ( see fig . although the program has typically deployed advisors on long - term assignments of a year or more , dod also sent an advisor to mongolia in fiscal year 2014 on a 2-week assignment using moda authority and officials stated they plan to send additional short - term advisors in fiscal year 2015 . according to dod officials , the reasons dod did not meet its goal of 12 advisors in place by the end of fiscal year 2014 are unique to each of the countries and advisors selected . these officials noted there can be delays in the country approval process , or with the recruitment or training of the advisor . while dod stated that the process of selecting a country and deploying an advisor should take about 6 months , the process for the first 2 advisors — from the scoping visit to deployment — took over a year . delays in deployments have occurred at various stages in the process of selecting countries and advisors . see figure 3 for examples of reasons for delays . the fiscal year 2012 and 2014 ndaas established requirements for the global moda program , including that dod ( 1 ) obtain concurrence from the secretary of state in assigning advisors to foreign ministries of defense ; ( 2 ) report annually on activities under the program during the preceding fiscal year and include 6 elements on the status of the program in its reports ; and ( 3 ) update the policy guidance for the moda program . dod met some , but not all , of these requirements . specifically , dod obtained concurrence on deployments from the secretary of state , but its most recent annual report to congress only included 4 of the 6 required elements for the global moda program , and it has not developed a policy for the program . as required in the ndaa for fiscal year 2012 , dod officials worked with state to obtain concurrence on moda deployments . according to state officials , dod provides state with a concurrence package that typically includes an internal dod action memo seeking final concurrence . the memo may include an opinion from u.s. officials in the nominated country and may note which approvals have been obtained within dod , such as from the relevant geographic combatant command or from the joint staff . the program manager in state's bureau of political - military affairs then adds an action memo for state reviewers and routes the package to relevant parties within state . state's internal goal is to vet a package within 10 working days , assuming there is policy agreement .