bidirectional health information exchange . according to a va / dod annual report and program officials , bidirectional health information exchange ( bhie ) is an interim step in the departments' overall strategy to create a two - way exchange of electronic medical records . bhie builds on the architecture and framework of fhie , the application used to transfer health data on separated service members from dod to va. as discussed earlier , fhie provides an interface between va's and dod's existing health information systems that allows one - way transfers only , which do not occur in real time: va clinicians do not have access to transferred information until about 6 weeks after separation . in contrast , bhie focuses on the two - way , near - real - time exchange of information ( text only ) on shared patients ( such as those at sites jointly occupied by va and dod facilities ) . this application exchanges data between va's vista system and dod's chcs system ( and ahlta where implemented ) . the departments have taken important actions on the chdr initiative . as of september 2005 , the departments reported having spent $2.6 million on bhie . the primary benefit of bhie is near - real - time access to patient medical information for both va and dod , which is not available through fhie . during a site visit to a va and dod location in puget sound in 2005 , we viewed a demonstration of this capability and were told by a va clinician that the near - real - time access to medical information was very beneficial in treating shared patients . as of june 2006 , bhie was deployed at va and dod facilities at 16 sites , where the exchange of demographic , outpatient pharmacy , radiology , laboratory , and allergy data ( text only ) has been achieved . in addition , according to officials , over 120 outpatient military clinics associated with these sites also have access to this information through bhie . according to va and dod , bhie will be implemented at two more sites in july 2006 . table 1 presents a schedule for implementation of bhie ; the sites listed are all dod sites with nearby va facilities . additionally , because dod stores electronic medical information in systems other than chcs ( such as the clinical information system and the integrated clinical database ) , work is currently under way to allow bhie to have the ability to exchange information with those systems . currently , one site is testing the use of bhie as an interface allowing both departments' staff to view discharge summaries stored in the clinical information system . dod and va plan to perform a side - by - side comparison to ensure that this capability maintains data quality . when they are satisfied , the capability will be provided to those dod locations that currently use the clinical information system and have bhie implemented . doing so will permit all va sites access to the information in the clinical information system on shared patients at dod sites running bhie .