consistent with h.r . 2420 , our report recommends that sec consider requiring mutual funds to make additional disclosures to investors , including considering requiring funds to specifically disclose fees in dollars to each investor in quarterly account statements . sec has agreed to consider requiring such disclosures but was unsure that the benefits of implementing specific dollar disclosures outweighed the costs to produce such disclosures . however , we estimate that spreading these implementation costs across all investor accounts may result in minimal increases in fund expenses . our report also discusses less costly alternatives that could also prove beneficial to investors and spur increased competition among mutual funds on the basis of fees . each mutual fund in the united states is required to have a board of directors that is charged with overseeing the interests of fund shareholders . these boards also must include directors that are not employed or affiliated with the fund's adviser , and these independent directors have specific duties to oversee the fees their fund's charge . however , some industry critics have questioned whether fund directors are adequately performing their duties and various corporate governance reforms have been proposed to improve the effectiveness of mutual fund boards . we found that many of the corporate governance reforms are already being practiced by many funds as a result of either recent sec actions or because they are recommended as best practices by the mutual fund industry body , the investment company institute . by amending the investment company act of 1940 to require these and other corporate governance practices , h.r . 2420 would further strengthen certain corporate governance practices and ensure that all mutual funds implement these practices . the work that we conducted for our report also found that mutual fund advisers have been increasingly engaged in a practice known as revenue sharing under which they make additional payments to the broker - dealers that sell their fund shares . although we found that the impact of these payments on the expenses to fund investors was uncertain , these payments can create conflicts between the interests of broker - dealers and their customers that could limit the choices of funds that these broker - dealers offer investors . however , under current disclosure requirements investors may not always be explicitly informed that their broker - dealer , who is obligated to recommend only suitable investments based on the investor's financial condition , is also receiving payments to sell particular funds . consistent with h.r . 2420 , our report also recommended that more disclosure be made to investors about any revenue sharing payments their broker - dealers are receiving . finally , we also reviewed a practice known as soft dollars , in which a mutual fund adviser uses fund assets to pay commissions to broker - dealers for executing trades in securities for the mutual fund's portfolio but also receives research or other brokerage services as part of the transaction . these soft dollar arrangements can result in mutual fund advisers obtaining research or other services , including from third party independent research firms , that can benefit the investors in their funds .