i will discuss four of these developments . first , the conventional market offered products that increased consumer choices for borrowers , including those who may have previously chosen an fha - insured loan . these products — interest - only loans , no - and low - documentation mortgages , piggyback loans , and hybrid adjustable rate mortgages ( arm ) — became popular , especially during the subprime market's rapid growth after 2001 , because they featured flexible payment and interest options that increased initial affordability . in combination with historically low interest rates , these products made it easier for homebuyers to purchase homes in a period of strong house price appreciation . second , advances in underwriting technology , particularly mortgage scoring and automated underwriting systems , allowed conventional mortgage providers to process loan applications more quickly and consistently than in the past and broaden their customer base . fha implemented its own mortgage scoring tool , called the technology open to approved lenders ( total ) scorecard , in 2004 . however , in prior work we found that the way fha developed total may limit the scorecard's effectiveness . to the extent that conventional mortgage providers were better able than fha to use scoring tools to identify lower - risk borrowers in fha's traditional market segment , these borrowers may have migrated toward conventional products , contributing to the decline in fha's market share . third , there was an increase in mortgage originations through third parties such as loan correspondents and mortgage brokers , particularly in the subprime market . this trend has been associated with the decline in fha's market share because the third - party originators primarily market non - fha products . finally , the growth in private mortgage securitization ( the bundling of mortgage loans into bond - like securities that can be bought and sold on the secondary market ) , particularly for subprime loans , allowed lenders to sell loans from their portfolios , transferring credit risk to investors , and use the proceeds to make more loans . as a result of these developments and lower interest rates , more homebuyers — especially minority and lower - income families — were able to obtain conventional loans , but many of these loans had high ultimate costs . as previously discussed , much of the increase in mortgages to minorities and lower - income borrowers was due to the growth in subprime lending , and many of these loans offered lower initial costs through their interest - only features and low introductory interest rates . however , these mortgages became more costly as the interest rates on many of these loans reset to higher rates , typically 2 to 3 percentage points higher in a relatively short period . highly leveraged and weaker credit borrowers — the typical subprime borrowers who have obtained nontraditional mortgage products such as hybrid arms — are the most vulnerable to payment shocks . as a result , borrowers who obtained subprime mortgages have experienced relatively high rates of default ( defined as payments more than 90 days past due ) and foreclosure ( in any stage of the foreclosure process ) .