artificial lines . but must focus on all waters that together form the entire aquatic system.” further , water moves in hydrologic cycles and pollution of one part of an aquatic system can affect other waters within that aquatic system . the regulations also extend federal jurisdiction under section 404 to tributaries . the federal government has argued in court that it must regulate tributary waters well beyond the point at which they are navigable because any pollutant or fill material that degrades water quality in a tributary has the potential to move downstream and degrade the quality of navigable waters themselves . similarly , according to the corps , drainage ditches constructed in uplands that connect two waters of the united states may themselves be jurisdictional . the first step in the regulatory process is a jurisdictional determination , in which the corps determines whether a water or wetland is a “water of the united states.” in general , corps staff conduct jurisdictional determinations by considering a range of factors , and they often view each factor's importance within the context of the actual site of a proposed project . while many jurisdictional determinations are simple to perform , some can be complex and require considerable effort . for example , a relatively simple jurisdictional determination might involve a proposed project for the placement of a pier on the mississippi river . in this case , corps staff may only consult a map to determine that the activity falls within the corps' jurisdiction . in contrast , a more complex jurisdictional determination might arise when a property owner wants to fill in multiple wetlands to build a parking lot . this kind of jurisdictional determination would likely require additional time and resources because corps staff might need to consult a variety of maps and aerial photographs and then visit the site . once on site , corps staff would verify the exact locations of the wetlands . if the corps determines that a water or wetland is jurisdictional , a permit applicant then has the option of filing an administrative appeal challenging this determination and could subsequently pursue the matter in court . if a water or wetland is found to be jurisdictional , the property owner would take the next step in the process and apply for a section 404 permit from the corps . the corps bases its decision to issue a permit on an evaluation of the probable impacts , including cumulative impacts , of the proposed activity on the public interest . still other districts , such as chicago and rock island , do not consider the 100- year floodplain at all when making jurisdictional determinations . rock island district officials said that they do not use the 100-year floodplain because headquarters never suggested it as a possible criterion . moreover , these officials were concerned that if they used this practice , there were parts of the rock island district where the practice would be very inclusive because the 100-year floodplain can extend several miles inland from the banks of the mississippi river . additionally , districts varied in their use of sheet flow — that is overland flow of water outside of a defined channel — for making jurisdictional determinations .