federal insurance for property and crops . the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) and the federal crop insurance corporation are sources of federal fiscal exposure due , in part , to the vulnerability of the insured property and crops to climate change . these programs provide coverage where private markets for insurance do not exist , typically because the risk associated with the property or crops is too great to privately insure at a cost that buyers are willing to accept . from 2013 to 2017 , losses paid under nfip and the federal crop insurance program totaled $51.3 billion . federal flood and crop insurance programs were not designed to generate sufficient funds to fully cover all losses and expenses , which means the programs need budget authority from congress to operate . the nfip , for example , was about $21 billion in debt to the treasury as of april 2019 . further , the congressional budget office estimated in may 2019 that federal crop insurance would cost the federal government an average of about $8 billion annually from 2019 through 2029 . operation and management of federal property and lands . the federal government owns and operates hundreds of thousands of facilities and manages millions of acres of land that could be affected by a changing climate and represent a significant federal fiscal exposure . for example , the department of defense ( dod ) owns and operates domestic and overseas infrastructure with an estimated replacement value of about $1 trillion . this is consistent with the findings of the fourth national climate assessment . for example , according to that assessment , the continued increase in the frequency and extent of high - tide flooding due to sea level rise threatens america's trillion - dollar coastal property market and public infrastructure sector . as we reported in september 2017 , information on the potential economic effects of climate change could help federal decision makers better manage climate risks , according to leading practices for climate risk management , economic analysis we reviewed , and the views of several experts we interviewed . for example , such information could inform decision makers about significant potential damages in different u.s. sectors or regions . the costs associated with recent disasters have illustrated the need for such planning and investment . in 2018 alone , there were 14 separate billion - dollar weather and climate disaster events across the united states , with a total cost of at least $91 billion , according to the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) . further , on june 6 , 2019 , a supplemental appropriation of approximately $19.1 billion was signed into law for recent disasters . global change research program ( usgcrp ) , which coordinates and integrates the activities of 13 federal agencies that research changes in the global environment and their implications for society , reported in its november 2018 fourth national climate assessment that climate change is playing a role in the increasing frequency of some types of extreme weather that lead to the billion - dollar disasters .