the recommendations are listed by report . ( see app . rhs has not documented the relationships between the agency components that have risk - management functions and responsibilities . omb circular a - 129 states that federal credit agencies should codify clearly defined lines of authority and communication . i for a full list of the recommendations from these reports and their status. ) in our may 2012 report , we found that rhs had made annual estimates of improper payments in its rental assistance program and taken steps to reduce such payments . rhs generates these estimates as part of annual improper payment audits . from fiscal years 2007 through 2010 , rhs reduced its reported error rate ( total amount improperly paid divided by program outlays ) from 3.95 percent ( representing $35 million in errors ) to 1.48 percent ( representing $15 million in errors ) . rhs's error rates reported in fiscal years 2013 and 2014 were 1.79 and 1.99 percent , respectively . however , we also found that rhs's reported error rates might understate the magnitude of the problem for several reasons , including the following: rhs had not estimated improper payments due to unreported tenant income because it lacked the authority to match data on tenant income against federal wage and benefits databases . rhs had not estimated improper payments made on the behalf of deceased tenants because it had not completed steps to gain access to the social security administration's ( ssa ) death master file , which could be used to match data to detect such payments . in 2008 , rhs began excluding improper payments of less than $100 from estimated error rates . however , rhs did not submit this change to omb , which is responsible for approving agency methodologies for estimation . our may 2012 report also found that rhs had not fulfilled all omb reporting requirements for improper payments . for example , usda's performance and accountability reports ( 1 ) did not contain a description of steps the agency took to ensure managers were accountable for reducing and recovering improper payments ; and ( 2 ) did not fully discuss whether the agency had the internal controls , human capital , information systems , and other infrastructure to reduce improper payments . to address limitations in rhs's detection and estimation of improper payments , in our may 2012 report we suggested that congress consider amending the social security act to grant rhs access to the national directory of new hires database ( new hires database ) for purposes of verifying tenant incomes . although usda drafted legislation to obtain this access , and a bill was introduced in the 113th congress ( 2013 – 2014 ) to provide access , these proposals were not enacted . we continue to believe that providing rhs with this access would strengthen the accuracy and integrity of rhs's payment process . in addition , we recommended that usda do the following: draft proposed legislation to grant rhs access to ssa benefits data for income verification purposes . usda has not yet drafted this legislation . usda officials told us that they wanted to obtain access to the new hires database before pursuing access to the ssa benefits data .