better documentation of recusals . establishing better documentation of employee recusals and related matters may provide sec with additional information that it could use to screen for potential conflicts of interest . while sec currently has an online system in which recusals can be documented , employee use of the system is optional . according to the sec ig , better documentation of recusals and the related matters would help in creating a history of steps employees have taken to avoid potential conflicts of interest and would provide supervisors with information on matters for which certain employees have recused themselves and on which they cannot work . however , according to sec officials , supervisors are generally aware of the matters from which their employees have recused themselves . further , requiring documentation of recusals would require sec supervisors or ethics officials to develop a method to enforce the requirement and ensure that recusals are in fact being documented . each of these options has advantages and disadvantages . specifically , they stated that it is in an employee's interest to avoid potential conflicts of interest regardless of whether or not recusals are documented .  better communications . personal contact between current and former sec employees may create the appearance of conflicts of interest . for example , even without direct evidence that undue influence has affected an enforcement action , the appearance of a conflict of interest could undermine confidence in the enforcement process and sec . according to sec officials , sec has controls to address these challenges , as described in the next section of this report . sec has a number of controls for managing post - employment and conflict - of - interest issues . these include training and information for employees , staffing decisions , work process controls , ethics advice , exit requirements for departing employees , and supplemental post - employment rules for certain employees . according to federal ethics regulations , federal agencies must have an ethics training program to educate employees about ethics laws and rules and how to obtain ethics advice . sec requires its new employees to attend initial training that includes ethics - related issues and provides new employees printed information that outlines post - employment restrictions and provides contact information for agency ethics officials . sec also requires that new employees submit financial disclosures , as applicable , to identify any personal financial interests they may have and determine if any potential financial conflicts of interest exist . in addition to providing initial training and information to new employees , sec makes training available and provides information to all employees on an ongoing basis , including information about post - employment rules and conflict - of - interest issues . sec's 2011 training plan includes both in - person and online training sessions that cover topics such as conflicts of interest , employment seeking , post - employment issues , and sec supplemental rules . the sec ethics office currently provides information about ethics rules and regulations ( as well as conflict - of - interest and post - employment restrictions ) to employees through the sec intranet and by e - mail .