( see app . v for more information about stakeholders' ratings of characteristics of offset credibility and market challenges. ) according to most stakeholders and key studies , additionality is fundamental to the credibility of offsets because only offsets that are additional to business - as - usual activities result in new environmental benefits . regional greenhouse gas initiative ( rggi ) the regional greenhouse gas initiative is a cooperative effort by northeast and mid - atlantic states to design a regional cap - and - trade program initially covering carbon dioxide emissions from power plants in the region . connecticut , delaware , maine , maryland , massachusetts , new hampshire , new jersey , new york , rhode island , and vermont are participating in the rggi effort . the district of columbia , pennsylvania , ontario , quebec , the eastern canadian provinces , and new brunswick are observers in the process . on august 15 , 2006 , the participating states issued a model rule that details the proposed rggi program . offset projects included in the program are initially limited to five types of projects , including landfill methane capture and sequestration , because these types occur within the borders of the rggi states , among other factors . the model rule specifies offset project requirements including criteria for additionality , quantification and verification of emissions reductions , independent verification , and accreditation standards for independent verifiers . each source required to reduce emissions would generally be able to use offsets to comply with up to 3.3 percent of its obligation in a single compliance period . if the compliance price hits certain levels , the use of offsets may increase to 5 or 10 percent of required reductions . the first 3-year compliance period will begin january 1 , 2009 . more information about rggi is available at http: / / www.rggi.org / index.htm . on february 19 , 2008 , the united kingdom ( uk ) department for environment , food and rural affairs announced the framework for the code of best practice for carbon offsetting to provide uk consumers with guidance on carbon offsets . the code is designed to increase consumers' understanding of offsetting and its role in addressing climate change , increase consumer confidence in the integrity and value for money of the offset products available to them , and to provide signals to the uk offset sector on the quality and verification standards to which they should aspire . offset products meeting the specifications of the code will be assigned with a certification mark , which providers may use on their web sites and other materials . the code is voluntary and offset providers can choose whether to seek accreditation for all , or some , of their offsetting products . the code initially covers only certified emissions reductions ( cer ) , that are compliant with the kyoto protocol , because there is currently no definition or fully established common standard for voluntary offsets . defra has asked the voluntary offset industry to jointly develop a standard that could be included in the code in the future .