iii ) . according to navy supply officials , to minimize the inventory of unneeded spare parts carried on board ships , ships could purge their existing inventories periodically and revise the allowance parts lists based on accurate configuration records , demand data , and allowance models . the revised allowance would identify both shortages of needed parts and excesses of unneeded parts . they said that allowance lists used to be reviewed and updated periodically , but these reviews are no longer performed . although officials acknowledged that the inventory of unneeded parts should be minimized , they said a higher priority has been placed on correcting the shortages of needed spare parts because of their impact on ships' operations and mission readiness . they said that the existing inventories of unneeded parts have already been purchased , and the costs cannot be recouped . the navy's long - standing failure to meet its spare parts supply performance goals has led to shortages of needed parts on board ships and some degradation in ships' operations and mission readiness during long deployments at sea . these shortages stem from the navy's inability to determine , in a reliable way , what types of spare parts and how many of each type need to be stocked on board ship . the navy uses inaccurate , out - of - date , or incomplete ship configuration and historical demand information to develop the parts allowance lists that identify what repair parts , manuals , and other related items a ship should carry in its onboard inventory . even though a ship may stock almost all of the parts on the allowance list , it is likely to fall short of meeting the navy's supply performance goals because the data used to develop the allowance lists are inaccurate . when needed parts are not available on board , a large number of repair jobs are delayed and equipment is not functional — sometimes for weeks or months — until the ships' crews can obtain the parts from off - ship sources . moreover , the navy may not have a complete picture of the actual impact that equipment downtime has on the ships' operations and mission readiness because of discrepancies in the reporting systems the navy uses to monitor these problems . the navy's spare parts supply problems also substantially increase costs . because of inaccuracies in the information the navy uses to develop its allowance lists , it often stocks the wrong types or the wrong quantities of parts on board ships . as a result , the navy has to spend additional money to obtain the parts it needs from off - ship sources , often incurring high expenses to locate the parts and transport them to the ships . it also expends substantial funds to maintain large inventories on board its ships that are not requisitioned during deployments . however , the navy has given low priority to purging unneeded parts from its ships' inventories and , instead , has focused on purchasing additional spare parts to avoid future shortages .