( see fig . mepi and its administrative partners negotiated agreements with ngos , the private sector , and other u.s. government entities to implement more than 100 projects . mepi and its administrative partners have obligated the $129 million that mepi received for fiscal years 2002 and 2003 . mepi has directly obligated about 45 percent of the funds ; mepi's administrative partners have obligated the remainder ( see fig . mepi: mepi has obligated about 45 percent ( $58 million ) of its 2002-2003 funds directly to ngos , the private sector , and u.s. government entities . ngos and the private sector: mepi has obligated 33 percent ( $42.8 million ) of the funds in various grants directly to american or locally based ngos or private companies . according to mepi , these grants are intended to support innovative ideas that can be implemented quickly to produce concrete results , such as increasing women's political participation . mepi officials say that they would like to obligate more mepi resources directly , but they acknowledge that such a shift would require mepi staff to shoulder a significant administrative burden in monitoring these projects . u.s. government implementers: through interagency acquisition agreements , mepi has obligated about 12 percent ( $15.2 million ) of its 2002-2003 funds to u.s. government entities with specific expertise in the areas of reform that mepi supports . these entities implement projects , such as the department of the treasury's technical assistance project to develop expertise in surplus and debt management in algeria . appendix i provides a more detailed description of our scope and methodology . from the 1950s through 2001 , u.s. bilateral economic assistance to the middle east and north africa focused primarily on promoting regional stability by providing funding for large bilateral military and economic programs , chiefly in egypt , israel , and jordan , and by fostering development . in december 2002 , the state department announced the creation of mepi , which has expanded u.s. assistance to other countries in the region and includes programs focused on democracy and reform . figure 1 shows mepi's area of operation . according to the administration , mepi comprises a new approach to foreign assistance for the region , aimed at linking arab , u.s. , and global private - sector businesses , ngos , civil society elements , and governments to develop innovative policies and programs that support reform in the region . mepi is also an important element of the administration's counterterrorism and public diplomacy strategies . mepi projects are organized under its four reform pillars ( see fig . mepi's budget of $293 million for fiscal years 2002-2005 was derived from supplemental appropriations and annual foreign operations legislation . figure 3 shows mepi's budget for fiscal years 2002-2005 . the office of regional affairs within state's bureau of near eastern affairs ( nea ) in washington , d.c. , administered mepi activities during mepi's first 6 months . the office worked with usaid , which managed the long - standing bilateral economic assistance programs in the middle east and north africa , to implement most of its initial projects . the office also worked with the embassies in the region to implement projects funded through small grants .