( see app . ii for detailed information provided by the corps districts. ) as part of their response to our request , corps districts provided information about reimbursements to nonfederal sponsors for the federal share of projects they undertook . we clarified and confirmed data we obtained through the data collection instrument through follow - up interviews with corps district officials . we also compared information we collected from the corps districts on reimbursements to nonfederal sponsors with information provided by corps headquarters on reimbursements to nonfederal sponsors . through this process , we identified a number of discrepancies between the reimbursement information on projects led by nonfederal sponsors reported to us by corps districts and the information provided by corps headquarters . we interviewed corps headquarters officials to understand the potential reasons for the discrepancies and asked them to reconcile the differences . they added 13 projects to the list we collected directly from the districts and modified some of the reimbursement amounts , but they did not provide satisfactory explanations for all of the changes . therefore , the reimbursement data are reliable for reporting an estimated aggregate reimbursement amount to give a sense of magnitude , but they may not be accurate at the individual project level , as discussed in the report . we also reviewed relevant agency guidance documents , such as corps - issued engineer regulations and policy documents that provide implementation guidance , as well as partnership agreements between the corps and nonfederal sponsors , federal standards for internal control , and leading practices for collaboration . to obtain views on lessons learned from projects led by nonfederal sponsors , we conducted semistructured telephone interviews with corps officials from 16 districts that reported overseeing at least one feasibility study or construction project undertaken by a nonfederal sponsor . we conducted similar semistructured telephone interviews with several of the nonfederal sponsors that undertook feasibility studies or construction projects to get their perspectives on the lessons learned from these projects . specifically , we interviewed 20 of the 28 sponsors undertaking 32 projects . the remaining nonfederal sponsors either did not respond to our request for an interview or did not have a representative with direct knowledge of the project with whom we could speak . we analyzed the information from the interviews we conducted with district officials and nonfederal sponsors qualitatively , including conducting a content analysis on selected questions related to the advantages and disadvantages of projects led by nonfederal sponsors and lessons learned from these projects . table 4 shows the questions we asked the corps district officials and nonfederal sponsors to obtain their views on lessons learned . we conducted this performance audit from january 2014 to december 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .