assists. , clerical & secretarial support staff , athletic directors , audiovisual & instructional technology staff , librarians , school library support staff , superintendents , assistant superintendents , principals , assistant principals , business managers , maintenance and security . although it is impossible to know whether these jobs or others would have been eliminated in the absence of arra - funding , these jobs were in existence and are maintained with funds which will be reimbursed from the state fiscal stabilization fund . specifically , the funds were used to retain one instructional staff position . as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that the school was able to maintain its low student - teacher ratio and increase the number of graduates by 12 . they also said that they are expecting additional graduates after the july texas assessment of knowledge and skills ( taks ) administration . they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were less than 50 percent completed . san leandro unified school district san leandro , ca 94579 award amount: $607,453 san leandro unified school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to hire staff , get intervention opportunities , purchase materials and equipment to accelerate support for student learning , and fund programs to increase adequate yearly progress in all significant subgroups . these funds supported approximately 1,300 title i students at five elementary sites . specifically , the funds were used to retain and hire staff , provide professional development , and purchase instructional materials . as a result of these funds , officials said the district was able to increase standardized test scores . they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed . santa ana unified school district santa ana , ca 92701 award amount: $11,429,961 santa ana unified school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to maintain positions and staff development programs . these funds supported 62 schools with approximately 54,000 students . specifically , the funds were used to retain staff both certificated and classified and to pay for the salaries of teachers on special assignments who support teachers through staff development , demonstration lessons , and the coordination of instructional materials . as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that the district was able to maintain 62 special assignment teachers . they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were fully completed . wiggins school district re - 50j wiggins , co 80654 award amount: $57,733 wiggins school district re - 50j reported that it used its recovery act title i award to hire a math coach . these funds supported 55 students in the middle school in addition to teachers the math coach worked with . as a result of these funds , officials reported that they expect to see student math test scores improve . they indicated that their recovery act title i activities were more than 50 percent completed .