however , marad does neither . two of the selected shipowners had multiple title xi loan guarantees during 1996 – 2002 ( hvide , five guarantees ; and amcv , the parent company of project america , inc. , five ) . we interviewed agency officials and reviewed provisions of existing federal regulations set forth in title 46 , part 298 of the code of federal regulations to identify the key program requirements that influence the approval or denial of a title xi loan guarantee . we reviewed internal correspondence and other documentation related to the compliance with program requirements for the approval of the loan guarantee , ongoing monitoring of the project , and disposition of assets for loans resulting in default . we interviewed agency officials and staff members from the title xi support offices that contribute to the approval and monitoring of loans and disposal of a loan resulting in default . also , we interviewed a retired marad employee involved in one of the projects . in addition , we interviewed officials that represented amcv / project america , inc. , including the former vice president and general counsel and former outside counsel . to determine how marad's practices of managing financial risk compare to those of selected private - sector maritime lenders , we interviewed two leading worldwide maritime lenders , and one leading maritime lender in the gulf coast region . we interviewed these lenders to become familiar with private - sector lending policies , procedures , and practices in the shipping industry . among the individuals we interviewed were those responsible for portfolio management and asset disposition . we did not verify that the lenders followed the practices described to us . to assess marad's implementation of credit reform , we analyzed marad's subsidy cost estimation and reestimation processes and examined how the assumptions marad uses to calculate subsidy cost estimates compare to marad's actual program experience . we first identified the key cash flow assumptions marad uses to calculate its subsidy cost estimates . once we identified these assumptions , we determined whether marad had a reliable basis — whether marad had gathered sufficient , relevant , and reliable supporting data — for the estimates of program cost and for their estimates of loan performance . we compared estimated program performance to actual program performance to determine whether variances between the estimates and actual performance existed . further , we interviewed those marad officials who are responsible for implementing credit reform and compared the practices marad uses to implement credit reform to the practices identified in omb and other applicable credit reform implementation guidance . we performed our work in washington , d.c. , and new york , n.y. , between september 2002 and april 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report or need additional information , please contact me , or mathew scirè at 202-512-6794 . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv .