without tracking performance over time , agencies cannot do so . after the deepwater horizon incident and oil spill in 2010 , interior strengthened many of its safety requirements and policies to prevent another offshore incident . for example , interior put new safety requirements in place related to well control , well casing and cementing , and blowout preventers , among other things . in a july 2012 report , we found that after the new safety requirements went into effect , review times for offshore oil and gas drilling permits increased , as did the number of times that interior returned a permit to an operator . in conclusion , our past reports have identified varied factors that affect the timeliness and efficiencies of federal energy infrastructure permitting reviews . federal agencies have implemented a number of our recommendations and taken steps to implement more efficient permitting , but several of our recommendations remain open , presenting opportunities to continue to improve permitting processes . chairmen palmer and gianforte , ranking members raskin and plaskett , and members of the subcommittees , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have at this time . if you or your staff members have any questions concerning this testimony , please contact frank rusco , director , natural resources and environment , who may be reached at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . key contributors to this testimony include christine kehr ( assistant director ) , dave messman ( analyst - in - charge ) , patrick bernard , marissa dondoe , quindi franco , william gerard , rich johnson , gwen kirby , rebecca makar , tahra nichols , holly sasso , and kiki theodoropoulos . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . two common themes emerge from these reports . first , permitting processes are varied and complex , often requiring an applicant to comply with a range of federal , state , and local laws and regulations . second , permitting processes can involve several federal and state agencies , as well as other stakeholders , many of whom have approval responsibilities . our work has shown that a factor that hinders efficiency and timeliness is that agencies often do not track when permitting milestones are achieved , such as the date a project application is submitted or receives final agency approval to determine if they are achieving planned or expected results . in addition , our work has shown that agencies often do not collect accurate information , which prevents them from analyzing their processes in order to improve and streamline them .