gao - 05-655t . washington , d.c.: may 5 , 2005 . high - risk series: an update . gao - 05-207 . washington , d.c.: january 2005 . once a claim is developed ( i.e. , has all the necessary evidence ) , a rating vsr , also called a rating specialist , evaluates the claim and determines whether the claimant is eligible for benefits . if the veteran is eligible for disability compensation , the rating specialist assigns a percentage rating based on degree of disability . veterans with multiple service - connected disabilities receive a single composite rating . for veterans claiming pension eligibility , the regional office determines if the veteran served in a period of war , is permanently and totally disabled for reasons not service - connected ( or is aged 65 or older ) , and meets the income thresholds for eligibility . a veteran who disagrees with the regional office's decision for either program can appeal sequentially to va's board of veterans' appeals ( bva ) , the u.s. court of appeals for veterans claims , and the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit . in january 2003 , we designated modernizing va's disability programs , along with other federal disability programs , as high - risk . we did not perform independent verification of va's data . we conducted our work in may 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , va continues to have disability claims processing problems . for example , as of the end of march 2005 , rating - related claims were pending an average of 119 days , 8 days more than at the end of fiscal year 2003 , and far from its strategic goal of 78 days . during the same period , the rating - related inventory grew by about 86,000 claims to a total of about 340,000 claims . while va has improved the accuracy of its decisions to 87 percent in fiscal year 2004 , it is still below its strategic goal of 96 percent in fiscal year 2008 . further , we have identified concerns about the consistency of decisions across va's regional offices . va has begun studying one indicator of inconsistency , the wide variations in average payments per veteran from state to state , in response to adverse media coverage . we identified factors that may impede va's ability to improve its disability claims processing performance . the impacts of laws , court decisions , and the filing behavior of veterans can significantly affect va's ability to decide claims , as well as the volume of claims received . also , va's ability to improve the productivity of its claims processing staff may affect its ability to improve performance . more dramatic gains in timeliness and inventory reduction might require fundamental changes in the design and operations of va's disability programs . va's disability compensation program pays monthly benefits to veterans with service - connected disabilities ( injuries or diseases incurred or aggravated while on active military duty ) according to the severity of the disability .