building codes . building codes are minimum safeguards to ensure the public health , safety , and general welfare of the occupants of new and existing buildings and structures , according to the international code council , a standards - developing organization . for example , building codes may ensure that exterior walls and roofs are resistant to the weather , such as by including flashing and drainage . building codes may reference one or more design standards . voluntary certifications . voluntary certifications assess infrastructure across a spectrum of key criteria , including environmental performance , and recognize those that go beyond minimum code compliance . for example , builders and owners may use an asset management framework to decide whether to repair or replace a building or another physical asset . in this report , we focus on the use of climate information in standards , model codes , and certifications , although climate information may also be relevant to broader planning processes and asset management decisions . in the united states , standards - developing organizations are the primary source of design standards , building codes , and voluntary certifications that federal , state , local , and private - sector infrastructure planners follow . for example , a 2015 report by the national institute of building sciences' consultative council on the priorities of the building industry stated that standards - developing organizations develop and maintain standards and codes , while state and local governments adapt , adopt , and enforce them . in april 2013 , we found that federal agencies rely on professional associations in adopting design standards . in 2015 , we found that federal agencies and the private sector use voluntary certifications that third - party organizations — such as standards - developing organizations — develop . a variety of organizations , including professional societies and trade associations such as the american society of civil engineers and the international association of plumbing & mechanical officials , develop design standards , building codes , and voluntary certifications . members of these organizations can include academics ; professionals , such as architects , engineers , and planners ; and federal , state , and local government officials . various federal laws and regulations govern the use of design standards , building codes , and voluntary certifications that standards - developing organizations issue , including the following: the national technology transfer and advancement act of 1995 , as amended ( nttaa ) , codified the omb circular a - 119 directive for federal agencies to use voluntary consensus standards in lieu of government - unique standards except where inconsistent with law or otherwise impractical . federal highway administration ( fhwa ) regulations incorporate , by reference , certain design standards that the american association of state highway and transportation officials develops , thereby requiring their use for projects in the national highway system . the public buildings amendments of 1988 requires that each building constructed or altered by gsa or any other federal agency , to the maximum extent feasible , comply with one of the nationally recognized model building and other applicable codes .