reg . obligations were not separately identifiable . estimated . data from the beginning postsecondary students ( bps ) longitudinal study show that for those who started with a major in the sciences , there is no appreciable difference between men and women in the proportion that have completed a bachelors degree 6 years after starting college . among those who started college with nonscience or undeclared majors , a greater proportion of women than men had achieved bachelors degrees within 6 years . for both men and women , those who began college majoring in the sciences were more likely to have earned degrees within 6 years than those who began college with nonscience or undeclared majors . data from the integrated postsecondary education data system ( ipeds ) show that the proportion of students , and of degree earners , who are women varies substantially from one area to another in the sciences . in addition to those named above , kopp michelotti , kelsey bright , john mingus , james rebbe , richard burkard and sue bernstein made important contributions to this report . part 106 . 65 fed . researchers still have to run their laboratories . scientists responsible for research projects have to organize the work , supervise graduate students working on the projects , and also advise students on their academic course work and projects . some faculty we spoke with pointed out that relief from teaching duties may benefit male faculty more than female faculty . in connection with the arrival of a child , to the extent that male faculty may have less involvement in caring for newborns , male faculty may use the extra time to do additional research or laboratory work . given its role as coordinating agency of title ix compliance , we also gathered data and interviewed officials at the department of justice ( justice ) . we chose to visit research universities and national laboratories because by visiting those institutions we were able to interview future and practicing scientists working in a wide variety of areas . during this phase of the review , we visited seven research universities where we interviewed grant recipients , students and faculty . we also visited six national laboratories where we talked with administrators and scientists . research universities were selected for site visits because they received grants from at least three of the four agencies we reviewed and were near at least one national laboratory and another research university that also met our criteria . those selected were: clemson university , columbia university , duke university , stanford university , state university of new york at stony brook , university of california , berkeley , and university of south carolina . brookhaven national laboratory , environmental measurements laboratory , lawrence berkeley national laboratory , lawrence livermore national laboratory , savannah river ecology laboratory , and savannah river national laboratory .