irs is continuing this test . irs uses central withholding agreements to minimize tax compliance risk for athletes and entertainers , who often are high earners relative to other nonresident aliens . as shown in table 4 , the number of agreements and amounts withheld has increased over the past 3 fiscal years , although the average amounts withheld have fluctuated . the number of sailing permits filed annually has decreased substantially over past decades . as we reported in 1988 , the number of form 1040-c sailing permits filed dropped from about 176,000 in calendar year 1960 to 1,245 in fiscal year 1986 . lmsb international is continuing these examinations . building face - to - face examination cases for nonresidents is resource intensive . for example , preparing for and conducting the examinations of employees of foreign embassies and consulates and international organizations took up nearly all of lmsb international's resources that were dedicated to nonresident alien enforcement . lmsb international used state department visa information to identify the nonresidents it contacted and examined . however , it is difficult and time consuming for irs to use visa information to identify corresponding tax returns because visas do not include ssns or itins , which are the unique identifiers included on tax returns that irs uses to build examination cases . lmsb international is planning on using examiners it expects to hire in fiscal year 2010 to conduct additional enforcement actions against nonresidents that would be less time consuming and complex than face - to - face examinations . for example , irs may examine potentially noncompliant nonresidents through correspondence , according to an lmsb international official . likewise , through its automated underreporter program ( aur ) , irs has begun to match information taxpayers report on forms 1040nr to information third parties report to irs to identify nonresident alien taxpayers who may have underreported their income . irs previously concluded , through a test , that matching income items from form 1040nr , such as wages , was not a prudent use of resources . irs found that many of the tax returns it studied claimed tax treaty benefits , which can be time consuming to verify and can require expertise to evaluate that irs aur staff generally did not possess . however , given that lmsb international is planning to hire additional staff , it may be able to examine nonresident alien taxpayers whom it identifies as potentially noncompliant through aur , according to the official . irs has a broad program to identify taxpayers who failed to file a required tax return , including those who should have filed form 1040nr . the program only identifies whether individuals may have failed to file a tax return and cannot easily identify which form they should have filed ( i.e. , form 1040 versus form 1040nr ) . irs may be able to identify during an examination that a nonfiler should have filed form 1040nr . irs does not have a program to automatically identify taxpayers who may have improperly filed form 1040 instead of form 1040nr . according to an lmsb international official familiar with examinations of nonresidents , irs has found that some nonresidents improperly file form 1040 instead of form 1040nr .