vol . theory , measurement , and analysis . washington , d.c.: the aspen institute , 1998 . glazerman , steven , dan m. levy , and david myers . “nonexperimental versus experimental estimates of earnings impacts.” the annals of the american academy of political and social science 589 ( 2003 ) : 63 – 93 . what types of interventions do randomized controlled experiments appear to be best suited to assessing effectiveness ? for intervention types for which randomized controlled experiments appear not to be well suited , what alternative forms of evaluation are used to successfully assess effectiveness ? to assess the coalition's top tier initiative , we reviewed documents , conducted interviews , and observed the deliberations of its advisory panel , who determined which interventions met the “top tier” evidence standard — well - designed , randomized controlled trials showing sizable , sustained benefits to program participants or society . we evaluated the transparency of the initiative's process against its own publicly stated procedures and criteria , including the top tier evidence standard . to assess the validity of the coalition's approach , we compared its procedures and criteria to those recommended in program evaluation textbooks and related publications , as well as to the processes actually used by six federally supported initiatives with a similar purpose to the coalition . through interviews and database searches , we identified six initiatives supported by the u.s. department of education , department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and department of justice that also conduct systematic reviews of evaluation evidence to identify effective interventions . we ascertained the procedures and criteria these federally supported efforts used from interviews and document reviews . we identified the types of interventions for which randomized controlled experiments — the coalition's primary evidence criterion — are best suited and alternative methods for assessing effectiveness by reviewing the program evaluation methodology literature and by having our summaries of that literature reviewed by a diverse set of experts in the field . we obtained reviews from seven experts who had published on evaluation methodology , held leadership positions in the field , and had experience in diverse subject areas and methodologies . we conducted this performance audit from may 2008 through november 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . over the past two decades , several efforts have been launched to improve federal government accountability and results , such as the strategic plans and annual performance reports required under the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) . the act was designed to provide executive and congressional decision makers with objective information on the relative effectiveness and efficiency of federal programs and spending . in 2002 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) introduced the program assessment rating tool ( part ) as a key element of the budget and performance integration initiative under president george w. bush's governmentwide management agenda .