we considered all other settings to be rural . we identified providers' specialties on the basis of the specialties listed on the claims . these specialty codes include physician specialties , such as cardiology and hematology / oncology , and nonphysician provider types , such as nurse practitioners and physician assistants . we also examined the extent to which the characteristics of the patient populations served by self - referring and non - self - referring providers differed . we used cms's risk score file to identify average risk score , which serves as a proxy for beneficiary health status . information on additional patient characteristics , such as age and sex , came from the medicare part b carrier file claims . to calculate the percentage of advanced imaging services referred by self - referring providers that were referred , performed , and interpreted by the same provider , we summed global advanced imaging claims where the referring and performing provider were the same and claims where the tc and pc were referred and performed separately for the same beneficiary by the same provider . we then divided the total by the number mri and ct services referred by self - referring providers . we used 4 years of experience ( 2007 through 2010 ) to categorize providers even though we compared referrals in 2008 to 2010 because we wanted to ensure that providers that began self - referring in 2009 did not self - refer for at least the 2 prior years . year before the switchers began self - referring ) to 2010 ( i.e. , the year after they began self - referring ) . we compared the change in the number of referrals made by these providers to the change in the number of referrals made over the same time period by providers who did not change whether or not they self - referred advanced imaging services . specifically , we compared the change in the number of referrals made by switchers to those made by ( 1 ) self - referring providers — providers that self - referred in years 2007 through 2010 , and ( 2 ) non - self - referring providers — providers that did not self - refer in years 2007 through 2010 . for each provider , we also identified the most common tin to which they referred mri or ct services . if the tin was the same for all 4 years , we assumed that they remained part of the same practice for all 4 years . we calculated the number of referrals in 2008 and 2010 separately for providers that met this criterion . to determine the implications of self - referral for medicare spending on advanced imaging services , we summed the number of and expenditures for all mri and ct services performed in 2010 by providers of those specialties with at least 1,000 self - referring providers . we then created an alternative scenario in which self - referring providers referred the same number of services as non - self - referring providers of the same provider size and specialty and calculated how this affected expenditures . typically , the medicare payment for the tc is substantially higher than the payment for the pc .