these are positive steps . it is important for dol to follow through with its plans to complete revisions to its userra operations manual , which according to dol officials is expected in january 2008 , to ensure that clear and uniform guidance is available to all involved in processing userra claims . our review of data from vets's database showed that from the start of the demonstration project on february 8 , 2005 , through september 30 , 2006 , vets investigated a total of 166 unique claims . we reviewed a random sample of case files to assess the reliability of vets's data and found that the closed dates in vets's database were not sufficiently reliable . therefore , we could not use the dates for the time vets spent on investigations in the database to accurately determine dol's average processing time . instead , we used the correct closed dates from the case files in our random sample and statistically estimated the average processing time for vets's investigations from the start of the demonstration project through july 21 , 2006 — the period of our sample . based on the random sample , there is at least a 95 percent chance that vets's average processing time for investigations ranged from 53 to 86 days . during the same period , osc received 269 claims and took an average of 115 days to process these claims . we found the closed dates in osc's case tracking system to be sufficiently reliable . in his july 2007 memo discussed above , the assistant secretary for veteran's employment and training also instructed regional administrators , senior investigators , and directors that investigators are to ensure that the closed date of each userra case entered in vets's database matches the date on the closing letter sent to the claimant . we found data limitations at both agencies that affected our ability to determine outcomes of the demonstration project and could adversely affect congress's ability to assess how well federal userra claims are processed and whether changes are needed . at vets , we found an overstatement in the number of claims and unreliable data in the vets's database . from february 8 , 2005 , through september 30 , 2006 , vets received a total of 166 unique claims , although 202 claims were recorded as opened in vets's database . duplicate , reopened , and transferred claims accounted for most of this difference . also , in our review of a random sample of case files , we found the dates recorded for case closure in vets's database did not reflect the dates on the closure letters in 22 of 52 claims reviewed , so using the correct dates from the sample , we statistically estimated average processing time , and the closed code , which vets uses to describe the outcomes of userra claims ( i.e. , claim granted , claim settled , no merit , withdrawn ) was not sufficiently reliable for reporting specific outcomes of claims .