ii ) . however , the expenses related to a category would be similar to the types of expenses funded under several appropriation accounts . for example , dod may incur operation and maintenance , and procurement expenses under the categories of improved command and control and enhanced force protection . because the 10 funding categories established by omb and dod did not correlate with dod's existing appropriation account structure , a dual system of accounting emerged , which some believed to be cumbersome for tracking purposes . therefore , for subsequent appropriations — a second supplemental appropriation in fiscal years 2002 and dod's regular appropriation in fiscal year 2003 — congress changed its method of providing funds . however , these line items were broad in nature and dod did not identify the specific types of expenses that could be funded within each line item . in addition , omb , among other things , directed that any requirement to be funded must reflect an urgent and known need . however , dod did not establish any specific parameters to define the meaning of urgent and known . also , in the event that funds in the defense emergency response fund would be needed to meet the requirements of contingency operations , dod stipulated that funds would be used to cover the incremental costs of contingency operations . dod directed components to use its existing financial management regulation in reporting incremental costs , but it did not offer any further guidance as to how commands were to distinguish incremental from baseline costs . in may 2002 , we reported that dod's financial management regulation did not provide sufficient information on what types of costs met dod's definition of incremental costs , which resulted in various interpretations among the services — and even among units within a service — as to appropriate and proper expenditures . as a result , we recommended that dod expand its financial management regulation to include more comprehensive guidance governing the use of contingency funds . dod agreed with our recommendation and , as of april 2003 , is still working on revisions to its guidance . because dod is in the process of improving its guidance based on recommendations from our prior work , we are not making a new recommendation in this report . in the absence of detailed guidance , command officials often had to use their best judgment in deciding how to spend the defense emergency response funds , and we found the same type of uncertainty among commands as we reported in may 2002 . for example , command officials told us that determining what could be purchased from each category and line item was often difficult because the categories and line items were broad and generally differed from dod's regular appropriation accounts . for example , dod designated mobilization of guard and reserves as an allowable line item for the category of increased worldwide posture . mobilization involves many factors , such as special pay , transportation , and equipment , but dod did not specify which could be appropriately funded . we also found differing interpretations existed as to whether requirements were urgent or known .