poor workmanship . for example , poor soldering workmanship caused a power distribution unit to experience problems during vehicle - level testing on mda's targets and countermeasures program . according to mda officials , all units of the same design by the same manufacturer had to be x - ray inspected and reworked , involving extensive hardware disassembly . as a corrective action , soldering technicians were provided with training to improve their soldering operations and ability to perform better visual inspections after soldering . the use of undocumented and untested manufacturing processes . gao - 11-404 . manufacturing materials , a portion of the material was not returned and was inadvertently used to fabricate manifolds for two complete ce - ii ground - based interceptors . the vehicles had already been processed and delivered to the prime contractor for integration when the problem was discovered . prime contractor's failure to ensure that its subcontractors and suppliers met program requirements . the gmd program experienced a failure with an electronics part purchased from an unauthorized supplier . according to program officials , the prime contractor required subcontractors to only purchase parts from authorized suppliers ; however , the subcontractor failed to execute the requirement and the prime contractor did not verify compliance . at the time of our june 2011 report , mda had instituted policies to prevent and detect parts quality problems . the programs reviewed in the report — gmd , aegis bmd , space tracking and surveillance system , and targets and countermeasures — were initiated before these recent policies aimed at preventing and detecting parts quality problems took full effect . in addition to new policies focused on quality , mda has developed a supplier road map database in an effort to gain greater visibility into the supply chain to more effectively manage supply chain risks . in addition , according to mda officials , mda has recently been auditing parts distributors in order to rank them for risk in terms of counterfeit parts . mda also participates in a variety of collaborative initiatives to address quality , in particular , parts quality . these range from informal groups focused on identifying and sharing news about emerging problems as quickly as possible , to partnerships that conduct supplier assessments , to formal groups focused on identifying ways industry and the government can work together to prevent and mitigate problems . moreover , since our report , mda has added a new clause in one of its gmd contracts to provide contractor accountability for quality . we have not yet fully assessed the clause but it may allow the contracting officer to make an equitable reduction of performance incentive fee on two contract line items for certain types of quality problems . this new clause shows some leadership by mda to hold contractors accountable for parts quality . but , we do not yet know what the impact of this clause will be on improving mda's problems with parts quality . our june 2011 report recommended greater coordination between government organizations responsible for major space and missile defense programs on parts quality issues and periodic reporting to congress .