combat operations . battlefield commanders rank the need for isr systems and the information battlefield commanders rank the need for isr systems and the information they produce as high on their priority lists , a fact that is reflected in dod's they produce as high on their priority lists , a fact that is reflected in dod's planned investment in isr . the demand for isr assets at every level of planned investment in isr . the demand for isr assets at every level of command is growing , and dod is making investments in a number of isr command is growing , and dod is making investments in a number of isr systems , including unmanned aircraft systems , manned platforms , and systems , including unmanned aircraft systems , manned platforms , and space - borne , maritime , and terrestrial systems . specifically , for uas , space - borne , maritime , and terrestrial systems . specifically , for uas , funding has increased from $363 million in fiscal year 2001 to $2.23 billion in fiscal year 2007 , and dod has requested $2.54 billion for fiscal year 2008 . as of february 2007 , dod had more than 3,900 unmanned aircraft in its inventory compared to fewer than 50 in 2000 . the majority of these aircraft are currently being used in support of ongoing operations in iraq and afghanistan . in december 2005 , we reported that while commanders are experiencing mission success with uas in ongoing operations , they face challenges in fully optimizing the use of these assets , due in part to the growing number of uas . specifically , we reported that dod had achieved operational successes with uas , but challenges such as interoperability and limited communications bandwidth were hampering joint operations or preventing timely uas deployment . additionally , in april 2006 , we testified that while dod continues to request funds to support service plans for acquiring uas , it lacks a viable strategic plan to guide uas development and investment decisions . you asked us to review dod's efforts to integrate uas into ongoing combat operations while optimizing the capabilities offered by all dod isr assets . specifically , we assessed the extent to which ( 1 ) dod has taken steps to facilitate the integration of uas into combat operations ; and ( 2 ) dod's approach to allocating and tasking its isr assets considers all available isr capabilities , including those provided by uas . we are also providing information on the extent to which dod evaluates the performance of its isr assets , including uas , in meeting the warfighters' needs . to address our objectives , we reviewed dod and military service publications and documentation pertaining to isr , including those specific to uas such as joint publications , concepts of operations , manuals on tactics and procedures , and the 2005 – 2030 uas roadmap .