the passenger may then continue through the security process . individuals matched to the no fly list are to be denied boarding . if the individual is matched to the selectee list , the person is to be subject to further screening , which could include physical screening , such as a pat - down . the criteria in general that are used to place someone on either of these two lists include the following: persons who are deemed to be a threat to civil aviation or national security and should be precluded from boarding an aircraft are put on the no fly list . persons who are deemed to be a threat to civil aviation or national security but do not meet the criteria of the no fly list are placed on the selectee list and are to receive additional security screening prior to being permitted to board an aircraft . the white house homeland security council devised these more stringent sets of criteria for the no fly and selectee lists in part because these lists are not intended as investigative or information - gathering tools or tracking mechanisms , and tsa is a screening but not an intelligence agency . rather , the lists are intended to help ensure the safe transport of passengers and facilitate the flow of commerce . however , the white house's review of the december 25 attempted terrorist attack raised questions about the effectiveness of the criteria , and the president tasked the fbi and tsc with developing recommendations for any needed changes to the nominations guidance and criteria . weighing and responding to the potential impacts that changes to the nominations guidance and criteria could have on the traveling public and the airlines will be important considerations in developing such recommendations . in september 2006 , we reported that tens of thousands of individuals who had similar names to persons on the watchlist were being misidentified and subjected to additional screening , and in some cases delayed so long as to miss their flights . we also reported that resolving these misidentifications can take time and , therefore , affect air carriers and commerce . if changes in criteria result in more individuals being added to the lists , this could also increase the number of individuals who are misidentified , exacerbating these negative effects . in addition , we explained that individuals who believe that they have been inappropriately matched to the watchlist can petition the government for action and the relevant agencies must conduct research and work to resolve these issues . if more people are misidentified , more people may trigger this redress process , increasing the need for resources . finally , any changes to the criteria or process would have to ensure that watchlist records are used in a manner that safeguards legal rights , including freedoms , civil liberties , and information privacy guaranteed by federal law . in reacting to the december 25 attempted terrorist attack , determining whether there were potential vulnerabilities related to the use of watchlist records when screening — not only individuals who fly into the country but also , for example , those who cross land borders — are important considerations .