these individuals also traveled often . as shown by bank of america data , personnel e - 4 to e - 6 accounted for 36 percent of the total navy outstanding balance , which was higher than the outstanding balance of all other military and civilian personnel . this combination of high outstanding balance and high delinquency rate largely explained the high navy delinquency rate . as shown in figure 4 , charged - off amounts for military personnel grades e - 1 to e - 6 during fiscal year 2001 totaled more than $3.6 million . table 8 shows the results of our statistical samples . appendix ii includes the specific criteria we used to assess the effectiveness of these controls . timely approval of the travel orders is the first step in ensuring that travel is authorized . at one of the three installations we audited , patuxent river , the controls over travel order approval were partially effective . in contrast , puget sound naval shipyard , which had a failure rate of 49 percent , had ineffective controls over travel order approval . at puget sound , the high failure rate was primarily attributable to travel personnel not consistently ensuring that all copies of the six - part travel orders used in fiscal year 2001 were signed before sending the originals to the travelers . consequently , this unit was unable to provide us with signed copies of the travel orders . puget sound naval shipyard management informed us that it had recently instituted procedures that require signed copies of travel orders be maintained by the unit . once travel is completed , the traveler is required to submit a voucher for all reimbursable expenses and must include receipts for certain claimed amounts . the voucher review process is intended to ensure that only authorized , properly supported travel charges are reimbursed and that the amounts are accurately calculated . all three case study sites we audited had ineffective controls to ensure that travel orders were properly reviewed for accuracy and support . the estimated failure rates during fiscal year 2001 for the three case study sites ranged from 33 to 40 percent . travel voucher errors resulted in both over - and underpayments to the traveler and created an additional administrative burden for the navy , which had to take additional actions to recover overpayments or make payments on previous underpayments . at one case study site we audited , a communication breakdown had occurred between the office that helped travelers prepare vouchers and the office that entered voucher data into the automated system used to record relevant travel voucher data so that payment could be made by dfas . at this site , each office thought that the other was responsible for reviewing the vouchers for accuracy . as a result , the vouchers were not consistently reviewed to ensure that they were filed in accordance with travel regulations . in addition , we found that the voucher auditing process was not effective , resulting in payment errors that should have been detected . in our samples , we found that most errors were in the following categories .