we incorporated their perspectives as appropriate . the full text of the ondcp deputy director for state and local affairs' letter , and the department of justice's associate deputy attorney general's memo are presented in appendix iii and iv , respectively . we will provide copies of this report to appropriate departments and other interested congressional committees . in addition , we will send copies to the attorney general of the united states and the director of the office of national drug control policy . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix v. if you or your staffs have any questions concerning this report , contact me on ( 202 ) 512-8777 . during fiscal year 2003 , a total of 744 cpot investigations were conducted by ocdetf member law enforcement agencies . the majority of those investigations ( 497 , or 67 percent ) were multi - agency ocdetf investigations , involving participation from dea , fbi , ice , irs and other member agencies , while the remaining were conducted individually by dea ( 191 , or 26 percent ) or fbi ( 56 , or 8 percent ) . for fiscal year 2004 , the majority of cpot investigations continued to be multi - agency ocdetf investigations . for the first 7 months of fiscal year 2004 , 72 percent ( 548 of 761 ) of cpot investigations conducted by member law enforcement agencies were designated as ocdetf investigations . ocdetf officials attributed fiscal year 2004 increases in cpot investigations over fiscal year 2003 to ocdetf's emphasis on identifying links between targeted domestic organizations and the cpot list . as previously mentioned , ocdetf is composed of member agencies that worked together on the 497 cpot investigations in fiscal year 2003 . member agencies either led investigations or supported other ocdetf member agencies in these investigations . the bar chart in figure 3 shows the number of drug investigations in which each ocdetf member agency participated . for example , dea participated in 402 cpot investigations , the highest level of participation by any member agency . fbi participated in 320 investigations , many of which it conducted jointly with dea along with other member agencies . dea and fbi are the only ocdetf member agencies that conducted separate cpot investigations . generally , these investigations were handled outside of ocdetf because they did not yet satisfy the criteria for ocdetf designation — that is , they were investigations conducted exclusively by foreign offices or investigations that had not yet developed to a sufficient level to be designated as ocdetf cases . for the first 7 months of fiscal year 2004 , data showed that dea separately conducted 23 percent ( 172 of 761 ) and fbi separately conducted 5 percent ( 41 of 761 ) of investigations linked to cpots in addition to their participation in ocdetf investigations . these two agencies conducted their cpot investigations out of their own agency's direct appropriations . these cpot investigations can subsequently become eligible for ocdetf funding when ocdetf's criteria are met .