dod concurred with all of these recommendations . i will focus my remarks today on dodig's progress in ( 1 ) taking actions to track and report on the timeliness of military whistleblower reprisal investigations and ( 2 ) strengthening its oversight of the military services' military whistleblower reprisal investigations . my testimony is based primarily on the reports that we issued on military whistleblower reprisal investigations in may 2015 and february 2012 . for those reports , we examined laws , regulations , and dod guidance ; conducted detailed file reviews using representative samples of cases closed in fiscal year 2013 and between january 1 , 2009 and march 31 , 2011 ; analyzed dodig and military service ig data for cases closed in fiscal years 2013 and 2014 ; and interviewed officials from dodig and the military service igs , among other things . additional details on our scope and methodology can be found in the two issued reports . for this testimony , we also followed up with dodig officials to determine what actions they had taken through august 2016 in response to our 18 recommendations . the work on which this testimony is based was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . dodig has taken a number of actions to improve its tracking of the timeliness of military whistleblower reprisal investigations , including developing an automated tool to address statutory notification requirements . we noted that dod could do so , for example , through its semiannual reports to congress . dod concurred with that recommendation and has since included examples in its semiannual reports to congress of corrective actions taken by the military services for substantiated cases but not a comprehensive list of all corrective actions taken . however , in following up on actions that dodig has taken regarding this recommendation in august 2016 , dodig officials stated that the corrective actions listed in its semiannual reports to congress included all corrective actions taken during the 6 month reporting period , but that the reports incorrectly identified these actions as examples . dodig provided us corrective action information to compare with the corrective actions reported in dodig's december 2015 and march 2016 semiannual reports to congress for those reporting periods . we identified some key differences . specifically , we identified corrective actions in the information provided to us by dodig that were not published in the december and march reports to congress and identified discrepancies in the types of corrective action contained in the reports and in the information that dodig provided . this tool is to help provide assurance that servicemembers are being notified of the status of their reprisal investigations .