software . in december 2007 , mda's director approved a new block construct that will be the basis for all future development and fielding , which i will discuss in more detail shortly . to assess progress during block 2006 , we examined the accomplishments of nine bmds elements that mda is developing and fielding . our work included examining documents such as program execution reviews , test plans and reports , production plans , and contract performance reports . we also interviewed officials within each element program office and within mda functional directorates . in addition , we discussed each element's test program and its results with dod's office of the director , operational test and evaluation . regarding transparency , accountability , and oversight , we held discussions with officials in mda's directorate of business operations to determine whether its new block structure improved accountability and transparency of the bmds . in addition , we reviewed pertinent sections of the u.s. code to compare mda's current level of accountability with federal acquisition laws . we also interviewed officials from the office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics and dod's joint staff to discuss the oversight role of the new missile defense executive board ( mdeb ) . additionally , we reviewed the mdeb charter to identify the oversight responsibility of the board . mda made progress in developing and fielding the bmds during 2007 . additional assets were fielded and / or upgraded , several tests met planned objectives , and other development activities were conducted . on the other hand , fewer assets were fielded than originally planned , some tests were delayed , and the cost of the block increased by approximately $1 billion . to stay within the revised budget despite increasing contractor costs , mda deferred some budgeted work to future blocks . such deferrals , coupled with a planning methodology too often used by some contractors that could obscure cost reporting , prevent us from determining the full cost of block 2006 . mda was able to meet most test objectives despite delays in several elements' test schedules . neither we nor dod could evaluate the aggregate performance of fielded assets because flight testing to date has not generated sufficient data . an evaluation of aggregate performance would also have to consider that ( 1 ) some parts in fielded interceptors identified as potentially problematic have not been replaced yet , and ( 2 ) tests done to date do not provide enough information for dod's independent test organization to fully determine if the bmds is suitable and effective for battle . during block 2006 , mda increased its inventory of bmds assets while enhancing the system's performance . it fielded 14 additional ground - based interceptors , 12 aegis bmd missiles designed to engage more advanced threats , 4 new aegis bmd destroyers , 1 new aegis bmd cruiser , and 8 web browsers and 1 software suite for c2bmc . in addition , mda upgraded half of its aegis bmd ship fleet , successfully conducted four aegis bmd and two gmd intercept tests , and completed a number of ground tests to demonstrate the capability of bmds components .