however , borrowers may rehabilitate a loan only once . education has additional tools to collect on defaulted loans when borrowers do not make voluntary repayment arrangements . for example , the treasury offset program allows the federal government to collect on defaulted student loans by withholding money from certain federal or state payments to borrowers , including federal or state income tax refunds and social security benefits . through wage garnishment , education is generally able to collect up to 15 percent of a borrower's disposable pay and apply those funds toward the defaulted loan . before using wage garnishment , education must notify the borrower and provide him or her with the opportunity to have a hearing to object to the garnishment by showing , for example , that it would cause a financial hardship . payments made through involuntary collections do not count toward payments borrowers must make to rehabilitate their loans . also , there is no limit on how long the government can attempt to collect on defaulted student loans and , unlike other types of consumer debt , student loans cannot be eliminated during bankruptcy proceedings unless the court finds that repayment would constitute an undue hardship on the borrower and the borrower's dependents . in 2003 , education entered into a 5-year , performance - based contract known as common services for borrowers ( csb ) to improve the management of student loans following disbursement , including loan servicing , which includes tracking loans and accepting payments from borrowers . the csb contractor was the sole loan servicer for the department's direct loan program and was also expected to modernize and integrate four separate information systems for loan servicing , consolidation , disability discharge requests , and debt collection . the base contract had an estimated cost of over $1 billion and allowed the government to extend the contract up to 5 more years , increasing the potential cost to about $2 billion . after the csb contract was awarded in 2003 , we reported that education had not yet fully determined how the department would integrate the four information systems . in response , education officials said they would rely on the contractor to develop these solutions . however , the department's csb contractor experienced significant software development delays and did not identify and resolve problems in a timely manner . as a result , in fiscal year 2005 the department issued a cure notice , which informs the contractor that the government considers the contractor's failure to make progress as endangering performance of the contract or the contractor has failed to perform contractual provisions other than delivery of supplies or performance of services . education updated its contract monitoring plan in 2011 , about a year after the upgrade work began and performance problems , such as missed deadlines , had occurred . for example , the system development work the contractor was scheduled to complete in december 2010 was not finished until february 2011 , and the system was launched 3 months later than scheduled . education reported increasing its oversight during this time period , for example , by getting more frequent updates from the contractor .