plan management . this module interacts primarily with state agencies and health plan issuers . the module is intended to provide a suite of services for activities such as submitting , monitoring , and renewing qualified health plans . financial management . this module facilitates payments to issuers , including premiums and cost - sharing reductions , and collects data from state - based marketplaces . other ffm functions include services related to system oversight , communication and outreach strategies , and customer service . the data hub routes and verifies information among the ffm and external data sources , including other federal and state sources of information and issuers.security number with the social security administration and connects to the department of homeland security to assess the applicant's citizenship or immigration status . for example , the data hub confirms an applicant's social the data hub's connection with other federal and state databases enables exchanges to determine whether an applicant is eligible for or enrolled in some other type of health coverage , such as the department of defense's ( dod ) tricare program or medicaid — and therefore ineligible for subsidies to offset the cost of marketplace plans . hub also communicates with issuers by providing enrollment information and receiving enrollment confirmation in return . see figure 2 for an overview of healthcare.gov and selected supporting systems . these subsidies include premium tax credits to offset qualified health plan premium costs and cost - sharing reductions to reduce policyholders' out - of - pocket payments , including deductibles and co - payments , for covered services . while cms was tasked with oversight of marketplace establishment , several other federal agencies also have implementation responsibilities . three agencies — cms , the internal revenue service ( irs ) , and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) — reported almost all of the it - related obligations supporting the implementation of the healthcare.gov and its supporting systems . it - related obligations include funds committed for the development or purchase of hardware , software , and system integration services , among other activities . these obligations totaled approximately $946 million from fiscal year 2010 through march 2014 , with cms obligating the majority of this total . as of march 2014 , cms reported obligating $840 million for the development of healthcare.gov and its supporting systems , over 88 percent of the federal total . according to agency data , these obligations were spread across 62 contracts and task orders . we focused our review on two cms task orders issued under an existing 2007 contract . the task orders were for the development of two core healthcare.gov systems — the ffm and the data hub . we also reviewed a letter contract awarded by cms in january 2014 to continue ffm development . the two task orders and the additional contract account for $369 million , or more than 40 percent , of the total cms reported obligations as of march 2014 . the contract and task orders we examined are subject to the federal acquisition regulation system , which provides uniform policies and procedures for acquisition by all executive agencies . the system includes the hhs acquisition regulation , which implements or supplements the far .