hanford site . the 1993 federal facility agreement for the savannah river site and the savannah river site treatment plan of 1995 between doe and the south carolina department of health and environmental control focus on completing doe's closure of tanks that store liquid waste and solidifying its high - level waste for safer storage . west valley site . the west valley demonstration project act , enacted in 1980 , directs the secretary of energy to enter into a cooperative agreement with new york and to carry out a radioactive waste management demonstration project at the western new york service center in west valley , new york . the project includes solidifying high - level waste , developing waste containers suitable for permanent disposal , and transporting the solidified waste to an appropriate federal repository for permanent disposal . a termination of the yucca mountain repository may prevent doe and the navy from meeting agreements with colorado and idaho that establish milestones for shipping the spent nuclear fuel out the states . as shown in table 1 , the other agreements do not set dates for removing spent nuclear fuel from doe sites . em estimates that it could need an additional $918 million ( 2010 dollars ) to extend storage if the opening of a permanent repository were delayed from 2020 to 2040 . about two - thirds of these costs would fall into the category of annual and recurring storage costs . for example , costs for storing spent nuclear fuel at the hanford site were estimated at $6 million per year for an additional 20 years . the remaining one - third of the projected additional costs fall into the category of increased storage capacity beyond what would be needed if the yucca mountain repository had opened in 2020 . em's estimate did not include any costs in the category of replacing storage facilities and containers because it assumed a delay of 20 years would not necessitate the replacement of any existing storage buildings or containers . if storage were extended well into the future , however , some buildings would need to be replaced . for instance , savannah river site officials said the high - level waste canister storage buildings at the site have a design life of 50 years , but are expected to have a usable life of 100 years if properly maintained . according to the officials , if storage needs to be extended beyond the storage buildings' usable life , these buildings would have to be replaced at an estimated cost of about $75 million each , the cost when the last one was built in 2005 . doe may also have to replace or reinforce waste containers . specifically , spent nuclear fuel canisters might need to be either repackaged or left in the original canister but then placed into a larger one , called a canister overpack .