, getting lost ) . information determined to be sensitive has been removed from this report . to determine the actions taken by the federal government to assess and communicate threats and vulnerabilities associated with general aviation , we reviewed federal agency reports and studies sponsored by industry associations , and interviewed federal officials and general aviation industry representatives , including those who provided input to tsa's aviation security advisory committee working group on general aviation . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of the department of homeland security , the secretary of the department of transportation , the assistant secretary of homeland security for the transportation security administration , and the administrator of the federal aviation administration and interested congressional committees . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . ( 3 ) what steps have non - federal stakeholders taken to enhance the security of general aviation ? we sought to determine the reliability of these data by , among other things , discussing methods of inputting and maintaining data with agency officials . due to tsa's concerns that the public release of our detailed findings could compromise aviation security , we issued a separate restricted report to you detailing the results of our review . individuals from these offices provided documentation on tsa's threat assessment efforts as well as its past vulnerability assessment activities and future vulnerability assessment plans . we sought to determine the reliability of these data by , among other things , discussing methods of inputting and maintaining data with faa officials . we spoke to tsa officials about , and examined related documentation on , security guidelines published by tsa , including documentation on tsa's activities with the aviation security advisory committee's working group on general aviation airports security . we interviewed general aviation industry representatives , including those who provided input to the tsa - sponsored aviation security advisory committee's working group on general aviation airports security , to obtain their views on federal efforts to enhance general aviation security . we also interviewed individuals from tsa's office of compliance on the promulgation of regulations as a result of the passage of the aviation and transportation security act , as well as tsa's plans for ensuring operator compliance with these regulations . we interviewed personnel from faa's special operations division regarding faa's issuance of temporary flight restrictions , including the criteria and internal controls faa uses to examine requests for these restrictions from federal and nonfederal entities . as part of this analysis , we took steps to verify the reliability of data from faa on the number of violations of temporary flight restrictions . in addition , intelligence information may be classified or sensitive , thus limiting with whom it can be shared . tsa partners with industry associations that are part of a general aviation coalition as a primary means for communicating threat information and developing security guidelines for general aviation airport managers . specifically , rather than notifying general aviation airport operators directly , tsa communicates threat advisories to these industry associations , which in turn are to provide it to their members .