earnings . atus provides current information on respondent's usual weekly earnings at their main job . because we did not have current information on earnings from all jobs , for this analysis only , we restricted the sample to those respondents who have a single job . because we did not have current information on self - employment income , we restricted our analysis of earnings to those respondents who are wage and salary workers . in our report , we present data on the unadjusted demographic and economic characteristics of caregivers and the general population . we present the unadjusted characteristics so that readers can view the actual demographic profile of caregivers . however , we also conducted logistic regression analyses that predict the likelihood of caregiving as a function of various demographic and economic characteristics and found that most characteristics are qualitatively similar in the multivariate and univariate context . our independent variables for this multivariate analysis were age , education , gender , marital status , race , ethnicity , and labor force status — employed , unemployed , or not in the labor force . where indicated , as mentioned above , we included a categorical variable for whether the respondent's parent lives in the respondent's household . where indicated , we included quartiles of usual weekly earnings ; in logistic regressions that included weekly earnings as an independent variable , the analyses were restricted to wage and salary workers with a single job . see appendix iii for more detail about these logistic regression analyses . to analyze the impact of caregiving on retirement assets and income , we compared the assets and retirement income of caregivers and non - caregivers . we conducted separate analyses for each type of care , as described below . to determine the effect of spousal caregiving on retirement security , we took two approaches: 1 . we conducted descriptive analyses to examine differences between spousal caregivers and non - caregivers in terms of assets at or near retirement and social security income during retirement . we also examined differences between spousal caregivers and non - caregivers in terms of work , education , and health status of both the person providing and the person receiving care . we conducted regression analyses to examine whether observed differences in assets and social security income were still statistically significant when we controlled for these differences in the spousal caregiving and non - caregiving populations . in order to construct our analysis sample of spousal caregivers , we took the following steps . first , we identified married individuals at ages 65 or 66 . we chose these ages because they are at or near the full retirement age at which individuals can receive unreduced social security benefits . we then identified the respondents that provided spousal care in the current wave or in the prior two waves of data , a 6-year period of time . to determine whether someone provided spousal care , the hrs asks the respondent whether they received help with activities of daily living ( adls ) or with instrumental activities of daily living ( iadls ) and who helped with these activities .