open . as treasury is designing its new financial statement compilation process to begin with the fiscal year 2004 cfs , the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to develop reconciliation procedures that will aid in understanding and controlling the net position balance as well as eliminate the plugs previously associated with compiling the cfs . this is a long - standing problem that treasury will continue analyzing . however , treasury designed a process to eliminate intragovernmental activity and balances using formal balanced accounting entries and developed a model to provide an analysis of the unreconciled transactions that affect net position ( plug ) for fiscal year 2004 . treasury will further analyze the results of the 2004 process and continue to work on this issue in 2005 by starting to establish the reciprocal category for the general fund and analyzing the changes in net position from the beginning of the year to the end of the year to eliminate or explain the adjustments to net position . open . as treasury is designing its new financial statement compilation process to begin with the fiscal year 2004 cfs , the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to use balanced accounting entries to account for the change in net position rather than simple subtraction of liabilities from assets . sffas no . 1 defines restricted cash as restrictions usually imposed on cash deposits ( in escrow or other special accounts ) by law , regulation , or agreement . treasury did not adequately ensure that the note disclosure relating to cash and other monetary assets was presented in conformity with gaap . specifically , while agencies are required by treasury to describe in the closing package the nature of the amount reported in the line item other cash , they are not required to designate whether such cash is restricted . the director of omb should direct the controller of omb , in coordination with treasury's fiscal assistant secretary , to work with the federal agencies so that the differences between net outlays the agencies report in their statement of budgetary resources and the net outlay records treasury uses to prepare the statement of changes in cash balance are reconciled . see status of recommendation no . open . the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary to determine and address the effects that any of the differences between net outlays the agencies report in their statement of budgetary resources and treasury's net outlay records may have on the cfs . treasury will wait to see the results of the work between treasury , omb , and the agencies to address gao's recommendation for no . pending the results of that work and analysis , this step may not be necessary . open . the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary to develop a process that will allow full reporting of the changes in cash balance of the u.s. government .