iii . implemented.scoring activities from the secure flight system , tsa ensures that passenger data do not remain in the system and thus will not be subject to unauthorized use or disclosure . nevertheless , the measure does not assess other points in time in which the records could be subject to unauthorized use or disclosure , such as before the records are purged or when other government agencies request the results of secure flight screening for various purposes , such as an ongoing investigation . when the secure flight program was in development , tsa included among a list of possible measures for the fully implemented program a measure for privacy incident compliance ( i.e. , percentage of privacy incidents reported in compliance with dhs privacy incident handling guidance ) . according to tsa officials , since then , tsa has determined that such a measure is not needed because privacy incidents are tracked and publicly reported on at the department level . to what extent do tsa's performance measures appropriately assess progress toward achieving the secure flight program goals ? by purging the results of secure flight matching and secure flight's performance measures provide program managers some information on its progress with respect to its accuracy - related and privacy - related goals ( goals 1 through 4 and 6 ) , but do not measure all aspects of performance critical to achieving these goals . this report is a public version of the prior sensitive report that we provided to you . dhs and the department of justice deemed some of the information in the report as sensitive security information and law enforcement sensitive , respectively , both of which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits this sensitive information , which includes information about secure flight processes , high - risk lists used for screening , secure flight's ability to correctly identify individuals for screening , and the ability of transportation security officers ( tso ) to carry out secure flight determinations at the checkpoint . in some places throughout the report , we note that sensitive information was omitted from the text in order to explain why additional details were not provided . similarly , without a measure that reflects misidentifications to all high - risk lists , tsa cannot appropriately gauge its performance with respect to its goal of limiting such misidentifications . although the information provided in this report is more limited in scope , it addresses the same questions as the sensitive report . also , the overall methodology used for both reports is the same . to identify how the secure flight program has changed since 2009 , we analyzed tsa documentation related to new agency initiatives involving secure flight screening , including the secure flight program concept of operations , privacy notices tsa issued from 2008 ( in preparation for program implementation ) through 2013 , and tsa memorandums describing the rationale for new agency initiatives involving the secure flight system . we also submitted questions on changes to secure flight to tsa's office of chief counsel and reviewed its written responses .