virtualization . seventeen agencies provide complete information on their virtualization and 4 agencies provide partial information . for example , hud , the departments of state ( state ) and veterans affairs ( va ) , and the national science foundation ( nsf ) , all provide complete information on their virtual host count and virtual operating system count . in contrast , the departments of defense , homeland security ( dhs ) , justice , and gsa provide partial information for both of those same elements . it facilities and energy . four agencies provide complete information on their it facilities and energy , while 17 provide partial information . for example , the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) and ssa fully provide such information as total data center power capacity and average data center electricity usage . however , va fully reports on total data center power capacity , but partially on average data center electricity usage and total it data center power capacity . further , the department of labor ( labor ) partially reports on total data center it power capacity and average data center electricity usage and does not report any information on total data center power capacity . network storage . fourteen agencies provide complete information on their network storage and 7 provide partial information . for example , the departments of commerce ( commerce ) and transportation ( transportation ) , epa , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) all fully report on their total and used network storage . other agencies , such as defense , hhs , and state partially report information in each of those two categories . data center information . three agencies provide complete information on their individual data centers , while 18 provide partial information . for example , hud and ssa both fully report on data center - specific information such as data center type , gross floor area , and target date for closure . other agencies , such as energy and va fully report on gross floor area and closure information , but partially report data center costs . also , agencies such as defense and dhs report partial information in all categories . part of the reason the agencies' inventories remain incomplete stems from challenges in gathering data center power information , a key component of the it facilities and energy component , and more broadly , problems providing good quality asset inventories , as omb requires . these challenges are discussed in more detail later in this report . because the continued progress of fdcci is largely dependent on accomplishing goals built on the information provided by agency inventories , it will be important for agencies to continue to work on completing their inventories , thus providing a sound basis for their savings and utilization forecasts . in addition to the agencies' inventories , we previously recommended and omb required agencies to update their consolidation plans to address any missing elements .