( fig . 7 compares the threshold for review of incidents in each system. ) officials stated that rap is more robust than the previous system because it is able to take numerous factors into account when determining event severity , as well as overall risk to air traffic safety . in addition , the rap will assess risk for loss events that were not assigned a severity category under the old system . as a result , they said the agency will be better equipped to identify systemic issues in air traffic safety and to issue related corrective action requests . ( 2 ) what are the trends in terminal area safety and the factors contributing to these trends ? and ( 3 ) what additional actions could faa take to improve terminal area safety ? to answer these questions we reviewed our prior work and other reports and literature on safety in the terminal area and analyzed faa , national transportation safety board ( ntsb ) , and occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) data on surface and airborne incidents in the terminal area . in order to ensure that faa data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes , we reviewed agency documentation and interviewed agency officials . we also obtained information about data from osha and ntsb to assure data reliability . we interviewed faa officials , as well as industry experts and representatives from key industry associations . in addition , in order to obtain background information on safety in the terminal area , we interviewed facility managers and airport officials and observed facility operations and the application of key technologies at four air traffic control facilities and one airport , which were located near gao offices . ( see app . i for more information on our objectives , scope , and methodology. ) we conducted this performance audit from february 2011 to october 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the terminal area is the area around an airport extending from the airfield or surface to about 10,000 feet vertically and out to about 40 miles in any direction . the terminal area includes airport surface areas such as runways , taxiways , and ramps , as well as the airspace covered by air traffic control towers — typically within 5 miles of a towered airport — and by terminal radar approach control ( tracon ) facilities , which typically handle air traffic to within about 40 miles of an airport ( see fig . terminal area safety incidents can occur on the surface at airports or in the airspace around them . surface incidents may threaten the safety of aircraft , passengers , and airport workers , among others . terminal area safety incidents that happen on runways and taxiways include incursions and excursions .