vamcs . the program is administered at the local level at 140 vamcs . each vamc has staff that are assigned to the program on either a full - time or part - time basis , as well as other vamc staff that may assist with specific family caregiver program - related activities as a collateral duty . vamc staff assigned to the family caregiver program may include the following: cscs . cscs are the primary program staff administering the program at vamcs . they are generally licensed clinical social workers or registered nurses . cscs have clinical responsibilities that may include identifying and coordinating appropriate interventions for caregivers or referrals to other va or non - va programs , such as mental health treatment , respite care , or additional training and education . cscs also have administrative responsibilities that may include responding to inquiries about the program , overseeing the application process , and entering information about applications and approved caregivers into it systems . during the first quarter of fiscal year 2019 , there were approximately 436 cscs assigned to 140 vamcs . administrative staff . administrative staff are typically responsible for activities such as mailing communications to program applicants and participants , scheduling appointments , entering data into cat , and otherwise supporting the administrative needs of the program . during the first quarter of fiscal year 2019 , 24 of the 140 vamcs or health care systems had administrative staff members assigned to the program . clinical staff . some vamcs have clinical staff assigned to the program , which can include registered nurses , doctors , nurse practitioners , occupational therapists , or psychologists . these staff typically conduct in - home monitoring and may help with clinical eligibility determinations of veterans during the application process . during the first quarter of fiscal year 2019 , 17 vamcs had approximately 12 full - time - equivalent doctors , nurse practitioners , occupational therapists , and psychologists assigned to the program . other vamc clinical staff who are not assigned to the family caregiver program may assist the program as a collateral duty . for example , they may serve as members of the clinical eligibility team or assist with program monitoring — including quarterly contacts and annual home visits — or program appeals ( see fig . the caregiver support program office directly funds the salaries for staff assigned to the family caregiver program at vamcs . specifically , it funds the salaries of the cscs , as well as some other staff who are assigned to the program , such as administrative staff or clinical staff . however , some vamcs may also choose to fund additional staff for the program , if they identify a need . additionally , the portion of time spent by vamc staff assisting the program as a collateral duty may be reimbursed by the caregiver support program office . to participate in the program , caregivers and veterans must submit applications to their local vamc or to vha's health eligibility center . cscs manage the multi - step application process , which includes administrative and clinical eligibility determinations , among other requirements ( see fig .