immigrant parents . a family is headed by an immigrant parent who is not eligible for tanf . these parents could include illegal immigrants , as well as certain recent legal immigrants who are ineligible for tanf . ineligible immigrants can receive tanf for their children , provided the children are u.s. citizens .  sanctioned or disqualified parents . the parent has not complied with tanf program requirements , such as work requirements , and has been denied benefits , but the state allows the children to continue receiving benefits . states must also disqualify adults from receiving tanf benefits for other reasons , such as if they are fleeing to avoid a felony conviction , violating a condition of probation or parole , or in certain circumstances , fraudulently receiving tanf assistance .  nonparent caregivers . a child is living with a family headed by a nonparent caregiver , often a relative who receives cash assistance on a child's behalf . according to hhs , nonparent caregivers may not be legally obligated to support these children , and states can provide child - only grants to any relative caring for a child , regardless of the relative's income , provided that the relative meets the state's tanf definition of a relative caretaker . if the nonparent caregiver chooses to have their income and resources considered in order to receive a higher level of assistance , the caregiver may be subject to work requirements and time limits . families receiving cash assistance with adults in the assistance unit are subject to federal time limits and work requirements . prwora established a 60-month time limit for families with an adult receiving aid ; however , states have the option to use federal funds to extend assistance beyond the federal time limit for hardship reasons the state has defined . prwora also requires adults to engage in work activities after 2 years of assistance , or sooner , if the state determines the recipient is ready . tanf child - only cases are typically not subject to these requirements . child welfare programs provide services to protect children from abuse and neglect , to help parents care for their children successfully , and to provide support to children who cannot safely live with their parents . hhs' children's bureau oversees federal funding to states for child welfare programs , and states administer these programs . the principal federal funding sources for child welfare are through titles iv - e and iv - b of the social security act , although child welfare services are also supported by nondedicated federal funding sources , including tanf . in fiscal year 2011 , about $6.5 billion was available under iv - e , and about $757 million was made available to states under iv - b , according to hhs budget documents . child welfare agencies typically become involved in family situations after receiving reports of child abuse and neglect . child welfare staff screen and investigate reports of child maltreatment and make recommendations about whether a child can remain safely at home . when abuse or neglect is identified , the agency may provide services designed to improve the situation and avoid removing children from their homes .