this is the unclassified version of that report . to prepare this unclassified version , we removed references to funding ; stockpile quantities and locations ; capabilities ; and specific classified assessments . to evaluate our objectives , we analyzed dod , doe , and nuclear weapons council policies and guidance on the requirements development process and the planning and implementation of nuclear weapons delivery system modernization and stockpile life - extension programs . we obtained , reviewed , and analyzed key air force documents , such as the initial capabilities document for ground based strategic deterrent , and the air force's draft plan for preparing the minuteman iii follow - on study . using best practices we identified in our prior work , we assessed the air force's proposed methodology for estimating the costs for options that the air force will consider in the minuteman iii follow - on study . we also reviewed dod and nnsa reports , project officers group and subgroup charters , and air force and nnsa budget documentation . we analyzed documents from the office of the secretary of defense , joint staff , u.s. strategic command , nnsa , and the nuclear weapons council . we also interviewed dod and nnsa officials responsible for developing and coordinating requirements for the follow - on to the minuteman iii icbm and for the w78 / 88-1 life - extension program , and other officials from the office of the secretary of defense , including from the office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for nuclear matters and the cost assessment and program evaluation office ; the air force , including global strike command and nuclear weapons center ; the navy , including strategic systems programs ; u.s. strategic command ; and nnsa , including the manager for the w78 / 88-1 life - extension program and managers for the icbm and slbm weapons systems . we conducted this performance audit from june 2012 to june 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . our scope and methodology are described in more detail in appendix i . the air force presently deploys 450 minuteman iii icbms in fixed , land - based launch facilities ( or “silos” ) , located on three bases that encompass vast regions of the united states . three missile wings — the 90th missile wing , 91st missile wing , and 341st missile wing , which fall under the command of air force global strike command — operate the icbm force . each icbm carries up to three w78 warheads , or a single w87 warhead . in fiscal year 2007 , the air force began deploying w87 warheads , while reducing the number of deployed w78 warheads . to support u.s. strategic command's operational requirements , the air force maintains nearly all of the icbms on alert at any given time .