gao - 14-156 . washington , d.c.: march 7 , 2014 . cms did not comment on our recommendation . we are currently examining the activities of the cms contractors , including zpics , that conduct postpayment claims reviews . our work is reviewing , among other things , whether cms has a strategy for coordinating these contractors' postpayment claims review activities . cms has taken steps to improve use of two cms information technology systems that could help analysts identify fraud after claims have been paid , but further action is needed . in 2011 , we found that the integrated data repository ( idr ) — a central data store of medicare and other data needed to help cms program integrity staff and contractors detect improper payments of claims — did not include all the data that were planned to be incorporated by fiscal year 2010 , because of technical obstacles and delays in funding . as of march 2014 , the agency had not addressed our recommendation to develop reliable schedules to incorporate all types of idr data , which could lead to additional delays in making available all of the data that are needed to support enhanced program integrity efforts and achieve the expected financial benefits . however , one program integrity ( one pi ) — a web - based portal intended to provide cms staff and contractors with a single source of access to data contained in idr , as well as tools for analyzing those data — is operational and cms has established plans and schedules for training all intended one pi users , as we also recommended in 2011 . however , as of march 2014 , cms had not established deadlines for program integrity contractors to begin using one pi , as we recommended in 2011 . without these deadlines , program integrity contractors will not be required to use the system , and as a result , cms may fall short in its efforts to ensure the widespread use and to measure the benefits of one pi for program integrity purposes . having mechanisms in place to resolve vulnerabilities that could lead to improper payments , some of which are potentially fraudulent , is critical to effective program management , but our work has shown weaknesses in cms's processes to address such vulnerabilities . both we and oig have made recommendations to cms to improve the tracking of vulnerabilities . in our march 2010 report on the rac demonstration program , we found that cms had not established an adequate process during the demonstration or in planning for the national program to ensure prompt resolution of vulnerabilities that could lead to improper payments in medicare ; further , the majority of the most significant vulnerabilities identified during the demonstration were not addressed . in december 2011 , oig found that cms had not resolved or taken significant action to resolve 48 of 62 vulnerabilities reported in 2009 by cms contractors specifically charged with addressing fraud . we and oig recommended that cms have written procedures and time frames to ensure that vulnerabilities were resolved .