office of management and budget . analytical perspectives — budget of the united states government , fiscal year 2011 . washington , d.c.: executive office of the president , feb. 1 , 2010 . what conditions influence an agency's choices ? to find answers that would apply broadly to other federal agencies about how to prioritize program evaluations , we selected four agencies in three departments with known evaluation capacity — the ability to systematically collect , analyze , and use data on program results — in a variety of substantive areas . the four agencies were the department of education and the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) and two agencies in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) — the administration for children and families ( acf ) and the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) . to identify agencies fulfilling our criteria , we reviewed previous gao reports and agency documents for evidence of emphasis on conducting evaluations . for example , we searched for examples of agencies' incorporating the results of program evaluations in their annual performance reports . to obtain a diverse set of cases , we selected agencies that addressed a variety of content areas and program types — direct services or grants , regulation , and research — and that varied in the conditions likely to affect their decision process , such as whether they had a central office responsible for evaluation . to identify evaluation planning procedures and criteria , we reviewed agency materials and interviewed agency evaluation officials about their evaluation planning process . we identified conditions influencing their choices in interviews with agency officials and in comparisons of what we found across the agencies . we conducted this performance audit from may 2010 through december 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the secretaries of education , health and human services , and housing and urban development . its framework , coordinated school health , involves community , family , teachers , and schools in addressing a diverse set of health issues . it also partners with nongovernmental and community - based organizations to reach children who are not in school . dash supports rapid evaluations to identify innovative programs and practices . these evaluations typically last 12 to 24 months and data are collected within a school calendar year . the evaluation team also has a small portfolio of evaluation research that includes large longitudinal randomized controlled trials that assess effectiveness over a 5-to - 6-year period . the agencies we reviewed use a similar but informal evaluation planning process that involves collaboration between each agency's evaluation office and program offices , external groups , and senior officials .