iii ) . this report presents data on the relative historical volatility of energy futures contracts , which we calculated from relative changes in daily prices . futures and off - exchange derivatives markets provide participants with a means to hedge or shift unwanted price risk to others more willing to assume the risk or those having different risk situations . for example , if a petroleum refiner wanted to shed its risk of losing money as a result of falling gasoline prices , it could lock in a price by selling futures contracts to deliver the gasoline in 6 months at a guaranteed price . likewise , a transportation company that knows it must refill its gasoline tanks in 6 months might want to offset the price risk associated with purchasing fuel by buying futures contracts to take delivery of gasoline then at a set price . without futures contracts that help them manage risk , producers , refiners , and others likely would face uncertainty related to investment planning , budgeting , and forecasting — and potentially higher costs . futures markets also provide a means of price discovery for commodities such as energy products . for price discovery , markets need current information about supply and demand , a large number of participants , and transparency . market participants monitor and analyze the factors that currently affect , and that they expect to affect , the future supply and demand for energy commodities . with that information , they buy or sell energy commodity contracts on the basis of the price for which they believe the commodity will sell at the delivery date . the futures markets , in effect , distill the diverse views of market participants into a single price . in turn , buyers and sellers of physical commodities consider those predictions about future prices with other factors when setting prices on the spot and retail markets . a wide variety of participants hedge and speculate in energy derivatives markets . for the exchange - traded futures markets , cftc categorizes traders in general terms as either commercial or noncommercial participants . cftc identifies several subcategories of participants within the commercial category: producers , manufacturers , dealers / merchants , and swaps / derivatives dealers . dealers and merchants include , among others , wholesalers , exporters and importers , shippers , and crude oil marketers . typical noncommercial traders are entities such as those that manage money ( “managed money traders” ) . these noncommercial traders include , among others , commodity pool operators ( cpo ) and commodity trading advisors ( cta ) , many of which advise or operate hedge funds . other noncommercial traders include floor brokers and unregistered traders . the prices for energy commodities in the futures and in the spot or physical markets are closely linked because they are influenced by the same market fundamentals in the long run . prices in the physical spot and futures markets for the four energy commodities we reviewed are highly correlated and rose dramatically from 2002 to 2006 . as shown in figure 1 , from january 2002 to july 2006 , monthly average spot prices for crude oil , gasoline , and heating oil increased by at least 220 percent .