ondcp concurred and has implemented it . for our december 2015 testimony statement , we analyzed ondcp's reported progress on strategy goals in its 2015 strategy and performance report . more detail on our scope and methodologies can be found in our march 2013 report and december 2015 statement . for updates to these reports , we analyzed publically available data sources , ondcp reports on progress toward the strategy's goals and objectives , and reviewed ondcp's fiscal year 2015 and fiscal year 2016 budget and performance reports , and interviewed ondcp officials . we previously reported on progress toward meeting strategy goals in our december 2015 testimony based on results provided in ondcp's 2015 strategy and performance report , which were issued in november 2015 . to assess progress on strategy goals , we updated results for the goals using publically available data sources as of may 2016 . the data sources for the goals were determined by ondcp when developing the 2010 strategy , based on their availability and quality . we used the same data sources that ondcp uses to assess progress on strategy goals to update results and did not independently assess the reliability of these data . this statement is based on our prior work issued from july 2012 through december 2015 , with select updates as of may 2016 . the work upon which this testimony is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . ondcp was established by the anti - drug abuse act of 1988 to , among other things , enhance national drug control planning and coordination and represent the drug policies of the executive branch before congress . in this role , the office is responsible for ( 1 ) developing a national drug control policy , ( 2 ) developing and applying specific goals and performance measurements to evaluate the effectiveness of national drug control policy and national drug control program agencies' programs , ( 3 ) overseeing and coordinating the implementation of the national drug control policy , and ( 4 ) assessing and certifying the adequacy of the budget for national drug control programs . the 2010 national drug control strategy is the inaugural strategy guiding drug policy under president obama's administration . according to ondcp officials , it sought a comprehensive approach to drug policy , including an emphasis on drug abuse prevention and treatment efforts and the use of evidence - based practices — approaches to prevention or treatments that are based in theory and have undergone scientific evaluation . drug abuse prevention includes activities focused on discouraging the first - time use of controlled substances and efforts to encourage those who have begun to use illicit drugs to cease their use . in fy 2016 , the budget contains 38 federal agencies or programs .