faa has implemented these recommendations . in the coming years , faa risks losing significant amounts of institutional knowledge as its employees retire . the dramatic shifts that are occurring in the nation's population are reflected in faa's workforce , where more than three - fourths of its employees are age 40 or older . by fiscal year 2013 , faa projects that 38 percent of its employees who perform work that is critical to faa's mission will be eligible to retire ( see table 2 ) . for example , in the next 5 years , 42 percent of air traffic controllers , who ensure the safe and smooth movement of air traffic in the air and on the ground at airports ; 31 percent of airway transportation system specialists , who install and maintain air traffic control systems ; and 48 percent of aviation safety inspectors , who perform critical safety oversight of the aviation industry and air operators , are projected to be eligible to retire . mspb found that engaged employees have less intention to leave their current agency , use less sick leave , and workf in agencies that produce better programmatic results . for the purposes o this report , we use collaboration to include teamwork , cooperation , employee engagement , and employee empowerment . improving collaboration has implications for faa's successful implementation of nextgen , because 98 percent of faa's employees who are eligible to be members of a bargaining unit are represented by a union . the napa panel noted that although faa's labor - management relations had been strained for years , faa had no clear strategy to engage the unions . in the past , faa's failure to collaborate with the ultimate users early in a system's design contributed to cost growth and schedule delays . the panel concluded that faa's success in leading the transition to nextgen will depend , in part , on its willingness to review its past efforts and learn from challenges and mistakes . although controllers will be end users of nextgen's technology , natca representatives told us they perceive that faa management has little interest in collaboration . natca testified to congress ( 1 ) that nextgen will only be successful if it is done with complete participation and agreement from government , labor , and industry groups and ( 2 ) that collaboration will help faa to identify and address potential issues early on in the process , thereby saving time , money , and resources and avoiding safety risks . in faa's view , the agency has always desired to include end users in developing nextgen technology and procedures . according to faa , a dispute arose over whether faa or natca would make the final determination concerning the specific union members who would serve as subject matter experts . at the present time , faa is using controllers as subject matter experts in testing and developing new technology and procedures , but natca has not endorsed their participation , according to a senior faa official . other union representatives discussed collaboration in more general terms .