● orders of succession . all but a few agency plans identified an order of succession to the agency head . most plans included orders of succession for other key officials or included officials outside of the local area in the succession to the agency head . many plans did not include the orders of succession in the agency's vital records or document training for successors on their emergency duties . ● delegations of authority . few plans adequately documented the legal authority for officials to make policy decisions in an emergency . ● alternate facilities . most plans documented the acquisition of at least one alternate facility , and many included alternate facilities inside and outside of the local area . however , few plans documented that agencies had sufficient space for staff , pre - positioned equipment , or appropriate communications capabilities at their alternate facilities . ● redundant emergency communications . most plans identified at least two independent media for voice communication . less than half of the plans included adequate contact information , and few provided information on backup data links . ● vital records . less than half of the plans fully identified the agency's vital records . few plans documented the locations of all vital records or procedures for updating them . ● tests , training , and exercises . while many agencies documented some training , very few agencies documented that they had conducted tests , training , and exercises at the recommended frequency . during our prior review of 2002 plans , we found that insufficient oversight by fema contributed to agencies' lack of compliance with the guidance . specifically , we noted that fema had not conducted an assessment of agency contingency plans since 1999 . as a result , we recommended that it conduct assessments of agency continuity plans that include independent verification of agency - reported information . in response , dhs reported that it was developing a readiness reporting system to assist it in assessing agency plans and planned to verify the information reported by the agencies . although neither of these planned actions was completed by may 1 , 2004 , fema has made subsequent efforts to improve its oversight . according to fema officials , development of the readiness reporting system was completed in march 2005 , and the system is expected to be operational and certified by october 2005 , at which time there will be seven locations ( including two fema locations ) using the system . they added that once the system becomes fully operational , agencies will be required to periodically provide updated information on their compliance with fema's guidance . these officials also reported that the agency had taken additional steps to improve readiness . specifically , they stated that the interagency exercise held in mid - may 2004 successfully activated and tested agency plans ; they based this assessment on reports provided by the agencies . furthermore , fema has begun planning for another interagency exercise in 2006 . in addition , as of april 2005 , fema had provided training to 682 federal , state , and local officials from 30 major federal departments and agencies and 209 smaller agencies — including state , local , and tribal entities .