reduced visibility . reduced visibility can occur during nighttime hours ( including dawn and dusk ) and during weather - related events , such as fog , rain , or snow . reduced visibility can decrease a driver's ability to receive the proper visual cues to successfully navigate the road . our analysis of nhtsa's data found that overall , while 15 percent of all crashes took place under limited light conditions , about 34 percent of all traffic fatalities occurred at that time . although other factors are involved during nighttime crashes , such as alcohol or fatigue , the reduction of visual cues for the driver also appears to play a role . the primary purpose of roadway lighting is to provide increased visibility of the roadway and its immediate environment , to allow a person to drive more efficiently and safely . an fhwa study examined the impact of lighting options on urban freeways in minnesota . the study used data on crashes , roadways , and traffic volume to compare the safety of continuously lighted urban freeways with that of urban freeways having interchange lighting only . using data from between 1985 and 1990 , the study determined that 12 percent more crashes occur on sections with interchange - only lighting than on road sections with continuous lighting , assuming all other factors remain the same . the study concluded that there was a positive relationship between urban freeway lighting and highway safety . weather - related phenomena can also inhibit driver visibility . while fog crashes are proportionally small compared with all other crashes , they can involve numerous vehicles in a chain - reaction pileup . a recent example of this occurred in wisconsin in october 2002 , where a fog - related crash involving 51 vehicles resulted in 10 deaths . the national transportation safety board has concluded that major fog - related incidents generally occur because drivers have not maintained uniform reduced speeds during times of limited visibility . according to nhtsa's director of the office of human - centered research , the significance of adverse weather , including both slippery roads and reductions in driver visibility , is not fully understood because there are no measurements ( for example , vehicle miles traveled under adverse weather conditions ) available to make comparisons between crash rates under various conditions . a researcher at the university of michigan's transportation research institute said that pedestrian - related crashes are particularly sensitive to light conditions . the researcher pointed out that , unlike vehicles and roads that may have lighting or reflective markings , pedestrians are generally not highly visible and are more likely to be involved in crashes during nighttime hours . vehicle factors can contribute to crashes through vehicle - related failures and vehicle design characteristics ( attributes that may increase the likelihood of being involved in certain types of crashes ) . while such recent events as the number of crashes involving tire separations have highlighted the importance of vehicle factors , it is generally shown by data and studies and believed by experts that vehicle factors contribute less often to crashes than do human or roadway environment factors .