the program has time to improve . as of august 2015 , the f - 35 fleet had only flown a cumulative total of 35,940 hours of the 200,000 cumulative flight hours required for system maturity . similarly , although engine reliability improved significantly in 2015 , the engine was still not performing at expected levels . in 2014 , pratt and whitney data indicated that engine reliability — measured as mean flight hours between failure ( design controllable ) — was very poor and we reported in april 2015 that the engine would likely require additional design changes and retrofits . while pratt & whitney has implemented a number of design changes that have resulted in significant reliability improvements , the f - 35a and f - 35b engines are still at about 55 percent and 63 percent , respectively , of where the program expected them to be at this point . program and contractor officials continue to identify ways to further improve engine reliability . in conclusion , our preliminary results indicate that , although the f - 35 development program is nearing completion , the program is not without risks . the remaining significant and complex 3f mission systems software developmental testing , continuing issues with alis , and new issues with the ejection seat and f - 35c wing structures pose ongoing risks . going forward , the program will likely continue to experience affordability and oversight challenges . dod expects that beginning in 2022 it will need more than $14 billion a year on average for a decade to procure aircraft . it is unlikely that the program will be able to receive and sustain such a high level of funding over this extended period , especially given dod's competing resources such as the long range strike bomber and kc - 46a tanker . dod's plan to manage block 4 under the current acquisition program baseline presents oversight challenges because key reporting requirements and oversight mechanisms will not be initiated ; therefore , the two efforts will be comingled . without setting up the modernization as a separate program with its own baseline and regular reporting as best practices recommend , it will be difficult for congress to hold dod accountable for achieving f - 35 block 4 cost , schedule , and performance goals . it also makes it easier to re - categorize work planned for the baseline program as modernization . other manufacturing data are also trending in a positive direction . for example , scrap , rework , and repair hours , and time spent on work conducted out of sequence continue to decrease . although it has improved , lockheed martin's supply chain continues to deliver parts late to production , resulting in inefficiencies and requiring workarounds . engine manufacturing deliveries remain steady and 218 engines have been delivered to date . the labor hours required for assembling engines has remained steady and very little additional efficiency is expected . as a result , pratt & whitney is looking for additional ways to save cost . scrap , rework , and repair costs have remained steady over the last year and engineering design changes is relatively low and continues to decrease .