cause of loss . according to standard nuclear exclusions , commercial policies would not cover damage caused by a nuclear blast . however , regardless of any exclusions , according to information provided by naic , approximately 16 states ( including new york ) require property / casualty insurers to cover losses from a “fire following” an event , irrespective of the cause of fire . a national security expert told us that in the case of a nuclear bomb detonation , once the property was destroyed , insurers could dispute the extent to which fire ( covered in fire following states ) or the blast ( excluded by the nuclear exclusion ) caused the damage . in other contexts , disputes over the cause of loss often have been litigated . for example , many homeowners who suffered losses in hurricane katrina have filed lawsuits challenging property / casualty insurers' determinations about the cause of their losses . certified as a terrorist act . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has suggested that some nbcr events might not be readily identified as terrorist acts , as defined by tria , and therefore coverage — both for insurers and for their policyholders — would be unclear . for example , the persons or person who in 2001 mailed letters contaminated with anthrax that killed several people and sickened many more remain ( s ) unknown . however , should tria not be renewed in 2007 , this particular determination would not apply . in addition , homeowners' insurers , part of the personal property / casualty market , have long - standing exclusions in their policies , similar to the exclusions contained in commercial property / casualty policies . according to representatives of two large homeowners' insurers , the exclusions limited their exposure to nbcr risks . while these representatives also told us they have not excluded conventional terrorist events from their policies , they said their companies generally manage their exposure to any terrorism risks by diversifying their portfolios . the 2005 treasury study reported that less than 3 percent of policyholders from a range of industries reported purchasing nbcr coverage in their commercial property / casualty insurance policies . further , although purchase rates for nbcr insurance do not necessarily reflect overall demand , a major reason for not purchasing nbcr insurance given by the survey respondents was that they did not believe they were at risk for an nbcr event . while the treasury study did not break down purchase rates for nbcr insurance by industry sector , another study of the market for terrorism insurance conducted by insurance brokers found that companies in the real estate , financial , and health care sectors had the highest rates for purchasing terrorism insurance . although the brokerage firm study does not specifically address the demand for nbcr insurance , we consider demand for terrorism insurance generally to be a reasonable approximation of where demand for nbcr insurance might exist . for instance , demand for terrorism insurance may be strong in the real estate sector because terrorism coverage typically is required as part of a commercial business loan transaction , according to the mortgage bankers association .