in october 1985 , the u.s . the lead agency ( dod , in this case ) conducts a preliminary assessment of the site by reviewing existing information , such as facility records , to determine whether hazardous substance contamination is present and poses a potential threat to public health or the environment . epa regions review these preliminary assessments to determine whether the information is sufficient to the likelihood of a hazardous substance release , a contamination pathway , and potential receptors . epa regions are encouraged to complete their review of preliminary assessments of federal facility sites listed in epa's cercla database within 18 months of the date the site was listed on the federal docket . epa may determine the site does not pose a significant threat to human health or the environment and no further action is required . if the preliminary assessment indicates that a long - term response may be needed , epa may request that dod perform a site inspection to gather more detailed information . it is not intended as a definitive , comprehensive glossary of all aspects of the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla ) process for the cleanup of environmental contamination at superfund sites . when a federal agency identifies an actual or suspected release or threatened release to the environment on a federal site , it notifies epa , which then lists the site on its federal agency hazardous waste compliance docket . the docket is a listing of all federal facilities that have reported hazardous waste activities under rcra or cercla . rcra and cercla require federal agencies to submit to epa information on their facilities that generate , transport , store , or dispose of hazardous waste or that has had some type of hazardous substance release or spill . epa updates the docket periodically . the lead agency ( dod , in this case ) samples soil , groundwater , surface water , and sediment , as appropriate , and analyzes the results to prepare a report that describes the contaminants at the site , past waste handling practices , migration pathways for contaminants , and receptors at or near the site . epa reviews the site inspection report and , if it determines the release poses no significant threat , epa may eliminate it from further consideration . if epa determines that hazardous substances , pollutants , or contaminants have been released at the site , epa will use the information collected during the preliminary assessment and site inspection to calculate a preliminary hrs score . if epa determines that a significant hazardous substance release has occurred , the epa region prepares an hrs scoring package . epa's hrs assesses the potential of a release to threaten human health or the environment by assigning a value to factors such as ( 1 ) the likelihood that a hazardous release has occurred ; ( 2 ) the characteristics of the waste , such as toxicity and the amount ; and ( 3 ) people or sensitive environments affected by the release . if the release scores an hrs score of 28.50 or higher , epa determines whether to propose the site for placement on the npl .