( see table 2. ) although direct program costs decreased by $9.5 million , these costs were shifted to the enterprise support component of the estimate with the program's decision to fund only 1 year's worth of operations and maintenance , rather than 2 years' worth from the direct program budget . in addition , nasa anticipates that operations costs for fiscal years 2007 through 2010 — estimated at $137.8 million — will be funded by the nasa shared services center ( nssc ) , a planned initiative to consolidate various agency services such as purchasing and human resources . ( see table 3. ) as a result , the fiscal year 2004 budget for the ifmp direct program portion of implementing the system is $497.5 million . in march 2003 an independent cost estimate team concluded that there is an 85 percent confidence level that the direct program portion can be successfully completed with the available funding of $497.5 million . however , the direct program portion represents only about half of the total life - cycle cost estimate . in addition , the team's conclusion was contingent on two optimistic assumptions: that there would be no schedule disruptions and no increase in requirements . reflecting omb guidance and the best practices of government and industry leaders , nasa requires that life - cycle cost estimates be prepared on a full - cost basis , that estimates be summarized according to the current breakdown of work to be performed , and that major changes be tracked to the life - cycle cost . omb guidance calls for a disciplined budget process to ensure that performance goals are met with the least risk and the lowest life - cycle cost , which includes direct and indirect costs , operations and maintenance , and disposal . the software engineering institute ( sei ) echoes the need for reliable cost - estimating processes in managing software implementations — identifying tasks to be estimated , mapping the estimates to the breakdown of work to be performed , and having a clear audit trail are among sei's requisites for producing reliable cost estimates . despite nasa requirements and omb and sei guidance , ifmp did not prepare a full life - cycle cost estimate — that is , all direct and indirect costs for planning , procurement , operations and maintenance , and disposal were not included . for example , the life - cycle cost estimate does not include the following: the cost to operate and maintain the system beyond 2010 ; the cost of retiring the system ; enterprise travel costs , which are provided monthly by the nasa centers ; and the cost of nonleased nasa facilities for housing ifmp . in addition , ifmp did not prepare wbs estimates for active modules — that is , those currently being implemented . according to nasa guidance , breaking down work into smaller units helps facilitate cost estimating and project and contract management , and helps ensure that relevant costs are not omitted . the guidance also states that the wbs should encompass both in - house and contractor efforts .