iii ) . the air force's gps iif acquisition initially was not well executed , and currently poses technical problems . the air force is implementing lessons learned from the gps iif effort as it starts the gps iiia program . however , based on our analysis , the gps iiia program faces a compressed schedule along with new challenges to deliver the satellites on time . a slip in the launch of the gps iiia satellites could increase the likelihood that the gps constellation will fall below the number of satellites required to provide the level of gps service the u.s. government has committed to provide . this would not only have implications for military users but also for the larger community of gps users , who may be less aware and equipped to deal with gaps in coverage . however , the air force is evaluating different approaches that could potentially reduce the risk of degrading the gps service . the gps iif contract was awarded during an era of acquisition reform that centered on an approach called total system performance responsibility ( tspr ) . tspr gave a contractor total responsibility for the integration of an entire weapon system and for meeting dod's requirements . this approach was intended to facilitate acquisition reform and enable dod to streamline a cumbersome acquisition process and leverage innovation and management expertise from the private sector . however , dod later found that tspr magnified problems on a number of satellite acquisition programs because it was implemented in a manner that enabled requirements creep and poor contractor performance . for gps iif , the tspr approach resulted in relaxed specifications and inspections of the contractor , loss of quality in the manufacturing process , and poor - quality parts that caused test failures , unexpected redesigns , and the late delivery of parts . the contractor did not provide data on design drawings and statistical process control techniques were not used to monitor production . according to gps program officials , the gps iif program was also negatively impacted by multiple contractor mergers , acquisitions , and moves . in 1996 , shortly after rockwell won the iif contract , the company's aerospace and defense units , including the seal beach , california , facility where the iif satellites were to be manufactured , were acquired by boeing . in december 1997 , boeing merged with mcdonnell douglas and took over its delta launch vehicle unit in huntington beach , california , and subsequently gps work was moved to that facility . in october 2000 , boeing acquired hughes electronics corporation's space and communications business and related operations . boeing took over the hughes facility in el segundo , california , and once again , gps work was moved to another facility . as these events occurred , the prime contractor consolidated development facilities to remain competitive . in addition , the prime contractor lost valuable workers and knowledge , causing inefficiencies in the program . shortly after the iif contract was awarded in 1996 , the air force also added requirements . for example , the government decided to accelerate the fielding of new civil and military gps signals . flexible power capabilities were added to iif several years later .