fig . 5 provides a comparison of the process for visa waiver travelers and visa applicants . the visa waiver program , while valuable , can pose risks to u.s. security , law enforcement , and immigration interests because some foreign citizens may try to exploit the program to enter the united states . indeed , convicted 9 / 11 terrorist zacarias moussaoui and “shoe - bomber” richard reid both boarded flights to the united states with passports issued by visa waiver program countries . moreover , as we have reported , inadmissible travelers who need visas to enter the united states may attempt to acquire a passport from a visa waiver program country to avoid the additional scrutiny that takes place in non - visa waiver countries . since the terrorist attacks , the government has taken several actions intended to enhance the security of the visa waiver program by improving program management , oversight , and efforts to assess and mitigate program risks , among other things . ( 2 ) how have visa - related policies and programs evolved since 9 / 11 to help screen out potential terrorists seeking entry into the united states ? ( 4 ) what are the major strategic challenges facing congress , dhs , and other federal agencies as the post - 9 / 11 era progresses and decisions are made about prioritizing efforts and allocating finite resources to further enhance homeland security ? the overall scope of our review reflects the national layers of defense in place on 9 / 11 , which the terrorists exploited , and other areas with recognized vulnerabilities and security weaknesses where federal actions have been taken and for which we have a body of work . specifically , the scope of our work encompassed an extensive review of work published by us and others on the conditions leading up to and the actions taken after 9 / 11 by congress and federal departments — the departments of homeland security , state , and justice — which now have primary responsibility for establishing and maintaining key layers of national defense ( aviation , the visa process , and our borders ) exploited by the 9 / 11 hijackers . to perform our analyses for all the research questions , we reviewed the findings , conclusions , and recommendations from gao reports , testimonies , and other issued products on security policies and procedures prior to and after 9 / 11 . this review included gao's work on aviation security , the visa issuance process , and border security initiatives , as well as information on the development and consolidation of federal terrorist watch lists and how this and other sensitive information has been shared among federal agencies , including the department of homeland security , and appropriate state and local personnel , such as law enforcement agencies and private air carriers . we also analyzed our preliminary results from ongoing work related to homeland security that was being conducted at the time of this review ( i.e. , work that we had under way but had not yet issued ) on international aviation passenger prescreening , the u.s . visitor and immigrant status indicator technology ( us - visit ) border security program , and more .