comparison of q12 and q15 . ( 16.58 percent of respondents ) q15 . primary beneficiary of the project outputs / deliverables . during the postaward phase , did epa direct you to conduct activities outside the original scope of work ? did epa direct that you contract with a specific entity ( organization or individual ) under this grant / cooperative agreement ? did epa direct that you issue a subgrant to a specific entity under this grant / cooperative agreement ? did epa direct that contracts be awarded by you on a sole - source or noncompetitive basis under this grant / cooperative agreement ? survey completion status by grant award dollars . in addition to those individuals named above , scott heacock , andria key , mike rahl , sid schwartz , rebecca shea , carol herrnstadt shulman , and amy webbink made key contributions to this report . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . you can print these documents in their entirety , including charts and other graphics . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . the list contains links to the full - text document files . to have gao e - mail this list to you every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to e - mail alerts” under the “order gao products” heading . was this financial assistance award made in the form of a grant or a cooperative agreement ? were the project outputs / deliverables designed to directly benefit epa ? please indicate the primary beneficiary of the project outputs / deliverables . were the project directly benefit epa ? our scope and methodology are presented in appendix i . epa used over two - thirds of its fiscal year 2003 budget on grants and contracts to carry out its environmental programs and obtain services . out of an $7.6 billion fiscal year 2003 budget , epa awarded $4.2 billion in grants and $934 million in contracts , as shown in figure 1 . in fiscal year 2002 , epa made over 8,000 grant awards and amendments , covering 72 separate grant programs to 4,100 grant recipients .