tsa concurred with this recommendation . in its comments on our report , tsa stated that it would monitor , update , and report the results of its efforts to capture operational data and evaluate its associated impacts on operational costs . when contacted in november 2015 for an update on this recommendation , tsa officials stated that they have taken steps toward implementing this recommendation by evaluating the impact of false alarm rates on operational costs ( such as staffing ) during testing for new ait systems . this recommendation remains open pending additional actions by tsa to collect secondary screening data on an ongoing basis , which could be used to obtain valuable insights on false alarm rates and the resulting operational costs . by fully implementing the recommendation , tsa could improve the overall performance of the ait system and make more informed decisions about checkpoint screening . these recommendations are discussed in more detail later in this report . section 4 of tsara included a provision for gao to submit a report to congress containing an assessment of tsa's implementation of recommendations gao made on or before december 18 , 2014 — tsara's date of enactment — regarding tsa's acquisition of security - related technology . specifically , this report addresses the following questions: 1 . what is the status of tsa's implementation of gao's recommendations relating to the acquisition of security - related technology since 2003 and what are the characteristics of those recommendations ? what benefits have been realized by tsa implementing gao's recommendations relating to the acquisition of security - related technology ? to determine the status of tsa's implementation of gao's recommendations relating to security - related technology acquisitions , we reviewed our body of work on tsa and , as appropriate , dhs , in order to identify recommendations related to the acquisition of any technology that assists tsa in the prevention of , or defense against , threats to the u.s. transportation systems , including threats to people , property , and information . for the purpose of this review , the acquisition of security - related technology encompasses acquisitions that support tsa activities to screen passengers , checked baggage , and other property ( including cargo ) , including , but not limited to , advanced imaging technology ( ait ) ; explosives detection systems ( eds ) ; explosives trace detection ( etd ) machines and canines ; the vetting and prescreening of passengers ; and services to maintain , modify , or improve such security - related technologies . the acquisition of security - related technologies , for purposes of this review , does not encompass acquisitions that relate primarily to training on the use of security - related technologies ; the provision of screening services at an airport , such as the screening partnership program ; or identification and access media , such as the transportation worker identification credential . to determine the number and status of the recommendations we made to tsa from october 1 , 2003 , through july 31 , 2015 , we reviewed information in our internal database that maintains information on the status of recommendations we have made to all agencies .