for other deployments , this vaccination is voluntary . vaxgen was a small u.s. biotechnology company . according to niaid , one of the objectives was to demonstrate how manufacturing efforts might be increased to support creation of a stockpile of medical countermeasures . dod's program prevaccinates personnel being deployed to iraq , afghanistan , and the korean peninsula with biothrax . dod also has a program to order , stockpile , and use the licensed anthrax vaccine . dod estimates its needs for biothrax doses and bases its purchases on that estimate . an fda - licensed anthrax vaccine , biothrax , has been available since 1970 . the vaccine has been recommended for a variety of situations , for example , laboratory workers who produce anthrax cultures . the project bioshield act of 2004 formalized this initiative and authorized the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) to acquire and ensure the management of and accounting for a stockpile of medical countermeasures . the secretary , in turn , entrusted this responsibility to the office of the assistant secretary for preparedness and response ( aspr ) . among other medical countermeasures , this stockpile contained , as of june 2007 , about 10 million doses of biothrax , the licensed anthrax vaccine . since doses of biothrax , like other vaccines , have an expiration date , these doses will be disposed of if they are not used before that date . the only other large user of biothrax vaccine is the department of defense ( dod ) , which has procured its own inventory of the vaccine . in november 2004 , aspr awarded vaxgen a procurement contract for $877.5 million for the manufacture and delivery of 75 million doses of its rpa anthrax vaccine to the stockpile . two years later , in december 2006 , aspr terminated vaxgen's contract for failure to meet a critical contractual milestone . the failure of this procurement effort raised larger questions regarding the country's ability to develop a new anthrax vaccine and a robust and sustainable biodefense medical countermeasure industry by building a partnership between pharmaceutical and biotechnology firms and the government . the biotech industry has raised concerns about whether the government can clearly define its requirements for future procurement contracts . today , my testimony will focus on the following two issues that you asked us to address: ( 1 ) factors that contributed to the failure of aspr's first project bioshield procurement effort with vaxgen for an rpa anthrax vaccine and ( 2 ) issues associated with using the licensed anthrax vaccine , biothrax , in the strategic national stockpile . to respond to these questions , we interviewed agency and industry officials , reviewed documents , and consulted with biodefense experts . we conducted our review from june 2007 through august 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the project bioshield act of 2004 ( public law 108-276 ) was designed to encourage private companies to develop civilian medical countermeasures by guaranteeing a market for successfully developed countermeasures .