gao - 06-438 . washington , d.c.: april 28 , 2006 . military housing: further improvements needed in requirements determination and program review . gao - 04-556 . washington , d.c.: may 19 , 2004 . table 4 lists the installations we visited . together the installations contained 12 separate military housing privatization projects , since fort bliss and white sands missile range are included in the same project . at each installation we spoke with service officials managing the family housing privatization project . we also spoke with representatives from the private sector developers in charge of constructing and managing these projects . we chose these installations because they contained already awarded projects , represented each of the military services , and provided a balance of projects with and without challenges . additionally , we choose fort bliss , white sands , and camp pendleton as installations to visit because they are expected to experience a significant influx of military servicemembers and their families due to the planned implementation of dod's grow - the - force initiative . joint base mcguire - dix - lakehurst and joint base lewis - mcchord were selected primarily because they are 2 of 12 joint bases established by the 2005 base realignment and closure round with joint base mcguire - dix - lakehurst being managed by the air force and joint base lewis - mcchord being managed by the army . our analysis of the 13 installations we visited cannot be generalized to other military housing privatization projects . to assess the progress of dod's housing privatization efforts we obtained and analyzed performance data on each of dod's privatization projects . specifically , to determine the number of units privatized we obtained data on the number of projects awarded from osd's web site and received estimated data on the number of units expected to be privatized from the services . we obtained construction and renovation data from osd and the services through february 2009 . although we did not independently validate the construction or renovation data supplied by osd and the services , we did however compare this data to the data in osd's semiannual report to congress and the services' program performance reports . we also discussed with officials steps they have taken to ensure reasonable adequacy of the data . as such , we determined the data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to assess occupancy rates , we interviewed dod and service officials to discuss project occupancy expectations , the factors that contribute to lower - than - expected occupancy rates , the financial and other impacts that result from lower - than - expected occupancy rates , and the responses normally taken when occupancy is below expectations . we obtained , reviewed , and analyzed project occupancy rates and trends for all privatization projects awarded as of september 30 , 2008 , the last quarter for which occupancy data from all three military departments were readily available , and compared these data to occupancy expectations . we did not collect data for two recently awarded army projects — fort sill , oklahoma , and joint base lewis - mcchord , washington — because data were not yet available .