gao - 14-777 . washington , d.c.: september 18 , 2014 . mda developed this system in 2002 . ground - based midcourse defense – defends against intermediate - and intercontinental - range ballistic missiles by using ground - based interceptors that consist of a booster and a kill vehicle , plus a ground system that includes launch , communications , and fire control capabilities . the army was designated as the lead service in 2006 . according to mda officials , they did not include these two system elements in their core submission worksheet because these elements are considered developmental programs and are not yet considered safe and suitable for use by the warfighter . dod's 2016 core report to congress complied with two of the three required reporting elements of section 2464 — core capability requirements and planned workload . it partially complied with the third element , because it included information on shortfalls and mitigation plans , but it did not provide detailed explanations of all shortfalls and mitigation plans , as shown in table 3 below . additionally , dod included mda as a reporting agency in its 2016 core report but did not report accurate information for it . lastly , reporting agencies did not always provide accurate data for the core report because they do not have clear guidance on issues such as how to report additional depot workload performed that has not been identified as a core requirement , accurately capture inter - service workload , calculate shortfalls , and estimate cost of planned workload . dod's 2016 core report complied with the first two elements in section 2464 — to provide information on core capability requirements and planned workload . as requested by osd to support the core report , the armed services provided data on their core capability requirements , organized by lower - level elements of the eleven first - level categories of the work breakdown structure . the report included the required information on core capability requirements — expressed in direct labor hours — at the first - level category of the work breakdown structure , for each of the armed services . as reported in dod's 2016 core report , dod's total core capability requirements are about 58.5 million direct labor hours , as shown in table 4 . as requested by osd to support the core report , the armed services also provided data on their planned workloads — the amount of available work used to maintain the required capability , organized by lower - level elements of the eleven first - level categories of the work breakdown structure . in the report , osd included information on the amount of planned workload that is available to maintain the required capability at the first - level categories of the work breakdown structure , expressed in direct labor hours , and the estimated cost of these workloads for each of the armed services . as shown in table 5 , dod reported a total planned workload of about 93 million direct labor hours at an estimated cost of about $12 billion .