monitoring of dispute investigations . representatives from four cras said they have processes in place to help ensure that furnishers are responsive to disputes . for example , representatives from one cra said that the automated system they use to correspond with furnishers about disputes automatically identifies illogical furnisher responses ; the cra contacts the furnisher to confirm the accuracy of those responses . representatives from four cras told us that they monitor furnisher responses to disputes , such as dispute trends by furnisher type and the rate at which furnishers do not respond to disputes . although cras have made changes to improve processes for ensuring accuracy and addressing inaccuracies , cfpb and industry stakeholders said that challenges remain in these areas . first , cfpb staff told us that the consumer reporting market has historically had comparatively less regulatory intervention than other regulated markets . as a result , the staff said that it has been challenging to change cras' approach to a proactive one , whereby the cras proactively address compliance and change practices , as opposed to a defensive , reactive approach in response to consumer disputes and lawsuits . cfpb staff explained that this has been a focus of cfpb's supervision and said that its examination findings have demonstrated that cras can take actions to improve accuracy . further , representatives from three consumer groups said that consumer report inaccuracy remains a challenge because cras lack incentives to be responsive to consumers , in part because the cras' customers are the users of consumer reports , such as banks and employers , rather than the consumers themselves . additionally , two industry stakeholders identified gaps in furnisher responsibilities for ensuring accuracy as a challenge . representatives from one of these stakeholders , a state agency , said that furnishers often do not know their responsibilities for ensuring the accuracy of their data . monitoring of furnished data . representatives from four cras said that they use various mechanisms to monitor furnished data to detect potential inaccuracies and take corrective actions against furnishers that do not comply with data furnishing standards . for example , representatives from three cras told us they compare data submissions against industry patterns and historical trends — such as data submission history over the past 6 months — to identify anomalies that would suggest erroneous data and take actions such as rejecting incoming data and returning data for correction . representatives from one of these cras said that they analyze why a furnisher deviates from industry trends and help the furnisher identify and implement changes . representatives from four cras told us that they provide regular reports , such as monthly reports , on data quality to furnishers . we reported previously that such steps may improve the quality of the information received from furnishers but cannot ensure the accuracy of such data . representatives from the other stakeholder , a cra , said that while the cra has implemented policies and procedures to ensure accuracy in response to cfpb's supervision , furnishers might not have implemented similar policies and procedures to ensure the accuracy of the data provided .