ii ) . this result did not demonstrate that the declines in poverty in the ezs were directly associated with the ez program . finally , we conducted interviews of ez stakeholders and surveyed ec officials to determine their views of the effects of the ez / ec program on their communities . their responses were consistent with the inconclusive results of our other analyses: in general , they believed that both the ez / ec program and additional factors had affected the prevalence of poverty in their communities . some ez and ec stakeholders said that the ez / ec designation and program activities had addressed poverty by bringing in jobs and helping to stabilize the area . for instance , stakeholders from several ezs , including the chicago , mid - delta , and kentucky highlands ezs , mentioned the role of the ez in job creation . since the survey was administered by e - mail , a usability pretest was conducted at one urban ec ( akron , ohio ) to observe the respondent answering the questionnaire as it would appear when opened and displayed on their computer screen . in administering the survey , we took the following steps to increase the response rate . to identify survey participants , we obtained contact information for the round i ecs that did not receive a subsequent designation from hud and usda in april 2005 . we then sent a notification e - mail to inform the ecs of the survey , to identify the correct point of contact , and to ensure the e - mail account was active . those who did not respond to the first e - mail received follow up e - mails and telephone calls . the questionnaire was e - mailed on august 25 , 2005 to 27 rural ecs and 33 urban ecs , and participants were given the option to respond via e - mail , fax , or post mail . between september and december 2005 , multiple follow up e - mails and calls were made to increase the response rate . when the survey closed on december 20 , 2005 , all of the rural ecs and 31 of the 33 urban ecs had completed it . the overall response rate was high at 97 percent , with the response rates for the rural ecs at 100 percent and urban ecs at 94 percent . we did not attempt to verify the respondents' answers against an independent source of information . however , we used two techniques to verify the reliability of questionnaire items . first , we used in - depth interviewing techniques to evaluate the answers of pretest participants , and interviewers judged that all the respondents' answers to the questions were based on reliable information . second , for the items that asked about changes to poverty , unemployment , and economic growth in the ec , we asked respondents to provide a source of data for their response . responses to those questions that did not include a data source were excluded from our analysis of those items . the practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce certain types of errors , commonly referred to as nonsampling errors .