, or obtain a waiver . furthermore , dod developed a netcentric data strategy , standardizing the way data will be described and used in systems that make up the gig . these decisions will need to span a wide range of organizations , including the military services and their respective major commands and functional activities , numerous large defense agencies and field activities , and various combatant and joint operational commands that are responsible for military operations for specific geographic regions or theaters of operations . having accurate and reliable visibility over spending on systems that must integrate with the gig will be necessary as well as having effective mechanisms for identifying and deciding which systems should be pursued and which should not . in 2003 , we reported ( as part of a survey of federal agencies enterprise architecture programs ) that dod had made progress in developing the gig architecture , however , the department had not completed some essential architecture products that describe the desired ( target ) technology environment and provide a sequencing plan for transitioning to it . more specifically , at this point , dod is largely leaving it up to its components and services to decide how best to migrate their systems to the gig . there is no well - defined strategy that identifies what capabilities dod will invest in and what it will not invest in ; identifies how investments will align with the goals and objectives of the gig architecture ; determines what is affordable , particularly in light of near - term and sets out criteria for determining what legacy systems should remain or be phased out ; and specifies by whom and how decisions will be enforced . in addition , it is unknown how senior leaders within dod will be able to focus on the progress of the gig as a whole , that is , whether it is being developed and fielded within cost and schedule , whether risks are being adequately mitigated , and whether the gig is providing a worthwhile return on investment , particularly in terms of enhancing military operations . until dod implements an investment and oversight strategy for the gig as a whole , it is at risk of making investments that do not fit its vision for the future . according to dod officials , the enhancements dod is making to its planning and budgeting processes are meant to begin addressing these questions . however , these changes may be difficult to implement for a number of reasons . first , to some degree because of the broad scope and crosscutting nature of the gig concept , no office or single program is in charge of the gig , making it more difficult to make and enforce trade - off decisions . moreover , while key acquisition , budgeting , and requirements setting processes have been modified , they still largely operate under the same organizational structure , where it has been difficult to link acquisition and investment decisions to joint concepts like the gig .