we then reviewed these descriptions to determine the recipients of the grant services . in addition to indigent defense providers , this included the following categories: civil defenders , criminal defenders , prosecutors , law enforcement providers , court offices , correctional agencies , crime victims , reentry service providers , juvenile delinquency prevention organizations , appellate defenders , drug treatment providers , community and public outreach providers , non - attorney staff , innocence projects , and universities . many grants had multiple recipients of grant services . in these instances , we classified the grants to reflect all recipients ; as a result , grants may be counted in more than one category . for each grant program we determined the number of grants used exclusively for indigent defense , the number of grants used for indigent defense with another grant recipient category , and the number and amount of grants that were not used for indigent defense . two analysts made these classifications in order to verify each other's work . to what extent does doj collect data on indigent defense funding when the grant program specifies that funds be allocated or awarded for this purpose or highlights it as a priority ? when a grant program specifies that funds be spent for indigent defense or highlights it as a priority , to what extent does doj assess the impacts of this grant funding , and to what extent have there been evaluations of indigent defense programs and has doj supported these evaluation efforts ? those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our analysis based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our analysis based on our audit objectives . to determine what doj grant programs and bia funding could be used for indigent defense from fiscal years 2005 through 2010 , we analyzed the catalog of federal domestic assistance and doj's website , and consulted doj and bia officials responsible for administering state , local , and tribal grant and funding programs.recipients of relevant doj grants , and identified recipients of relevant bia funding through bia's annual budget justifications . further , we interviewed knowledgeable agency officials about the source of the grant data and the controls in place to maintain the integrity of the data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . in addition , we interviewed doj and bia officials with knowledge of other assistance the agencies provide to support indigent defense .