mres . u.s. forces in iraq experienced shortages of mres primarily during the deployment and major combat phases in february , march , and april 2003 before normal dining facilities were established . the peak monthly demand for mres rose to more than 1.8 million cases , while inventories dropped to a level of 500,000 cases . in late april when other food options became available , demand fell rapidly . while certain army units reported running out of mres , available data only shows that they came close . according to a rand study , some army units came within an estimated 2 days or less of exhausting their on hand quantities . similarly , according to a center for naval analysis study , at times marine corps combat support units had less than 1 day of mres on hand . as a result , both army and marine corps units were at risk of running out of food if supply distribution was hindered . tires for 5-ton trucks and hmmwvs . the rising demand for truck tires during and after major combat operations in iraq nearly exhausted existing inventories . the demand grew as vehicles were driven long distances and were modified with add - on - armor . for example , in august 2003 , the army's inventory contained only 505 tires for 5-ton trucks , which fell far below the worldwide monthly demand of more than 4,800 tires . as a result , back orders spiked to over 7,000 for 5-ton truck tires and to over 13,000 for hmmwv tires . the shortages reduced the operational capabilities of these vehicles and negatively impacted operations in iraq . for example , 3rd infantry division units reported that tire shortages forced them to abandon equipment , and marine corps units reported stripping and abandoning otherwise good vehicles because of a lack of tires . up - armored hmmwvs and add - on - armor kits . since the u.s. military began identifying requirements for these vehicles during the summer of 2003 , there has been a gap between the number of vehicles required and the number being produced by the industrial base . this new requirement was based on the need to protect soldiers and marines executing distribution and force protection missions . the up - armored hmmwv provides enhanced protection against rifle rounds and explosive blasts while the add - on – armor kits provide some additional protection to previously unarmored vehicles . as of september 2004 , only 5,330 of the 8,105 required vehicles were in theater . the overall impact of the shortages of up - armored hmmwvs and add - on - armor kits is difficult to measure because units do not report the direct effects of using unarmored hmmwvs . however , according to a center for army lessons learned study , the risk of harm to both personnel and equipment from improvised explosive devices is greatly reduced when they are transported in an up - armored hmmwv . two items we examined — chemical - biological suits and marine corps helicopter parts — did not experience shortages . in these cases , although demands were high because of wartime operations , the defense supply system was able to meet the needs of deployed forces .