disallowance of expenditure . if cms determines an expenditure is not allowable , cms can issue a disallowance , and the state returns federal funds through reductions in future federal allocations . states may appeal disallowances . cms uses a variety of processes to assure that state - reported expenditures are supported during quarterly reviews and performs focused financial management reviews on expenditures considered at risk of not complying with medicaid requirements . although we found that cms was identifying errors and compliance issues using both review methods , we also found weaknesses in how cms targets its oversight resources to address risks . cms uses quarterly reviews to assess whether expenditures are supported by the state's accounting systems ; are in accordance with cms approved methodologies , plans , and spending caps ; and whether there are significant unexplained variances — changes in expenditures — from one quarter to the next ( referred to as a variance analysis ) . cms review procedures include validation measures that check to ensure that expenditures were reported within the 2-year limit , which is a check done on all types of expenditures . another validation measure compares expenditures to various approval documents . for example , when a state has a waiver in place , expenditures are reviewed against waiver agreements that authorize payment for specified services or populations . other examples include comparing supplemental payment expenditures to caps set for those expenditures . ( see table 3. ) our examination of the quarterly reviews indicated that the reviews involved significant coordination with other cms staff and the state . in addition to reviewing state documentation , officials from two regional offices told us that they consult other regional office staff who oversee the approval of new expenditures to ensure that expenditures reflect approved program features . deferral of federal funds . cms can defer federal matching funds if , during the quarterly review , the regional office reviewer needs additional information to determine whether a particular expenditure is allowable . the reviewer may recommend that cms defer the expenditure until the state provides additional support or corrects the reporting . state reducing reported expenditures . if the state agrees that the questionable expenditure is an error , the state can submit an adjusted report during the quarterly review or make an adjustment in a subsequent quarter . these adjustments prevent federal payments for those expenditures . for example , officials in region 9 told us that in reviewing managed care expenditures , they consult with their colleagues who review the state's payment methodologies for capitated payments . in reviewing information technology development expenditures — which are subject to a higher federal matching rate — reviewers for all six selected states examined advanced planning documents , which requires coordination with staff who approve those documents to ensure that the state was receiving the correct matching rates and staying within the approved amounts . with regard to coordination with states , we found that regional reviewers for all six reviews contacted states to follow - up on issues identified during the review . officials also described being in regular contact with states to stay abreast of program , system , and staffing changes to inform their reviews .