we have revised this section of the report . the bureau believes much of the undeliverable as addressed operational and waste - disposal costs for usps and additional postage fees for the bureau were both anticipated and unavoidable . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of commerce , the under secretary of economic affairs , the director of the u.s. census bureau , the postmaster general , and interested congressional committees . the report also is available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions on matters discussed in this report , please contact robert goldenkoff at ( 202 ) 512-2757 or by e - mail at goldenkoffr@gao.gov or phillip herr at ( 202 ) 512-8509 or by e - mail at herrp@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . those comments are reprinted in appendix ii . the bureau in its comments was silent on whether it agreed with the recommendation to target recruitment opportunities to mail carriers , however , in a subsequent discussion stated that it did agree with that first recommendation . the bureau disagreed with the finding and recommendation for reducing the undeliverable as addressed mailing workload , stating they had already analyzed the available reasons for why mailings were undeliverable and because the number of unique addresses that were undeliverable did not vary substantially from bureau projections . further , the bureau provided additional information related to one of our findings that we incorporated into the report , as appropriate . specifically , the bureau informed us that since the completion of our audit work , it has opted not to use the intelligent mail barcode in its american community survey . this new information is reflected in the body of the report . in the comments , the bureau also included an attachment of analysis that was not reprinted in this report because the data were still in draft . the bureau noted that our report , in its discussion of undeliverable as addressed mailings , implies that the majority of these mailings were the result of invalid addresses . our draft report did not intend to imply that the majority of undeliverable as addressed mailings were the result of invalid addresses . in fact , our report emphasizes that the different purposes of the address lists for usps and the census bureau contributed to the many undeliverable mailings . we have revised the language in the finding to further clarify this point . the bureau stated that our report also implies that the bureau underestimated the number of undeliverable as addressed mailings by 7 million because of a miscommunication between the census and usps . specifically , the bureau in its response to our draft report acknowledges that it never clearly communicated to usps that undeliverable mailings would be higher than the number of undeliverable addresses . according to bureau officials , this is because undeliverable addresses receive multiple mailings .