type of services provided . states used hundreds of different procedure codes for personal care services . procedure codes on submitted claims and encounters were inconsistent in three ways: the number of codes used by states ; the use of both national and state - specific codes ; and the varying definitions of different codes across states . more than 400 unique procedure codes were used by the 35 states . cms does not require that states use standard procedure codes for personal care services ; instead , states have the discretion to use state - based procedure codes of their own choosing or national procedure codes . as a result , the procedure codes used for similar services differed from state to state , which limits cms's ability to use this data as a tool to compare and track changes in the use of specific personal care services provided to beneficiaries because cms cannot easily compare similar procedures by comparing service procedure codes . in our 2017 report we found that medicaid personal care services expenditure data collected were not always accurate or complete , according to our analysis of expenditure data collected by cms from states for calendar years 2012 through 2015 . when submitting expenditure data , cms requires states to report expenditures for personal care services on specific reporting lines . these reporting lines correspond with the specific types of programs under which states have received authority to cover personal care services , and can affect the federal matching payment amounts states receive when seeking federal reimbursement . for example , a 6 percent increase in federal matching is available for services provided through the community first choice program . for three other types of hcbs programs , cms also requires states to report their expenditures for personal care services separately from other types of services provided under each program on what cms refers to as feeder forms — that is , individual expenditure lines for different types of services that feed into the total hcbs spending amount for each program . we found that not all states were reporting their personal care services expenditures accurately , and , as result , personal care services expenditures may have been underreported or reported in an incorrect category . we compared personal care services expenditures for all states for calendar years 2012 through 2015 with each state's approved programs during this time period and found that about 17 percent of personal care services expenditure lines were not reported correctly . we found that this happens for two reasons . first , although states have 6 weeks following the completion of a quarter to report their claims data , their reporting could be delayed as a result of providers and managed care plans not submitting data in a timely manner , according to the cms contractor responsible for compiling data files of medicaid claims and encounters . additional information on our scopes and methodologies are included in the 2016 and 2017 reports . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .