fingerprinting during address canvassing was problematic . of the over 162,000 employees hired for the operation , 22 percent — or approximately 35,700 workers — had unclassifiable prints that the fbi could not process . the fbi determined that the unclassifiable prints were generally the result of errors that occurred when the prints were first made . factors affecting the quality of the prints included difficulty in first learning how to effectively capture the prints and the adequacy of the bureau's training . further , the workspace and environment for taking fingerprints was unpredictable , and factors such as the height of the workspace on which the prints were taken could affect the legibility of the prints . consistent with fbi guidance , the bureau relied on the results of the name background check for the nearly 36,000 employees with unclassifiable prints . of the prints that could be processed , fingerprint results identified approximately 1,800 temporary workers ( 1.1 percent of total hires ) with criminal records that name check alone failed to identify . of the 1,800 workers with criminal records , approximately 750 ( 42 percent ) were terminated or were further reviewed because the bureau determined their criminal records — which included crimes such as rape , manslaughter , and child abuse — disqualified them from census employment . projecting these percentages to the 35,700 temporary employees with unclassifiable prints , it is possible that more than 200 temporary census employees might have had criminal records that would have made them ineligible for census employment . importantly , this is a projection , and the number of individuals with criminal backgrounds that were hired for address canvassing , if any , is not known . applying these same percentages to the approximately 600,000 people the bureau plans to fingerprint for nonresponse follow - up , unless the problems with fingerprinting are addressed , approximately 785 employees with unclassifiable prints could have disqualifying criminal records but still end up working for the bureau . aside from public safety concerns , there are cost issues as well . however , if they are living someplace else , then they will be counted where they are living on census day . to help ensure group quarters are accurately included in the census , the bureau is conducting an operation called group quarters validation , an effort that is to run during september and october 2009 , and has a workload of around 2 million addresses in both the united states and puerto rico . during this operation , census workers are to visit each group quarter and interview its manager or administrator using a short questionnaire . the goal is to determine the status of the address as a group quarter , housing unit , transitory location , nonresidential , vacant , or delete . if the dwelling is in fact a group quarter , it must then be determined what category it fits under ( eg , boarding school , correctional facility , health care facility , military quarters , residence hall or dormitory , etc .

 ) , and confirm its correct geographic location . the actual enumeration of group quarters is scheduled to begin april 1 , 2010 .