110-289 , div . authorizes treasury to prescribe the debt instruments and otherwise limit and restrict the amount and composition of the debt . bpd , an organizational entity within the fiscal service of the department of the treasury , is responsible for issuing treasury securities in accordance with such authority and to account for the resulting debt . in addition , bpd has been given the responsibility to issue treasury securities to trust funds for trust fund receipts not needed for current benefits and expenses . bpd issues and redeems treasury securities for the trust funds based on data provided by program agencies and other treasury entities . bpd also issues other specific securities outside of the authority of title 31 u.s.c . § 3101 , such as hope bonds . these securities are not reported on the schedules of federal debt managed by the bureau of the public debt . the schedules were prepared in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles and from bpd's automated accounting system , public debt accounting and reporting system . interest costs are recorded as expenses when incurred , instead of when paid . certain treasury securities are issued at a discount or premium . these discounts and premiums are amortized over the term of the security using an interest method for all long term securities and the straight line method for short term securities . the department of the treasury also issues treasury inflation - protected securities ( tips ) . the principal for tips is adjusted daily over the life of the security based on the consumer price index for all urban consumers . notes to the schedules of federal debt managed by the bureau of the public debt for the fiscal years ended september 30 , 2009 and 2008 note 2 . federal debt held by the public as of september 30 , 2009 and 2008 , federal debt held by the public consisted of the following: total federal debt held by the public treasury issues marketable bills usually at a discount , but may also issue at par , and pays the par amount of the security upon maturity . the average interest rate on treasury bills represents the original issue effective yield on securities outstanding as of september 30 , 2009 and 2008 , respectively . treasury bills are issued with a term of one treasury issues marketable notes and bonds as long - term securities that pay semi - annual interest based on the securities' stated interest rate . these securities are issued at either par value or at an amount that reflects a discount or a premium . the average interest rate on marketable notes and bonds represents the stated interest rate adjusted by any discount or premium on securities outstanding as of september 30 , 2009 and 2008 . treasury notes are issued with a term of 2 – 10 years and treasury bonds are issued with a term of more than 10 years . treasury also issues tips that have interest and redemption payments , which are tied to the consumer price index for all urban consumers , a widely used measure of inflation . tips are issued with a term of 5 years or more .