epa . to describe any differences in uses between its toxicity values and those of other selected agencies , epa indicated that the agencies' values are developed in response to specific statutory requirements . epa provided supplementary information about these requirements , as well as the purposes for the values developed by these agencies . niosh . to describe differences in uses between its toxicity values and those of other selected agencies , niosh indicated that its recommended exposure limits ( rel ) are developed for workplace exposures ( other agencies develop values for environmental exposure ) ; niosh rels also support osha rulemaking . osha . for all chemicals except chromium vi , osha described the following differences in uses between its toxicity values and those of other selected agencies , and reasons why it developed its values: for most of its regulated chemicals , osha has not relied on an agency risk assessment to establish permissible exposure limits ( pels ) . rather , these pels were adopted shortly after formation of the agency in 1971 from approximately 400 occupational exposure limits that were based on the american conference of governmental industrial hygienist's 1968 list of threshold value limits . on january 19 , 1989 , osha published a final rule on air contaminants that lowered 212 of osha's existing pels for toxic substances and set pels for 164 toxic substances that had been previously unregulated . in doing so , osha relied heavily on the already published and widely accepted threshold limit values published by the american conference of governmental industrial hygienists and the rels developed by niosh . in 1992 , a federal appellate court vacated these standards , holding that osha had failed to establish that the new standards were technologically and economically feasible . as a result , osha resumed enforcing , and employers were required to comply with , the air contaminant exposure limits that were in effect prior to the issuance of the new limits on january 19 , 1989 . in reinstating the previous limits , osha said that it continued to believe that many these old limits were out of date ( they predate 1968 ) and not sufficiently protective of employee health based on current scientific information and expert recommendations . in addition , osha observed that many of the substances for which osha had no pels presented serious health hazards to employees . in commenting on the information in this appendix , osha officials stated that they continue to believe the limits contained in the 1989 rulemaking reduced significant risks of material impairment of health or functional capacity , and were technologically and economically feasible . gao note: the agencies listed below have developed toxicity values that vary in exposure . specific terms included are “acute,” which atsdr defines as exposure of between 1 and 14 days , and which calepa defines as exposure of 1 hour . atsdr defines “intermediate” exposure is being between 15 and 364 days . both calepa and epa define “chronic” exposure as being over the course of a lifetime , and atsdr defines “chronic” as being exposure of 365 days or longer .