( recommendation 1 ) . the apa provides for public notice and comment . at the beginning of the proceeding , carriers applying for immunity place information about the proposed cooperative agreement in a public docket . dot staff then review this material , may request additional information to address any questions raised by their review , and will solicit comments from the public . the apa , in contrast to department of justice merger review procedures , specifies steps that afford public involvement and requires agencies to respond to the public comments . in dot's proceedings , the department typically issues “show cause” orders that articulate the tentative approval or disapproval of the application . after publishing this show - cause order , dot solicits additional public comments for review prior to issuing a final decision . dot's competitive analysis focuses on the likely effect of the cooperative agreement on competition in key airline markets , while the public benefits analysis focuses on the likelihood of carrier integration yielding consumer benefits . as discussed earlier , dot's process includes opportunities for stakeholders' participation . stakeholders we interviewed considered the overall review process transparent , though some had criticisms of the underlying economic evidence dot uses to predict if , and how , consumer benefits might arise . the potential effects of proposed cooperative agreements on competition , and thus consumers , are central to dot's analysis . specifically , dot looks to see how the agreement may affect competition across routes affected by the alliance agreement . to make this assessment , according to dot documentation that we reviewed and officials whom we interviewed , dot focuses on three key elements of the proposed agreement . specifically , dot identifies ( 1 ) the geographic scope of the proposed alliance and which markets that the agreement would affect ; ( 2 ) the number of competitors in each market , their market shares , and the level of market concentration ; and ( 3 ) the feasibility and likelihood of market entry by new competitors into markets that might be adversely affected by the agreement as well as the ability of existing carriers to compete in such markets ( see table 1 ) . dot's assessment is based on an array of information provided by applicants and third parties . this information may include competitive analyses or other studies conducted by consulting economists for the applicants , and business plans and data , among other things . dot may also independently use departmental databases to conduct its own analysis , including those data dot collects from foreign carriers pursuant to data - reporting requirements in existing grants of antitrust immunity . dot looks at competitive issues at the region - to - region ( eg , united states to europe ) , country - to - country ( united states to france ) , and city - to - city levels ( eg , new york - to - paris city pair market ) , or airport - to - airport pairs ( chicago o'hare - to - london heathrow ) .