iv ) . in addition , a senior policy analyst from the office of science and technology policy / executive office of the president provided technical comments on a draft of this report via email , which we incorporated as appropriate . in their comments , both noaa and dod agreed with our recommendations and identified plans to implement them . for example , noaa plans to work with nasa to develop requirements and acquisition plans , identify the organization and staffing , and establish a cost and schedule baseline for jpss . in addition , dod officials reported that the agency plans to make decisions on capability , cost , and schedule following a series of meetings taking place in june 2010 . in addition , regarding the potential need to slow down or stop work on the npoess program to deal with potential contract liabilities and funding constraints , noaa , nasa , and dod reported that the npoess program office has identified priorities for work stoppage so that key activities could continue . at the end of march 2010 , the program executive officer provided high - level guidance on the priorities of the program , such as ensuring that npp development continues and ensuring that key sensor development is transferred to the jpss program . subsequently , program officials stated that the contractor agreed to slow all of its development work through the end of the fiscal year to avoid a work stoppage . however , slowing all work activities does not reflect a prioritization of the most important activities . unless the key activities that are on the critical path are able to continue scheduled development , the launches of npp and the first few satellites could be further delayed . nasa also commented on our finding that noaa would need to provide enhanced oversight of nasa's management of the jpss program . we called for enhanced oversight based , in part , on nasa's history of poor performance in managing major acquisitions . nasa officials asserted that the proper basis for comparison should not be their leading edge research missions , but , instead , should be the operational environmental satellite missions it has developed for noaa in the past . nasa noted that its role in jpss will be structured similar to the polar - orbiting operational environmental satellite ( poes ) and geostationary operational environmental satellite ( goes ) programs , where noaa and nasa have a long and effective partnership . however , we believe that enhanced oversight is warranted . four of the five sensors intended for npp are now on the spacecraft . in addition , the program has continued to develop key sensors intended for the first npoess satellite ( viirs , cris , omps , and the advanced technology microwave sounder sensors ) , and a key sensor for the second npoess satellite ( the microwave imager / sounder ) . these components may be transferred to noaa and dod to become part of their respective follow - on programs . however , the program experienced technical issues on the cross - track infrared sounder ( cris ) sensor intended for the npp satellite .