expenses allocated to and from the underwriter . for each affiliated title service company , the names of the 10 largest clients . the average was $663 . however , these data must be viewed with caution because they do not account for differences in what could be included in the premium . moreover , since these data came from only one zip code per state , they may not be representative of other localities . industry officials said that rates vary because of differences in what was included in the rate and in standard business costs in each area . nearly all of the industry participants we spoke with emphasized that title insurance is a local business , varying both within and across states . they said that state property , trustee , probate , and estate laws could partially explain the rate differences . in some states , these requirements make it much more expensive to do the search and examination work and clear all of the risks through the examination process . experts told us that trying to compare rates across states would not be meaningful because of the differences in the components of the premium . among the factors raising questions about the existence of price competition and the resulting prices paid by consumers within the title insurance industry are the following: consumers find it difficult to shop for title insurance , therefore , they put little pressure on insurers and agents to compete based on price ; title agents do not market to consumers , who pay for title insurance , but to those in the position to refer consumers to particular title agents , thus creating potential conflicts of interest ; a number of recent investigations by hud and state regulatory officials have identified instances of alleged illegal activities within the title industry that appear to reduce price competition and could indicate excessive prices ; as property values or loan amounts increase , prices paid for title insurance by consumers appear to increase faster than insurers' and agents' costs ; and in states where agents' search and examination services are not included in the premium paid by consumers , it is not clear that additional amounts paid to title agents are fully supported by underlying costs . disagreement exists between title industry officials and regulators over the actual extent of price competition within title insurance markets , with industry officials asserting that such competition exists and a number of regulators stating that a lack of competition ultimately results in excessive prices paid by consumers . for several reasons , consumers find it difficult to shop for title insurance based on price , raising questions about the existence of price competition in title insurance markets . first , most consumers buy real estate — and with it , title insurance — infrequently . as a result , they are not familiar with what title insurance is , what reasonable prices might be , or which title agents might provide the best service .