instruction 8510.01 . air force , navy , and marine corps officials stated that they have polices that assess the cybersecurity of ics , but that the policies do not cover the requirements in dod instruction 8510.01 . in addition , navy headquarters officials stated that they issued draft guidance in february 2015 , which , according to these officials , outlines the navy's process for accreditation of ics cybersecurity per requirements in dod instruction 8510.01 . navy , marine corps , and air force officials stated that they are developing technical capabilities that will assist with the implementation of dod instruction 8510.01 . for example , air force officials are developing a concept called icsnet , which includes hardware and software designed to monitor ics operations and provide intrusion - detection capabilities . further , osd officials stated that they are refining the enterprise mission assurance support service tool , which manages certification and accreditation processes for dod instruction 8510.01 , to better support ics - specific requirements . the military services face three challenges — conducting an inventory of existing ics ; finding qualified personnel with the necessary skills to implement the cybersecurity requirements ; and identifying funding needed to implement dod instruction 8510.01 — related to their implementation of cybersecurity guidance for ics . according to military service officials , the services have not yet implemented dod instruction 8510.01 and transitioning to the instruction is a complex and difficult task . evidence of this difficulty is that — according to officials from the office of the dod chief information officer — dod revised the original time frames to transition to dod instruction 8510.01 because they were unachievable . specifically , the original time frames required the military services to transition ics without a current accreditation to dod instruction 8510.01 by september 2014 , among other things . dod's adjusted time frames allow the services until the second quarter of fiscal year 2018 to implement dod instruction 8510.01 . according to army officials , the adjusted time frames will allow the military services additional time to plan for the transition . however , even with the additional time , the services may be challenged to implement dod instruction 8510.01 . military service headquarters officials stated that they are still developing an inventory of their services' respective ics . dod instruction 8510.01 requires that ics should be categorized based on the potential impact on an organization . as part of this categorization , it is necessary to inventory the ics and collect information about the system , such as the type of information collected and maintained on the system and technical aspects of the system , such as the type of operating system used . military officials we spoke with explained that an inventory of ics is an important tool for managing the various types and locations of ics on military installations . navy officials explained that a complete inventory of ics would help headquarters officials communicate information about updated security vulnerabilities to system owners . however , as of february 2015 , none of the military services had a complete inventory of existing ics . while each service is taking steps to obtain a complete inventory , the data collection process is challenging .