gao - 08-533t . washington , d.c.: june 12 , 2008 . we also reviewed the safe framework itself . additionally , we spoke with wco officials in brussels . we reviewed wco documents related to capacity - building efforts and progress towards implementation of the safe framework . what actions has cbp taken with international partners to achieve mutual recognition of customs security practices ? what issues do cbp and foreign customs administrations working to internationalize customs security standards anticipate in implementing 100 percent scanning of u.s. - bound container cargo ? to address these objectives , we reviewed available cbp documentation , such as reports pertaining to the csi , c - tpat , and sfi programs , and international agreements related to cbp's work in the international trade community . in addition , we met with cbp officials in washington , d.c. , who have program responsibilities for international affairs and trade . also , to discuss multilateral and bilateral efforts to promote supply chain security , we met with representatives from the european commission and the wco , as well as with customs officials from the americas , asia , and europe at the 2007 wco world customs forum and cbp's 2007 csi global targeters conference . we also spoke with representatives of industry groups , including cbp's departmental advisory committee on commercial operations and the federation of european private port operators . we spoke with officials of foreign customs administrations during our visits to 6 of the 58 seaports that participate in the csi program . we selected the six csi seaports — located in the countries of belgium , canada , france , honduras , south korea , and united arab emirates — based on geographic and strategic significance , container volume shipped to the united states from the seaports , and when the seaports began conducting csi operations . the results from our visits to seaports provided examples of cbp and host government operations but cannot be generalized beyond the seaports visited because we did not use statistical sampling techniques in selecting the seaports . similarly , while the perspectives of foreign officials we spoke to cannot be generalized across the wider population of countries , they provided us examples of how cbp interacts with foreign customs administration officials at overseas seaports . additionally , we reviewed cbp and wco documents on international initiatives for enhancing supply chain security . we conducted this performance audit in conjunction with concurrent reviews of the csi and c - tpat programs from may 2006 through july 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . a detailed discussion of our scope and methodology is contained in appendix i . seaports are critical gateways for the movement of commerce through the international supply chain . the facilities , vessels , and infrastructure within seaports , and the cargo passing through them , all have vulnerabilities that terrorists could exploit .