pub . weak internal controls limited dod's ability to accurately identify air sovereignty alert mission expenditures . in addition , according to air national guard officials , not all national guard bureau costs are included in total aerospace control alert mission costs . for example , the air force calculates the costs for each basing location based on formulas that do not consider the base's location and the unit's home station . however , according to air national guard officials , the actual costs of each basing location can vary depending on a number of factors , such as whether the personnel at the location are air national guard or active duty air force personnel or whether the assigned unit is home - based or a detachment unit — temporarily relocated from their usual duty station . the air force budget justification displays submitted for fiscal years 2010-14 include personnel costs for air force , air national guard , and air force reserve personnel , but do not include costs , such as military personnel costs , that other military services have in conjunction with the aerospace control alert mission . in addition to the 2009 requirement , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 requires that dod provide a consolidated budget justification display that fully identifies the aerospace control alert budget for each of the military services and encompasses all programs and activities of the aerospace control alert mission for each of the following: ( 1 ) procurement ; ( 2 ) operations and maintenance ; ( 3 ) research , development , testing , and evaluation ; and ( 4 ) military construction . however , the act does not require any additional military personnel cost reporting . dod has not yet developed a consolidated budget display in response to this new requirement . however , according to dod officials , such a display is being developed for inclusion with the department's fiscal year 2015 budget submission to include the four budget categories specifically identified by the act . as a result , dod's consolidated budget display for the fiscal year 2015 budget submission may not include military personnel costs associated with the other services , particularly the army . the consolidated budget displays required by the duncan hunter national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 and the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 should help provide congress and senior dod decision makers with a more complete picture of aerospace control alert mission costs . however , in addition to air force , air national guard , and air force reserve personnel costs , personnel costs from the other dod components also support the mission — including the army and the army national guard personnel providing ground - based air defense capabilities in support of the mission . unless this additional information is included in dod's revised budget display , dod decision makers will not have comprehensive cost information to make fully informed resource allocation decisions to support the aerospace control alert mission . the aerospace control alert mission is critical to defending u.s. airspace .