if not challenged , then the test is considered a failure . after testing at the airport is complete , team leaders conduct post - test reviews with the tsos , supervisors , and screening managers involved in the testing . tsa officials further stated that the agency has representatives stationed overseas at u.s. embassies that are knowledgeable about security issues across all modes of transportation . while tsa coordinates with domestic and foreign organizations regarding transportation security efforts , they do not have a systematic process in place to coordinate with these organizations regarding covert testing in non - aviation modes of transportation , and opportunities for tsa to learn from these organizations' covert testing efforts exist . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our analysis and the purposes of this report . we also interviewed oi officials regarding how the results of covert tests are used in developing their recommendations to tsa management . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . however , our observations at the seven airports provided us an overall understanding of how oi conduct covert tests and useful insights provided by tsos , their supervisors , and fsds at these airports . we analyzed tsa documents including established protocols for national and local covert testing , procedures for screening passengers and checked baggage , and oi covert testing reports issued from 2002 to 2007 to identify procedures for designing and implementing tsa's covert testing program . furthermore , to determine the extent to which tsa met the goals of the program , we conducted a detailed analysis of the data collection instrument and methods that oi used to collect covert testing data for the seven airports where we observed covert tests . we also assessed the adequacy of tsa's internal controls for collecting and maintaining the results of covert tests by evaluating tsa's processes for collecting covert testing data and inputting this data into its database . in assessing the adequacy of internal controls , we used the criteria in gao's standards for internal control in the federal government , gao / aimd 00-21.3.1 , dated november 1999 . these standards , issued pursuant to the requirements of the federal managers' financial integrity act of 1982 ( fmfia ) , provide the overall framework for establishing and maintaining internal control in the federal government . also pursuant to fmfia , the office of management and budget issued circular a - 123 , revised december 21 , 2004 , to provide the specific requirements for assessing the reporting on internal controls . to assess tsa's strategy for conducting covert tests in non - aviation modes of transportation , we interviewed officials from tsa's office of transportation sector network management ( tsnm ) regarding the extent to which tsa has conducted covert testing in non - aviation modes of transportation , the applicability and potential use of covert testing in other modes , and their future plans for conducting covert testing in other modes .