ii. ) we verified the reliability of medicare claims and other data used in this report through electronic data checks and by speaking with relevant parties knowledgeable about the data , including cms ; drug manufacturers ; and truven health analytics . in addition , we verified information on coupon use by conducting checks of internal consistency and by speaking with manufacturers as needed to verify the reliability of the information . we determined that the data used in this report were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we conducted this performance audit from august 2015 to july 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . manufacturer drug coupon programs reduce or eliminate out - of - pocket costs for specific drugs and are typically available to privately insured patients regardless of income . drug manufacturers provide these discounts to patients through several mechanisms . for example , manufacturers may provide patients with debit cards to be activated at the point of sale . alternatively , manufacturers may pay the patient's coupon discount amount directly to a provider , who would reduce the patient's out - of - pocket cost accordingly . manufacturers inform patients and providers of coupon programs in a variety of ways , such as distributing promotional materials , operating program websites and patient hotlines , and sending field representatives to communicate program information to providers . the effect of coupon programs on patients can differ depending on whether programs are associated with single - source or multi - source drugs , and changes in patient behavior may in turn lead to increased drug sales by manufacturers . for single - source drugs , which are only available from one manufacturer and may not have lower - cost , pharmaceutically equivalent alternatives , such programs can help patients afford their medications and have been shown to improve patient adherence to specialty drug regimens . for multi - source drugs , which are available from more than one manufacturer , coupon programs may encourage patients to request , and providers to prescribe , more expensive drugs instead of generics and other lower - cost , pharmaceutically equivalent alternatives . these changes in patient behaviors could benefit drug manufacturers financially while potentially increasing costs for health insurers . specifically , manufacturers gain revenue from the sale of drugs received by patients who might have quit a drug regimen or chosen a lower - cost alternative in the absence of a coupon program . additionally , manufacturers may be able to charge higher prices to purchasers than the market could sustain without these programs . although the use of drug coupon programs to induce or reward use of certain drugs is unlawful in federal health care programs such as medicare , beneficiaries who cannot afford their medications may be eligible to obtain financial assistance from other sources .