we will also provide copies to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . all rebaselines must be approved by the milestone decision authority . a program may therefore have several approved program baselines during development , but only one currently approved program baseline . programs also monitor a current estimate of the elements of a baseline and report differences as they develop . due to the classified nature of most defense system's performance parameters , our analysis of rebaselining did not include the baseline system's operational performance parameters . we reviewed pertinent statutes , such as 10 u.s.c . § 2432 ( saf ) , § 2433 ( unit cost reports ) , and § 2435 ( baseline description ) and dod acquisition system guidance , both the current version and proposed revisions . we analyzed more than 650 sars , both quarterly and annual reports covering an 8 year period from 1996 to 2003 , to determine which program had growth that exceeded dod's internal 10- percent or the nunn - mccurdy 15- and 25-percent thresholds . we arrayed the data extracted from these reports to show all program breaches and rebaselines by service , programs , breach types , and year . recognizing the need to establish a monitoring mechanism to provide oversight of cost growth in dod major defense acquisition programs , congress has required dod to ( 1 ) notify congress whenever unit cost growth is at least 15 percent , and ( 2 ) “certify” the program to congress when the unit cost growth is at least 25 percent above the latest approved acquisition program baseline cost estimate . however , congress did not require dod to report when a program has been rebaselined . the reporting requirement is commonly referred to as nunn - mccurdy , after the congressional leaders responsible for the requirement . exceeding either the 15 or 25 percent unit cost threshold is referred to as a nunn - mccurdy unit cost breach . the unit cost reporting includes two elements — program acquisition unit cost ( pauc ) and procurement unit cost ( puc ) . dod refers to the puc as the average procurement unit cost ( apuc ) . unit cost is considered a key measure because it describes buying power — the average cost to buy each unit . unit cost information is submitted to congress in dod's annual comprehensive sars . in addition to the comprehensive annual report to congress for the period ending december 31 , dod also prepares a quarterly report for the second , third , and fourth quarters of the fiscal year when there has been an increase of 15 percent or greater in the current estimate of the program acquisition unit cost or average procurement unit cost in base - year dollars ; a 6-month or greater delay in the current estimate of any schedule milestone since the current estimate of the previous report ; or a milestone b or c and associated acquisition program baseline approval within 90 days prior to the quarterly report as of that date .