, based ) . washington , d.c.: mar . the coast guard concurred with our recommendation . inspecting foreign ports: in response to a mtsa requirement , the coast guard established the international port security program to assess and , if appropriate , make recommendations to improve security in foreign ports . under this program , teams of coast guard officials conduct country visits to evaluate the implementation of security measures in the host nations' ports and to collect and share best practices to help ensure a comprehensive and consistent approach to maritime security in ports worldwide . the safe port act established a minimum number of assessments and congressional direction has called for the coast guard to increase the pace of its visits to foreign ports . ( see app . ii for more information on coast guard performance results. ) in 2006 , we completed an examination of the coast guard's non - homeland security performance measures to assess their quality . we reported that while the coast guard's non - homeland security measures are generally sound and the data used to collect them are generally reliable , the coast guard had challenges associated with using performance measures to link resources to results . such challenges included comprehensiveness ( that is , using a single measure per mission - program may not convey complete information about overall performance ) and external factors outside of the agency's control ( such as weather conditions , which can , for example , affect the amount of ice that needs to be cleared or the number of mariners who must be rescued ) . according to coast guard officials , new performance measures are currently under development to further capture performance for its mission - programs , and that link resources to results . for example , officials described efforts to develop a new measure that captures an additional segment under its search and rescue mission - program , called lives unaccounted for . also , two new measures are under development to further capture the coast guard's risk management efforts and link resources to results under the ports , waterways and coastal security mission - program . as we have reported , the coast guard appears to be moving in the right direction with these efforts . however , since these efforts are long - term in nature , it remains too soon to determine how effective the coast guard's larger efforts will be at clearly linking resources to performance results as certain initiatives are not expected to be implemented until 2010 . after the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , the coast guard's priorities and focus had to shift suddenly and dramatically toward protecting the nation's vast and sprawling network of ports and waterways . coast guard cutters , aircraft , boats and personnel normally used for non - homeland security missions were shifted to homeland security missions , which previously consumed only a small portion of the agency's operating resources . although we have previously reported that the coast guard was restoring activity levels for many of its non - homeland security mission - programs , the coast guard continues to face challenges in balancing its resources among each of its mission - programs .