identify and engage with external stakeholders . these are individuals or organizations that share an interest in the issue being addressed and may already be active in related efforts . for a federal agency , external stakeholders can include representatives of relevant nonprofit organizations and foundations , community or citizens' groups , universities and academic institutions , the private sector , members of congress and their staffs , other federal agencies , and state and local governments . look for opportunities to partner with other groups and organizations . what were any unintended consequences , both positive and negative ? lastly , the toolkit reminds agencies to complete required public reporting , sharing results , lessons learned , and success stories , which can be critical to improving how challenges are designed and implemented . as figure 10 also illustrates , our assessment found that guidance for open data collaboration initiatives did not reflect any of these key actions , and guidance for ideation and open dialogue initiatives reflected most of them . specifically , that guidance encourages agencies to collect and analyze data to assess goal achievement and results , conduct an after - action review , and report publicly on results . seek ways to maintain communication with members of the community . doing so can keep them informed of future initiatives and other opportunities , and facilitate communication within the community . as figure 11 shows , we determined that none of the guidance fully reflects the first action . the guidance for crowdsourcing and citizen science , and prize competitions and challenges , both encourage agencies to acknowledge the contributions of participants , and reward participants with monetary and nonmonetary incentives ( as appropriate ) . however , guidance for these strategies does not also encourage agencies to acknowledge the contributions of partner organizations , which can provide critical resources , expertise , and capacity for open innovation initiatives . the guidance for ideation , open dialogues , and open data collaboration initiatives did not reflect this key action . as also shown in figure 11 , our assessment found that guidance for most open innovation strategies fully reflect the second action ; however , guidance for open data collaboration does not . for example , the federal crowdsourcing and citizen science toolkit encourages agencies to continue actively engaging partners and participants , and help direct participants to other initiatives that might interest them . the toolkit also encourages agencies to create opportunities for participants to socialize and communicate with each other by supporting discussion forums , and identifying group leaders that can help carry forward a discussion among members of the community . in instances where guidance does not fully reflect the practices and key actions identified in our october 2016 report , agency staff may not be aware of certain steps they should take to better ensure the success of their open innovation initiatives . in part , the various guidance resources developed by omb , ostp , and gsa do not fully reflect some practices and key actions because those resources almost all pre - date our report . we also used different methodologies and sources in pulling together our practices and key actions than they did in developing their guidance .