app . the export administration act of 1979 , as amended , is not permanent legislation . since august 21 , 2001 , the export administration act has been in lapse . however , the president has continued the regulations in effect through executive order 13222 of august 17 , 2001 ( 3 c.f.r. , 2001 comp 783 ( 2002 ) ) , which most recently was extended by presidential notice on august 12 , 2011 , under the authority provided by section 202 ( d ) of the national emergencies act ( 50 u.s.c . administers commerce's end - use monitoring program for technologies covered by the commerce control list . the u.s. export control enforcement system consists of multiple agencies . within dhs , immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) investigates suspected export control violations involving both u.s . munitions list and commerce control list items . in addition , dhs' customs and border protection ( cbp ) inspects selected exports to determine whether proper licenses were obtained prior to shipment and may interdict suspicious items being shipped . within commerce , bis' office of export enforcement has authority to investigate violations involving commerce control list items . within doj , the fbi can take the lead in certain export control investigations involving counterintelligence and counterterrorism . doj prosecutes suspected export control violations . investigations can result in criminal prosecutions ; fines ; and imprisonment or administrative penalties , such as export denial orders barring a party from exporting any u.s. items for a specific period of time . figure 2 shows the principal agencies that have a role in the export control process . there are also u.s. government agencies that gather and analyze information on the proliferation of uav systems and related technologies and produce uav - related threat assessments and other uav - related information . the director of national intelligence serves as the head of the intelligence community , establishing objectives and priorities for collection , analysis , production , and dissemination of national intelligence . moreover , the defense security service ( dss ) provides threat assessments in support of its mission to oversee the protection of u.s. classified information and data in the hands of cleared dod contractors . the executive branch is currently considering reforms to the u.s. export control system in an export control reform initiative , including the creation of a single control list and a single information technology system . this initiative could affect export control licensing and enforcement efforts involving uavs and related technologies and components . there has been rapid growth globally in uav acquisition , development , and military applications . from 2005 to 2011 , nations , including countries of proliferation concern and key allies , sought to improve their intelligence gathering and military aviation capabilities by developing and fielding their own uav systems . furthermore , militaries across the globe sought to expand the uses for uavs , particularly in the area of armed strike missions . uavs are also increasingly used in a number of civil and commercial applications , such as law enforcement , but national and international regulations place restrictions on most of these applications .