billion . purchase card spending accounted for another $572 million . agriculture is currently using the results of a consultant's october 2001 spend analysis as updated with more recent spending data to obtain favorable prices on small purchase card buys through agencywide discount agreements with major vendors . the contractor analyzed almost $2.1 billion in fiscal year 2000 spending data from across the agency , organizing the agency's spending in terms of commodities and suppliers to identify high - volume , high - dollar areas that could yield significant savings and other benefits and also identifying 24 commodities for the agency's more detailed review . in 2003 , agriculture's procurement management division began to use this spend analysis , competitively awarding an agencywide discount agreement with a national office supply vendor that yielded savings of $1.8 million to the agency's purchase card holders — a price 10 percent less then the vendor's federal supply schedule contract prices . to receive the discounts , registered agency purchasers must use the national office supply vendor's electronic catalog and ordering system . building on this experience , agriculture recently began to use the consultant's spend analysis to improve its purchase card buying power in additional commodity areas . a temporary “electronic marketplace” subcommittee was organized in january 2004 , including representatives from across the agency . according to the co - chair , this subcommittee is using the consultant's spend analysis and updating it with more recent data on spending with major vendors to help negotiate more favorable prices based on the agency's dollar volume . by october , the subcommittee plans to implement at least three agencywide discount agreements comparable to the 2003 agreement . in the future , agriculture plans to provide automated and repeatable spend analysis , data - mining , and reporting capabilities that identify opportunities for savings through negotiated volume discounts . these will be available through electronic catalogs as part of a redesign and modernization of its agencywide acquisition system , an effort that will be complete in about two years . agriculture began this effort upon recognizing that the current multisystem environment does not provide an integrated , streamlined , or consistent approach to procurement and does not effectively support the agencywide goal for electronic commerce between agency purchasers and suppliers . to develop its spend analysis capabilities , agriculture will create a centrally maintained data warehouse to be shared by agency procurement and financial management organizations . this warehouse will extract and capture all agriculture procurement data , to be supplemented with business intelligence and organizational data from internal and external financial and corporate sources . once the warehouse is in place , it will allow for comprehensive spend analysis and reporting on procurement in real time , on issues such as the opportunities to be pursued for agencywide discount agreements with major suppliers for specific commodities and the extent of small business utilization . mission highlights: enforcing laws in the public interest mission highlights: enforcing laws in the public interest and protecting the public from terrorist and criminal activity . and protecting the public from terrorist and criminal activity .