techstat reviews . in january 2010 , the federal cio began leading techstat reviews — face - to - face meetings to discuss whether to terminate or turn around it investments that are in danger of failing or are not producing results . these meetings involved omb and agency leadership and were intended to increase accountability and improve performance . omb reported that federal agencies achieved over $3 billion in cost savings or avoidances as a result of these reviews in 2010 . subsequently , it empowered agency cios to begin holding their own techstat reviews by june 2012 . omb's 2015 guidance specified that the techstat reviews were to be held with agency leadership , not led by omb as in the past , and that agencies were only required to notify omb of the meetings' occurrence and report the results . projects that were not selected went into a backlog that is to be used to select a project when a team becomes available to work on a new engagement . usds has issued two reports to congress on the status of its projects — one in december 2016 and the other in july 2017 . the report issued in december 2016 summarized the status of 11 projects that usds is engaged in at federal agencies , and 3 broader initiatives that are intended to improve the performance and cost - effectiveness of government digital services . according to usds staff , the 11 projects had broad impact and had made the most significant progress . for example , these included the va's vets.gov project , which is intended to assist the department in developing a new digital application for healthcare , and dod's defense travel system , a system that facilitates travel for all dod employees . further , usds reported on the status of their efforts for these three initiatives: modernizing procurement processes , development of federal shared services , and hiring top technical talent . the july 2017 report included summaries for 10 projects , including 5 new projects . specifically , the new projects were the general service administration's login.gov project , the small business administration's effort to modernize small business certification for government contractors , dod's advisor network system , dod's defense personal property system , and transforming federal it procurement through digital acquisition training . in addition , 6 projects that were discussed in the december 2016 report were not included in the july 2017 report . table 2 provides a complete list of the projects identified in the two reports . our analysis determined that four of the projects identified in usds's reports were among the high priority programs that omb's e - gov office had identified in its june 2015 and june 2016 reports to congress . these projects were healthcare.gov , disability claim processing , modernizing the immigration system at the department of homeland security , and improving the visa program at the department of state . however , usds's report does not specify this or provide an update on the status of the other high priority programs .