gao - 08-860 . washington , d.c.: july 31 , 2008 . dod stated that it concurs with our report . we also received technical comments from dod , doe , nsc , state , treasury , and the intelligence community . additionally , consistent with our protocols , we provided a copy of the draft report to saudi officials , who described the report as a fair and detailed review of u.s. and saudi efforts and offered technical comments . we incorporated technical comments as appropriate . saudi arabia is known as the birthplace of islam and is the site of islam's two holiest shrines located in mecca and medina . ( see figure 1 for a map of saudi arabia. ) millions of muslims from all over the world visit mecca to undertake the pilgrimages of hajj and umrah . like hajj , charitable giving , or zakat , is one of the five pillars or duties of islam . zakat , a form of tithe or charity payable for those in need , is an annual flat rate of 2.5 percent of a muslim's assessable capital . zakat is broader and more pervasive than western ideas of charity , functioning as a form of income tax , educational assistance , and foreign aid . islam is a source of political legitimacy and guidance for the saudi government , and the country is governed on the basis of islamic law or sharia . as far back as the mid - eighteenth century , the founder of the saudi ruling dynasty , muhammad bin saud , allied himself with the conservative muslim scholar , muhammad bin abdul wahhab . the teachings of abdul wahhab , which called for a strict interpretation of islam , form the basis of islam as practiced by the majority of people in saudi arabia . the saudi government is a monarchy headed by the king of saudi arabia , who also serves as the prime minister and the custodian of the two holy mosques in mecca and medina . the current king is king abdullah bin abdulaziz al - saud . the king is expected to retain consensus of important elements in saudi society , such as the saudi royal family and religious leaders . the saudi royal family consists of thousands of members , some of whom head government ministries . in the mid - 1940s , saudi arabia started large scale oil production , and by the 1970s an increase in oil prices led to a rapid increase in saudi arabia's per capita income , making it comparable to that of developed countries during this time period . in part , this prosperity , combined with the islamic religious obligation toward charitable giving or zakat , led to the establishment of charitable organizations headquartered in saudi arabia , known as multilateral charitable organizations . these organizations — which include the muslim world league and the world assembly of muslim youth — were established in the 1960s and 1970s by saudi royal decree to spread islam and provide humanitarian assistance around the world , and received funds from the saudi government and citizens . relations between the united states and saudi arabia have a long historical context .