access . because virtual currencies can be accessed anywhere over the internet , they are a potential way to provide basic financial services to populations without access to traditional financial institutions , such as rural populations in developing countries.however , the potential benefit hinges on access to the internet , which these populations may not have , and may be offset by the lack of protections against losses noted previously . federal agency officials have acknowledged the need to consider both the risks and benefits of virtual currencies in carrying out their responsibilities . for example , the director of fincen has testified that the emergence of virtual currencies has prompted consideration of vulnerabilities that these currencies create in the financial system and how illicit actors will take advantage of them . however , she also noted that innovation is an important part of the economy and that fincen needs to have regulation that mitigates concerns about illicit actors while minimizing regulatory burden . similarly , the former acting assistant attorney general for doj's criminal division has testified that law enforcement needs to be vigilant about the criminal misuse of virtual currency systems while recognizing that there are many legitimate users of those services . balancing concerns about the illicit use of virtual currencies against the potential benefits of these technological innovations will likely be an ongoing challenge for federal agencies . federal financial regulators and law enforcement agencies have taken a number of actions related to the emergence of virtual currencies , including providing regulatory guidance , assessing anti - money - laundering compliance , and investigating crimes and violations that have been facilitated by the use of virtual currencies . however , interagency working groups addressing virtual currencies have not focused on consumer protection and have generally not included cfpb . fincen has taken a number of actions in recent years to establish and clarify requirements for participants in virtual currency systems . for example , in july 2011 , fincen finalized a rule that modified the definitions of certain money services businesses . among other things , the rule states that persons who accept and transmit currency , funds , or “other value that substitutes for currency,” are considered to be money transmitters . additionally , in march 2013 , fincen issued guidance that clarified the applicability of bsa regulations to participants in certain virtual currency systems . the fincen guidance classified virtual currency exchangers and administrators as money services businesses and , more specifically , as money transmitters . the guidance also specified that virtual currency users are not money services businesses . as a result , the guidance clarified that virtual currency exchangers and administrators must follow requirements to register with fincen as money transmitters ; institute risk assessment procedures and anti - money - laundering program control measures ; and implement certain recordkeeping , reporting , and transaction monitoring requirements , unless an exception to these requirements applies . according to fincen officials , as of december 2013 , approximately 40 virtual currency exchangers or administrators had registered with fincen . in 2014 , in response to questions from industry stakeholders , fincen issued administrative rulings to clarify the types of participants to which the march 2013 guidance applies .