circular no . a - 11 , preparation , submission , and execution of the budget . washington , d.c.: july 1 , 2016 . project management institute , inc. a guide to the project management body of knowledge ( pmbok guide ) newtown square , pa.: 2013 . gao - 16-89g . washington , d.c.: december 2015 . we provided a draft of the report to va for its review . in written comments , va disagreed with one of our recommendations and agreed in principle with the other five . we have reproduced va's comments in appendix i and have incorporated them — as well as technical comments provided by va — into the report , as appropriate . in its comments , va agreed with us that improving the efficiency and effectiveness of its appeals process is an ambitious undertaking , and we commend va for the many steps it has taken , including collaborating with stakeholders to develop the framework for a new process . we agree that obtaining the consensus of internal and external experts — including veterans service organizations — demonstrates important progress . we disagree , however , that such consensus negates the need for more detailed plans and robust risk mitigation strategies . while it is true that va has made noteworthy progress developing an implementation plan to guide its efforts , we found the plan lacked important details , such as: how va will monitor for interim success and trouble spots , including whether the agency has appropriately distributed resources among the new and old processes ; how it will mitigate risk of implementation challenges or setbacks , and reduce their negative impact ; and how it will measure whether the new process is improving overall appeals resolution timeliness from the veteran's perspective . va officials also said that va has extensive experience in organizational change management , but it is not clear how some of the practices va used in past transformation efforts are applicable to appeals reform , and we are concerned that va could not provide further information on what these practices include or how they are relevant . we believe implementing all of our recommendations will increase the likelihood that va's efforts to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of its appeals process will be successful . for the five recommendations that va concurred with in principle , va described planned actions to address them and stated that it also considered the actions complete and requested we close the recommendations . however , we believe va still needs to take actions to address those recommendations , as noted more fully below . va disagreed with a draft recommendation that it incorporate pilot testing of its proposed appeals process into implementation plans and pursue necessary legislative authority . in its comments , va noted that the appeals process is broken and that piloting a new process would result in further delays to veterans appealing their disability decisions .