rec . s4402 , which was adopted following cloture and agreement to several amendments designed to narrow differences between proponents and opponents of the bill . changes to legislative language during the consideration of a bill may support an inference that in enacting the final language , congress intended to reject or work a compromise with respect to earlier versions of the bill . statements made about earlier versions carry little weight . landgraf v. usi film products , 511 u.s. 244 , 255-56 ( 1994 ) . singer , 2a sutherland statutory construction , ยง 48:4 . in any event , the plain language of the statute remains controlling where , as we have concluded , the language and the structure of the statute are clear on their face . according to congressional budget office ( cbo ) staff , cbo estimated revenue losses to states and localities from changing how internet access was taxed by using two independent methodologies and comparing their results . first , it collected information directly from the states . using data from the federation of tax administrators and the multistate tax commission to identify states taxing access and their related tax collections , cbo discussed with state officials what the dollar amounts included and what they did not . it then reduced the state loss estimates by various percentages to get a sense of the ranges possible by assuming , for instance , that providers were not always paying the taxes states thought they should pay . to estimate from a second direction , cbo compiled its own state - by - state information . it multiplied the number of internet users by state times an average access fee for each user times the state's applicable tax rate . it then discounted each state total based on assumptions about noncompliance with tax assessments . to arrive at the number of users , according to cbo staff , cbo consulted the department of commerce , the federal communications commission , and studies of internet usage . from these sources , it obtained historical numbers of users and trends that it could project showing the number of users growing over time , and how usage was changing between dial - up and high - speed . finally , according to the staff members , cbo gathered the other information for its state - by - state estimate from other sources . it obtained state tax rates from council on state taxation information and computed a weighted average access fee after calling access providers about their current rates . it assumed that any change in revenues brought on by changes in technology and markets would offset each other . it estimated noncompliance to cover both tax avoidance and nexus issues by using indications it had of certain internet service providers not paying an access tax , considering their market share , and assuming various percentages of tax not being paid . cbo considered information from both the approaches it was using to get a range for each state .