( see fig . in addition , increased funding for nextgen r&d is contained in proposed legislation to reauthorize faa , although that legislation has not been enacted . if faa is authorized to receive increased r&d funding for nextgen , some observers believe that the agency lacks the r&d infrastructure to adequately address the developmental research needed for nextgen . according to a draft report by the research , engineering and development advisory committee , establishing the infrastructure within faa to conduct the necessary r&d could delay the implementation of nextgen by 5 years . what metrics should congress use to evaluate the progress of the nextgen initiative ? this statement is based on recent related gao reports and testimonies , including a report to this committee and other congressional requesters we are issuing today . our work on this most recent report included interviewing 25 key nextgen stakeholders about the progress of and challenges to planning for and achieving the transition to nextgen . we conducted this work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the work to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . nextgen is a multidecade , multiagency effort to transform the current atc system to the next generation air transportation system by moving from relying largely on ground - based radars to using precision satellites ; digital , networked communications ; and an integrated weather system . often characterized as “curb to curb,” nextgen involves every aspect of air transportation , from arrival at the airport to departure from the destination airport , and it is expected to increase the safety and enhance the capacity of the air transport system . jpdo was charged with coordinating the research activities of the federal partner agencies with the goal of developing a 20-year r&d agenda for nextgen . faa will play the central role in implementing nextgen , since it will be responsible for acquiring , integrating , and operating the new atc systems . industry stakeholders will also play a key role in implementing nextgen because they are expected to develop , finance , and operate many of the new nextgen systems that will need to be installed in aircraft . faa plans to spend roughly $5.4 billion from fiscal years 2009 through 2013 on nextgen development and capital costs . jpdo estimated that total federal spending for nextgen may range from $15 billion to $22 billion through 2025 . the agency also noted that it expects system users to incur $14 billion to $20 billion in costs to equip themselves with the advanced avionics necessary to realize the full benefits of some nextgen technologies . jpdo's authorizing legislation requires the office to create an r&d plan for the transition to nextgen . this requirement led jpdo to develop initial versions of the concept of operations , enterprise architecture , and iwp . the concept of operations is the fundamental planning document from which the other two documents flow .