( fig . 1 shows the locations of airports participating in vale. ) faa officials noted that this is the first vale project with airline participation . united airlines has agreed to keep 10 of its electric baggage tugs at the airport for their entire useful life in exchange for the airport agreeing to purchase a recharging station for the tugs through vale . similarly , us airways agreed to purchase 34 new electric ground support vehicles for use at philadelphia international . for this project , us airways obtained a grant from pennsylvania through the state's alternative fuels incentive program to fund part of the purchase of the tugs . george bush intercontinental houston airport , which previously used vale to purchase hybrid vehicles , increased its participation in the vale program to include funding the expansion of its people - mover system and other projects . expenditures for the vale program have increased significantly as the program has matured . in fiscal year 2008 , faa approved 11 projects at 6 airports , 4 of which were new participants in the program . overall , faa reports that a total of 20 projects at 9 participating airports are under way . we conducted our work from june 2008 through november 2008 . although aviation - related activities produce a small amount of the total air pollution in the united states , according to epa , the types of pollutants emitted by these activities are among the most prevalent and harmful in the atmosphere and are expected to increase based on the forecasted growth in the aviation sector . the major sources of emissions at airports are aircraft , the ground equipment ( such as vehicles that transport baggage ) that services the aircraft , and vehicles transporting passengers to and from the airport . the emissions produced by these sources include carbon monoxide ; toxic substances ( such as benzene and formaldehyde ) ; particulate matter ; sulfur dioxide ; and nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compounds , which contribute to the formation of ozone , a major pollutant in many metropolitan areas and a major concern to many airport operators and to state and local air quality authorities . in addition , the potential health effects of particulate matter are becoming an increasing concern of these groups . ( 2 ) what have been the outcomes attributable to the vale program ? to address these questions , we analyzed faa and airport information on vale projects , including types of projects , expenditures , and estimated outcomes in terms of reducing pollution . we also reviewed and synthesized relevant literature and our body of work on airport - related emissions . we visited two of the nine airports participating in the vale program ( these nine airports have vale projects that are in operation or under development ) . at these two airports , we observed the vale projects and interviewed airport officials . we chose these two airports because their projects are relatively large and account for over half of the total expenditures for the vale program . also , we interviewed via telephone airport officials at another three participating airports and obtained written responses to our interview questions from the remaining two participating airports .