pub . 86-777 , 74 stat . gao , helium program: urgent issues facing blm's storage and sale of helium reserves , gao - 13-351t ( washington , d.c.: feb. 14 , 2013 ) and helium program: key developments since the early 1990s and future considerations , gao - 10-700t ( washington , d.c.: may 13 , 2010 ) . program , blm's sales price for crude helium , and what should be done with the remaining helium . the helium stewardship act of 2013 was intended to complete the privatization of the federal helium reserve in a competitive market fashion that ensures stability in the helium markets while protecting the interests of american taxpayers , among other things . as you know , the federal government has a reserve of crude helium near amarillo , texas , that is stored in the ground in an area of a natural gas field that has a naturally occurring underground structural dome . in addition to the federal crude helium , this reserve also holds crude helium that private companies have previously purchased from blm but have not taken delivery of in accordance with storage contracts between the companies and blm . blm delivers crude helium from this reserve through a pipeline to the private companies that are connected to it . as of july 1 , 2014 , four such companies receive crude helium from blm these companies are commonly through the pipeline and refine it ; referred to as “refiners.” four other companies — commonly referred to as “nonrefiners” — have purchased relatively small volumes of crude helium from blm in the past and have expressed an interest in buying larger volumes . the nonrefiners , however , cannot receive the crude helium directly because they are not connected to the pipeline . instead , a nonrefiner must enter into an agreement with a refiner , so that the refiner can accept delivery of the crude helium and process it into pure helium on the nonrefiner's behalf . the practice of a helium refiner processing or refining another party's helium at an agreed upon price is referred to as “tolling.” the helium stewardship act of 2013 contains a tolling provision that requires , as a condition of sale or auction , that refiners make excess refining capacity of helium available at commercially reasonable rates to certain nonrefiners . in light of the new circumstances presented by the helium stewardship act of 2013 , my testimony today will describe ( 1 ) blm's initial actions to implement the act and ( 2 ) challenges , if any , blm faces in implementing the act's tolling provision and incentivizing tolling . to address these objectives , we reviewed the helium stewardship act of 2013 and documentation of blm's implementation of the act , including the helium sales conducted in january 2014 and may 2014 and the may 16 , 2014 , federal register notice on blm's proposed implementation of the act . we interviewed blm officials associated with the helium program at blm's headquarters in washington , d.c. ; blm's and blm's amarillo new mexico state office in santa fe , new mexico ; field office in amarillo , texas .