gao - 01-198 . washington , d.c.: feb. 15 , 2001 . force structure: projected requirements for some army forces not well established . gao - 01-485 . washington , d.c.: may 11 , 2001 . what are the initial and long - term costs to increase the size of the force and how does the department plan to fund this increase ? do the services have detailed implementation plans to manage potential challenges such as recruiting additional personnel , providing facilities , and procuring new equipment ? our prior work on recruiting and retention challenges , along with our prior reports on challenges in equipping modular units , identify some potential challenges that could arise in implementing an increase in the size of the army and marine corps at a time when the services are supporting ongoing operations in iraq and afghanistan . for example , we have reported that 19 percent of dod's occupational specialties for enlisted personnel were consistently overfilled while other occupational specialties were underfilled by 41 percent for fiscal years 2000 through 2005 . to what extent are the proposed military personnel increases based on supporting operations in iraq versus an assessment of longer - term requirements ? how will the additional personnel be allocated to combat units , support forces , and institutional personnel , for functions such as training and acquisition ? in addition , we have reported that the army is experiencing numerous challenges in equipping modular brigades on schedule , in part due to the demands associated with meeting the equipment needs of units deploying overseas . such challenges will need to be carefully managed if congress approves the secretary of defense's proposal . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared remarks . i would be happy to answer any questions you may have . for questions about this statement , please contact janet st. laurent at ( 202 ) 512-4402 . other individuals making key contributions to this statement include: gwendolyn jaffe , assistant director ; kelly baumgartner ; j. andrew walker ; margaret morgan ; deborah colantonio ; harold reich ; aisha cabrer ; susan ditto ; julie matta ; and terry richardson . force structure: army support forces can meet two - conflict strategy with some risks . gao / nsiad - 97-66 . washington , d.c.: feb. 28 , 1997 . force structure: army's efforts to improve efficiency of institutional forces have produced few results . gao / nsiad - 98-65 . washington , d.c.: feb. 26 , 1998 . force structure: opportunities exist for the army to reduce risk in executing the military strategy . gao / nsiad - 99-47 . washington , d.c.: mar . force structure: army is integrating active and reserve combat forces , but challenges remain . gao / nsiad - 00-162 . washington , d.c.: july 18 , 2000 . force structure: army lacks units needed for extended contingency operations . military personnel: dod needs to conduct a data - driven analysis of active military personnel levels required to implement the defense strategy . gao - 05-200 . washington , d.c.: feb. 1 , 2005 . force structure: preliminary observations on army plans to implement and fund modular forces . gao - 05-443t . washington , d.c.: mar .