bits . lastly , the united states is also a member of two international organizations — the organization for economic and community development ( oecd ) and the world trade organisation ( wto ) — that advocate open investment related policies , including policies that are transparent and nondiscriminatory . in nine cases , the united states has entered into a bit or a free trade agreement with countries with swfs , as shown in table 1 . the table shows the swf countries that have signed investment treaties or entered into free trade agreements with the united states , or are members of oecd and wto . we did not find examples of federal laws that specifically target swfs investing in the united states ; however some laws specifically target foreign investment , which would include swfs . while foreign investors appear to face no federal restrictions specifically targeting their ability to invest in many sectors of the u.s. economy , federal laws in several sectors — banking , communications , transportation , natural resources and energy , agriculture , and defense — do contain provisions that either restrict the level of foreign investment , limit the use of a foreign - owned asset , or at least require approval or disclosure of any foreign investments . banking , communications , transportation , natural resources and energy , and agriculture accounted for about 20 percent of u.s. output in 2007 . however , in terms of attracting foreign investment , these sectors accounted for about 28 percent of foreign direct investment holdings in 2007 ( see fig . several u.s. laws specifically affect foreign investment in the united states regardless of the sector , with national security considerations having the largest potential impact . these laws can potentially limit foreign investment directly by preventing planned investments from being carried out , which according to treasury officials is rare , or indirectly by discouraging investments by foreign investors who either find the process burdensome or believe their chances of success are too low . the defense production act of 1950 , as amended by the foreign investment and national security act of 2007 ( section 721 ) , authorizes the president , following a review by the interagency committee on foreign investment in the united states ( cfius ) , to suspend or prohibit a foreign acquisition , merger , or takeover of a u.s. business that is determined to threaten the national security of the united states . the president can do this in cases where there is credible evidence leading him to believe the foreign interest exercising control might take action that threatens to impair national security , and that provisions of law other than section 721 and the international emergency economic powers act ( ieepa ) do not provide adequate and appropriate authority for the president to protect the national security . cfius may also enter into an agreement with , or impose conditions on , parties to mitigate national security risks . filing a notice of a transaction with cfius is voluntary . however , cfius can initiate a review unilaterally and can compel the production of necessary information about the terms of any covered transaction .