pathway data . faa also maintains mechanic pathway data , but these data do not provide a complete picture of certificated individuals' education , training , and work experience due to certain data limitations . for example , faa does not require amt schools to report program completion data . as a result , it does not have information such as how many students who enter faa - approved amt schools complete the program . moreover , faa does not analyze nationwide trends for amt schools using existing data on these schools ( such as enrollment or mechanic test pass - rate data ) or aggregate information across amt schools to better understand the amt school pathway as a whole . in addition , pathway data collected by faa do not clearly differentiate between civil and military work experience . specifically , faa officials said practical , or civil , work experience pathway data may include information on individuals with both prior military and civil experience . moreover , according to an faa official , faa's military experience pathway data may include individuals who completed dod's faa - approved a&p training program as well as individuals who met faa's on - the - job training requirements through relevant military experience . combined pathway data may limit faa's and dod's understanding of dod's contributions to this workforce , including the number of individuals who completed dod's faa - approved a&p training program and subsequently obtained mechanic certification from faa . supply and demand data . military training and experience . the community college of the air force administers an faa - approved a&p training program which consists of on - the - job training and various courses for military service members with certain experience . when service members successfully complete the program , the joint services aviation maintenance technician certification council issues them a certificate of eligibility to take the faa mechanic tests ( see side bar ) . as part of the program , airline officials told us they provide about $5,000 worth of tools to each participant . training equipment and funding . officials we interviewed from one school said they strategically opened their amt program next to a major cargo airline so that students could benefit from employment opportunities there . the officials said the airline also benefits from the close proximity of the school in that it is able to leverage local talent , and the airline provides amt school students with scholarships , technical support , and surplus equipment to use for training . in another example , officials from a major commercial airline told us the airline partners with over 40 amt schools and provides them with funding to improve operations and recruitment . officials said the goal of the program is to ensure the airline has a pipeline of workers to fill any future job openings . despite faa's recent efforts to coordinate with other federal agencies on expanding and streamlining pathways for aviation maintenance careers , we found that faa does not routinely analyze , collect , or coordinate with other stakeholders on certain related data . such activities could assist faa in measuring progress toward meeting its workforce related objectives and inform strategic decisions for promoting the development of this workforce .