included in these is the sentinel program . the sentinel program succeeds and expands vcf and is intended to meet fbi's pressing need for a modern , automated capability for investigative case management and information sharing to help field agents and intelligence analysts perform their jobs more effectively and efficiently . the program's key objectives are to: ( 1 ) successfully implement a system that acts as a single point of entry for all investigative case management and that provides paperless case management and workflow capabilities , ( 2 ) facilitate a bureau - wide organizational change management program , and ( 3 ) provide intuitive interfaces that feature data relevant to individual users . to effectively leverage people , they must be treated as strategic assets . as we previously reported , a strategic approach to human capital management enables an organization to be aware of and prepared for its current and future human capital needs , such as workforce size , knowledge , skills , and training . to be effective , our research shows that such a strategic approach includes using data - driven , fact - based methods to ( 1 ) assess the knowledge and skills needed to execute a program ; ( 2 ) inventory existing staff knowledge and skills ; ( 3 ) forecast the knowledge and skills needed over time ; ( 4 ) analyze the gaps in capabilities between the existing staff and future workforce needs , including consideration of evolving program and succession needs caused by turnover and retirement ; and ( 5 ) formulate strategies for filling expected gaps , including training , additional hiring , and the appropriate use of contractors . ( see fig . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . our objective was to determine whether the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) has adequately provided for the human capital needs of its sentinel program . to address our objective , we focused on three areas: fbi's efforts to date in staffing the sentinel program office , the bureau's plans to address gaps between the program's human capital needs and existing fbi capabilities , and the extent to which fbi is proactively treating and managing human capital as a program risk . to evaluate whether the fbi is adequately providing for the sentinel program's human capital needs , we compared the bureau's efforts against relevant criteria and best practices , including our own framework for strategic human capital management . these criteria promote the use of data to determine key performance objectives and goals in identifying current and future human capital needs , including the appropriate number of employees , the key competencies and skills mix for mission accomplishment , and the appropriate deployment of staff across the organization . they also advocate strategies for identifying and filling human capital gaps and performing succession planning , as well as being the basis for efforts intended to mitigate human capital - related program risks . to accomplish these steps , we requested key staffing - related documents from the fbi , including ( 1 ) the organization chart for the sentinel program office , including filled positions and vacancies and the source of the resources filling those positions ( i.e.