that was not our intent . as indicated on page 6 of the report , we agree that battle damage assessments are an integral part of the broader targeting process . the use of a separate section of the report to deal with that aspect of targeting was meant only to highlight the long - standing problems with battle damage assessments and the need to focus dod's attention on corrective action . high leverage lessons learned from operation enduring freedom — phase ii report of the defense science board task force on operation enduring freedom lessons learned . washington , d.c.: 2003 . u.s. department of defense , office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics . organizational lesson learned review - phase iii report , defense science board task force on operation enduring freedom lessons learned . washington , d.c.: 2002 . u.s. department of defense , office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics . precision targeting and joint close air support , a phase ii report of the defense science board task force on operation enduring freedom lessons learned . washington , d.c.: 2003 . u.s. department of defense , office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics . report of the defense science board task force on discriminate use of force . washington , d.c.: 2003 . u.s. department of defense , office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics . report of the defense science board task force on enabling joint force capabilities . washington , d.c.: 2003 . u.s. department of defense . report to congress: network centric warfare . washington , d.c.: 2001 . u.s. department of defense . report to congress: kosovo / operation allied force after - action report . washington , d.c.: 2000 . u.s. department of defense . report on network centric warfare: sense of the report . washington , d.c.: 2001 . u.s. department of defense , strategic studies institute of the u.s. army war college . afghanistan and the future of warfare: implications for army and defense policy . carlisle , pennsylvania: 2002 . u.s. department of defense , strategic studies institute of the u.s. army war college . iraq and the future of warfare: implications for army and defense policy . carlisle , pennsylvania: 2003 . military readiness: lingering training and equipment issues hamper air support of ground forces . gao - 03-505 . washington , d.c.: may 2 , 2003 . defense acquisitions: steps needed to ensure interoperability of systems that process intelligence data . gao - 03-329 . washington , d.c.: march 31 , 2003 . major management challenges and program risks — department of defense . gao - 03-98 . washington , d.c.: january 2003 . defense management: munitions requirements and combatant commanders' needs require linkage . gao - 03-17 . washington , d.c.: october 15 , 2002 . dod financial management: integrated approach , accountability , transparency , and incentives are keys to effective reform . gao - 02-497t . washington , d.c.: march 6 , 2002 . kosovo air operations: need to maintain alliance cohesion resulted in doctrinal departures . gao - 01-784 .