( app . iii provides further details on condition measures for each of the aton and domestic icebreaking assets. ) for our second measure — trends in maintenance expenditures — the picture with regard to condition is more consistent than for our first measure: maintenance expenditures for domestic icebreaking and aton cutters are increasing , even after taking inflation into account . we analyzed three types of maintenance costs: scheduled maintenance costs , which are planned for in advance and include such things as repainting the vessel ; unscheduled maintenance costs , which are for unforeseen emergencies ; and engineering logistic center ( elc ) costs , which include fleetwide projects that require engineering assistance ( such as checking for watertight integrity ) and therefore cannot be handled at the unit level . these projects , such as replacing a generator , help sustain capability but do not enhance it , according to coast guard officials . we supplemented our analysis of these resource hours with documentation from interviews with asset program managers and crews of aton and domestic icebreaking assets . in assessing the condition of the assets during fiscal years 2001 to 2005 , we analyzed what coast guard officials identified as the best available condition measures . we obtained concurrence from the office of naval engineering and the office of cutter forces that the appropriate measures to use for the condition of assets were percent of time free of major casualties , scheduled / unscheduled / engineering logistics center maintenance costs , and estimated deferred maintenance costs . to determine the reliability of this data , we ( 1 ) reviewed the results of previous reliability assessments we have conducted of this data for other work and ( 2 ) examined responses the coast guard provided to a questionnaire we sent requesting updated information on the administration and oversight of the databases . we determined that the data was sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we supplemented our analysis of these measures with documentation from internal coast guard reports , as well as from interviews of asset program managers at coast guard headquarters and crewmembers of the assets located in the field . in addition to talking with crewmembers , we directly observed the condition of various assets during our site visits to alameda , calif ; bayonne , n.j. ; buchanan , tenn ; baltimore , md ; mobile , ala ; seattle , wash ; sault st. marie , mich ; and atlantic beach , n.c . these assets were selected to provide diversity in terms of type and age of asset and geographic location . in addition , we interviewed coast guard officials with the area commands in alameda , calif. , and portsmouth , va. , as well as in districts 5 and 13 . to determine the actions that the coast guard has undertaken to continue to achieve the missions of its aton and domestic icebreaking assets , we interviewed officials with the coast guard's engineering and logistics center , engineering and logistics directorate , office of naval engineering , office of boat forces , and office of cutter forces .