reviews as part of a complaint . hud may also receive complaints about grantees' affh compliance from a range of sources , including individuals , fair housing groups , or federal , state , or local agencies . in conducting investigations in response to such complaints , cpd or fheo staff may request that grantees provide their ais as deemed appropriate . if hud officials identify concerns with grantees ais through these processes , they can take several different actions . these actions include technical assistance , such as training workshops , to complete an ai ; a “special assurance” document , which hud may draft in order to outline a number of tasks that a grantee must do to fulfill requirements , including describing actions to overcome the effects of identified impediments , and creating a timetable for accomplishing these actions ; these assurances usually are signed by the grantee's chief elected official to signify cooperation ; and withholding cdbg and home funding by disapproving a grantee's conplan for failure to comply with requirements , including completion of an ai . according to hud officials , this action is a last resort and rarely used . hud's 2009 internal study , cpd and fheo officials in headquarters and field offices , as well as our analysis involving 10 field offices have identified significant limitations in the department's long - standing ai requirements and oversight and enforcement approaches . hud officials also cited staffing resource constraints as undermining their oversight capacity and ability to implement corrective measures . regarding hud's 2009 study , it concluded that the department's limited ai regulatory requirements and oversight processes contributed to the study's findings that many ais were outdated or otherwise did not conform with the department' 1996 fair housing guidance . to better ensure that grantees conform with hud guidance , the report suggested requiring grantees to submit their ais for review and approval . zoning and site selection . one ai we reviewed , which was prepared on behalf of several grantees by a regional planning unit within a local university , identified some of their established or planned land use policies as potential impediments to fair housing . for example , the ai found that some of the grantees had minimum lot - size requirements for building single - family residences that could limit housing affordability . the ai noted that a 1-acre minimum lot size , for example , would create land costs that would make owning or renting homes on such lots unaffordable to low - income families . further , the ai noted that some of the grantees were considering requiring that all new homes be constructed of brick , a requirement that could substantially increase construction costs compared with siding and make the homes unaffordable to low - income families . to address these potential impediments , the ai recommended that the grantees ( 1 ) ensure that a sufficient portion of their communities were zoned for multifamily construction and that lot sizes for single - family housing were small enough to keep single - family housing affordable and ( 2 ) consider the potential impact on housing affordability , including on minority families , before adopting building codes that require all - brick construction .