we provided a draft of this report to gsa for comment . an official in gsa's audit management division told us in an email that the agency had no comments on the draft report . we will send copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees and the administrator of the general services administration . in addition , we will make copies available to others upon request , and the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at 202-512-2834 or rectanusl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . this section displays these values at a regional level in chart form and by state in an interactive map . at the same time that gsa introduced regional and national - focused dashboard reports on capital projects , it also introduced ( 1 ) a project details dashboard for capital projects that provides project - level information by region and state and ( 2 ) a project award performance dashboard that provides capital project - level information for planned awards ; this dashboard can be filtered by fiscal year , program , vendor , project name , and contract type or number . both of these dashboards have multiple sections ; for example , the project award performance dashboard includes sections that focus on performance relative to the project delivery and timely award measures , highlight capital projects that may require adjustments to their schedule or budget baselines , and detail reasons for requested changes to baselines . in april 2018 , gsa also launched a draft version of a dashboard for small projects that it expects to give regional officials direct access to up - to - date information on their small r&a projects . similar to the capital project information dashboard , the small project dashboard will integrate information from systems including epmxpress , iris , easi , and fmis . gsa's plan for implementation states that this dashboard will present regional officials with a consolidated view of program and project information that includes status updates on timely - award and project - delivery measures . this can result in either missing data or baseline and completion dates simply being entered in a single session . officials from gsa's central office said that they rely on regional officials to input accurate information throughout the course of a project , as baselines are set and actual milestones are either met or exceeded . gsa's central office produces regional and national reports and provides them to their regional offices to facilitate internal discussion on r&a projects' performance . specifically , gsa shares the reports containing regional and overall results of its timely award measure , project delivery measures , and the previously discussed reconciliation measure to encourage conversations among senior gsa leadership and regional management . for example , one report compares projects' actual progress with baseline milestones using the project delivery measures to assess the accuracy of teams' planning . gsa also shares r&a project delivery measure results with the office of management and budget when compiling its annual performance reports .