royalties . because royalty payments raised costs associated with the development and sales of fossil energy , they provided a disincentive to produce and consume fossil energy . however , we cannot say to what extent the federal royalties provided a disincentive for oil and gas development on federal lands relative to other places because oil and gas companies that lease federal lands look for the best economic terms across a wide range of land owners ( such as state , private , federal , and international owners ) . we found in 2008 that studies of many resource owners indicated that the federal government collected less in total revenues than most other resource owners , but we do not have more recent comparisons of revenues collected . tax expenditures and royalty relief . in general , tax expenditures and royalty relief provided incentives for fossil energy production by lowering the costs associated with the exploration and development of oil and gas resources . this appendix provides more detailed information on u.s. production and consumption of nuclear energy from 2000 through 2013 and on major factors , including federal activities , that may have influenced nuclear energy production and consumption levels . the united states has 100 operating commercial nuclear reactors , all of which are used to generate electricity . the year - to - year pattern of domestic production and consumption of nuclear energy fluctuated from 2000 through 2013 , as shown in figure 17 . in general , nuclear energy production and consumption increased from 754 million megawatt - hours in 2000 to 806 million megawatt - hours in 2007 , according to energy information administration ( eia ) data . from 2007 through 2010 , nuclear energy production and consumption remained steady between about 800 million megawatt - hours and 807 million megawatt - hours . from 2011 through 2013 , nuclear energy production and consumption decreased below 800 million megawatt - hours . the proportion of electricity generated by nuclear power in the united states changed little during the period we reviewed , with nuclear reactors accounting for about 20 percent of total u.s. electricity generation in 2000 and about 19 percent in 2013 . the studies and reports we reviewed indicated that recent decreases in u.s. nuclear energy production and consumption may be due to a number of major factors , including reductions in natural gas prices and the fukushima daiichi nuclear accident . regarding natural gas prices , some nuclear plant operators cited price reductions as an important factor in their decisions regarding nuclear power reactor operations . for example , the vermont yankee nuclear power station in vernon , vermont , began operations in 1972 , and the owners obtained a renewed license in 2011 to operate the plant for an additional 20 years . however , in august 2013 , the owners announced plans to permanently close the plant in 2014 . according to the owners , their decision to close the plant was driven in part by lower natural gas prices , which had reduced the comparative profitability of the plant . in march 2011 , a 9.0-magnitude earthquake and subsequent tsunami devastated northeastern japan and severely damaged the fukushima daiichi nuclear power plant .