dod concurred with our recommendation . moreover , section 813 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2015 facilitated dod's implementation of our recommendation , encouraging dod to use other data sources , such as advisory and assistance services , to measure compliance with closely associated with inherently governmental and staff augmentation funding reductions . similarly , in april 2015 , the dod inspector general found that the information included in the inventory was not sufficient to determine whether funding reductions were met and also recommended that dod clarify how reductions should be reported . dod obligated $54.6 billion , or $280 million less than the limit on contract services in fiscal year 2014 . in addition , the comptroller's office improved planning and oversight of contract services for fiscal year 2014 by seeking input when setting spending targets and implementing a waiver request process to allow for adjustments during the year . these steps helped ensure that dod adhered to the aggregate limit ; but adherence to spending targets varied by the military departments . while , the army and navy exceeded the comptroller - provided targets due , in part , to a lack of accurate budget and obligation data for contract services , the air force did not . however , army and navy budget officials identified additional steps they plan to take to better manage the contract services spending limit in the future . dod adhered to the contract services spending limit for fiscal year 2014 , obligating $54.6 billion for contract services . dod reported obligating $1.17 billion less than the limit ; however , consistent with our december 2014 report , dod's methodology for calculating the spending limit for fiscal year 2014 contained errors which caused it to overstate the limit . after adjusting for these errors in the comptroller's methodology for calculating the limit , we estimated that dod obligated $280 million less than the limit on contract services in fiscal year 2014 . in response to our december 2014 recommendations , the comptroller took steps to correct its methodology for calculating the spending limit for fiscal year 2015 , but these changes were not yet in place for fiscal year 2014 implementation . these recommendations and their status are discussed later in this report . this report addresses dod's progress to implement our previous recommendations and further implementation of the contract services limitations for fiscal year 2014 . specifically we assessed the extent to which dod implemented the ( 1 ) contract services spending limit for fiscal year 2014 and ( 2 ) funding reductions for contracts with closely associated with inherently governmental and staff augmentation functions from fiscal years 2010 through 2014 . as a result of these errors in accounting for both research and development and the calculation of civilian workforce increases , dod's obligations were $280 million under the limit rather than the $1.17 billion reported by dod . the comptroller's office took steps in fiscal year 2014 to improve management of the contract services spending limit . the comptroller's office sought input from components when setting target amounts for fiscal year 2014 .