the group also weighs other considerations . for example , state department and science center staff said that they try to provide funds for projects at as many institutes as possible . a project with relatively weak scientific merit might receive funding if it is at an institute of high interest to the united states due to proliferation concerns . when the group reaches consensus on which projects to fund , it passes these instructions on to the u.s. representatives on the centers' governing boards . representatives from the funding parties on each board then jointly decide which projects will receive funding . the next step is for a member of the science center's staff to work with the project team to fine - tune the official project agreement . the staff member and the project team will revise the project's workplan and make any modifications required by the funding party . to examine the monitoring procedures used to check whether scientists are working on the peaceful research they are paid to produce , we first met with state department officials to discuss what monitoring procedures were in place . we then examined each component of the monitoring process in detail , as follows: we met with auditors from the defense contract audit agency and science advisers from the national laboratories to learn how they conduct their monitoring activities . we then reviewed the defense contract audit agency's reports on its audits of u.s. - funded science center projects conducted during 1999 and 2000 . we reviewed the reports prepared by the external auditors for both science centers and met with representatives from the firm that conducted the most recent audit of the center in russia . we visited the science centers in russia and ukraine and met with officials at all levels of these organizations including the executive directors , deputy executive directors , chief financial officers , technical specialists , and members of the financial staff to discuss how they conduct technical and financial monitoring of projects . we compared these discussions with the centers' written guidance . we also reviewed in detail the project documentation , including financial , technical , and monitoring reports , for 35 projects that had received u.s. funds .