extensions do not count against the cap . while working under an h - 1b visa , a worker may apply for legal permanent residence in the united states . after filing an application for permanent residence , h - 1b workers are generally eligible to obtain additional 1-year visa extensions until their u.s . permanent resident cards , commonly referred to as “green cards,” are issued . the departments of labor ( labor ) , homeland security ( homeland security ) , and state ( state ) each play a role in administering the application process for an h - 1b visa . labor's employment and training administration ( employment and training ) receives and approves an initial application , known as the labor condition application ( lca ) , from employers . the lca , which labor reviews as part of the application process , requires employers to make various attestations designed to protect the jobs of domestic workers and the rights and working conditions of temporary workers . homeland security's u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) reviews an additional employer application , known as the i - 129 petition , and ultimately approves h - 1b visa petitions . for prospective h - 1b workers residing outside the united states , state interviews approved applicants and compares information obtained during the interview against each individual's visa application and supporting documents , and ultimately issues the visa . for prospective h - 1b workers already residing in the united states , uscis updates the workers' visa status without involvement from state . uscis has primary responsibility for administering the h - 1b cap . generally , it accepts h - 1b petitions in the order in which they are received . however , for those years in which uscis anticipates that the number of i - 129 petitions filed will exceed the cap , uscis holds a “lottery” to determine which of the petitions will be accepted for review . to help ensure the full protection of h - 1b workers employed through staffing companies , in our report we asked that congress consider holding the employer where an h - 1b visa holder performs work accountable for meeting program requirements to the same extent as the employer that submitted the lca form . finally , changes to program legislation have diluted program provisions for protecting u.s. workers by allowing visa holders to seek permanent residency , broadening the job and skill categories for h - 1b eligibility , and establishing exemptions to the cap . the immigration act of 1990 removed the requirement that h - 1b visa applicants have a residence in a foreign country that they have no intention of abandoning . consequently , h - 1b workers are able to pursue permanent residency in the united states and remain in the country for an unlimited period of time while their residency application is pending . the same law also broadened the job and skill categories for which employers could seek h - 1b visas . a detailed explanation of our methodology can be found in our report . our work was conducted from may 2009 through january 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .