gao - 11-335 . ( washington , d.c. , may 5 , 2011 ) . overstay enforcement: additional mechanisms for collecting , assessing , and sharing data could strengthen dhs's efforts but would have costs . gao - 11-411 . ( washington , d.c. , april 15 , 2011 ) . this concludes my prepared testimony statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that members of the subcommittee may have . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact richard m. stana at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or stanar@gao.gov . in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony are rebecca gambler , acting director ; anthony moran , assistant director ; kathryn bernet , assistant director ; jeffrey baldwin - bott ; frances cook ; kevin copping ; and taylor matheson . visa waiver program: dhs has implemented the electronic system for travel authorization , but further steps needed to address potential program risks . visa waiver program: actions are needed to improve management of the expansion process , and to assess and mitigate program risks . gao - 08-967 . ( washington , d.c. , sep 15 , 2008 ) . border security: state department should plan for potentially significant staffing and facilities shortfalls caused by changes in the visa waiver program . gao - 08-623 . ( washington , d.c. , may 22 , 2008 ) . border security: stronger actions needed to assess and mitigate risks of the visa waiver program . gao - 06-854 . ( washington , d.c. , jul 28 , 2006 ) . overstay tracking: a key component of homeland security and a layered defense . gao - 04-82 . ( washington , d.c. , may 21 , 2004 ) . border security: implications of eliminating the visa waiver program . gao - 03-38 . ice had not established a time frame for completing this assessment . we reported in april 2011 that by developing such a time frame and utilizing the assessment findings , as appropriate , ice could strengthen its planning efforts and be better positioned to hold staff accountable for completing the assessment . we recommended that ice establish a target time frame for assessing the funding and resources ero would require in order to assume responsibility for civil overstay enforcement and use the results of that assessment . dhs officials agreed with our recommendation and stated that ice planned to identify resources needed to transition this responsibility to ero as part of its fiscal year 2013 resource planning process . dhs has not yet implemented a comprehensive biometric system to match available information provided by foreign nationals upon their arrival and departure from the united states . in 2002 , dhs initiated the united states visitor and immigrant status indicator technology program ( us - visit ) to develop a comprehensive entry and exit system to collect biometric data from aliens traveling through u.s. ports of entry . in 2004 , us - visit initiated the first step of this program by collecting biometric data on aliens entering the united states .