managing partner agency . as managing partner for grants.gov , hhs is responsible for managing grants.gov . hhs is also responsible for managing grants.gov as an information technology ( it ) investment through hhs's office of the chief information officer ( ocio ) . iv ) . each of these initiatives have funding and governance models similar to those of grants.gov . in addition , in order to obtain more information from the perspective of grants.gov partner agencies , we interviewed relevant officials at the departments of homeland security , labor , and the interior . we conducted this performance audit from april 2010 to may 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . over 1,000 federal grant programs are disbursed and managed by 26 federal agencies and other federal grant - making organizations . because of concerns about the burden on grantees of the varying requirements imposed by these different grant programs , congress enacted the federal financial assistance management improvement act of 1999 , commonly referred to by the grants community and omb as public law 106-107 . among other things , the act also required omb to direct , coordinate , and assist agencies in developing and implementing a common application and reporting system that included electronic processes with which a nonfederal entity can apply for multiple grant programs that serve similar purposes but are administered by different federal agencies . in response to public law 106-107 , among other things , omb created grants.gov ( initially known as e - grants ) , and included it among the initiatives designated in omb's 2002 e - government strategy . as these programs were initiated shortly after the e - government act of 2002 became law , we refer to them in this report as legacy e - gov initiatives . the grants.gov web site was deployed with both the “find” and “apply” tools on october 31 , 2003 , and was meant , in part , to improve the announcement and application stages ( together known as the pre - award stage ) of the grant - making process for grantees . omb has directed that almost all federal discretionary grant opportunities should be posted to the grants.gov web site ; applicants can search for grant opportunities by agency or across agencies using the “find” mechanism . many grant announcements include a link to application forms and instructions . as with all legacy e - gov initiatives , omb established a management structure to oversee the initiative and to facilitate a collaborative working environment for grants.gov .