i for further detail. ) following iraq's invasion of kuwait in august 1990 , the united states and other allied nations sent troops to the persian gulf region in operation desert shield . in the winter of 1991 , the allied forces attacked iraq in an air campaign and subsequent invasion by ground forces ( operation desert storm ) . despite the harsh environment , illness , injury , and death rates among approximately 700,000 u.s. military personnel were significantly lower than in previous major conflicts . yet , shortly after the war , some veterans began reporting health problems that they believed might be due to their participation in the war . since 1991 , 240 federally funded research projects have been initiated by va , dod , and hhs to address the health concerns of individuals who served in the gulf war . we interviewed va's then - assistant chief research and development officer ( crado ) and the department of defense's ( dod ) deputy director of the deployment health support directorate ( dhsd ) regarding the agencies' current and future gulf war illnesses research and investigation plans . we also interviewed crado and dhsd staff and senior managers with dod's medical research offices , including defense research and engineering and the army's medical research and materiel command . we reviewed other relevant documents , including interagency coordinating council meeting minutes , federal laws , presidential directives , and va - and dod - published documents on gulf war illnesses research and dod investigations . to describe efforts made by va and dod to monitor cancer incidence among gulf war veterans , we interviewed va's then - assistant crado , a va senior research manager , and va researchers , along with dod's deputy director of dhsd . we reviewed annual reports to congressional committees describing federally funded gulf war illnesses research , published articles from peer - reviewed journals reporting research findings , and other agency documents describing research projects . to evaluate the va's research advisory committee on gulf war veterans' illnesses ( rac ) efforts to provide advice on gulf war illnesses research , we interviewed rac's chairman and scientific director , attended the most recent rac meeting in february 2004 , and reviewed rac reports and recommendations to the secretary of va. we also interviewed officials with the national institutes of health's ( nih ) office of federal advisory committee policy and officials within an nih advisory committee to identify common practices related to information sharing and collaboration between nih and its advisory committees . to determine va's efforts to improve information sharing and collaboration with rac , we interviewed va's deputy crado and crado staff . from 1995 through 1996 , the research working group ( rwg ) of the interagency persian gulf veterans' coordinating board identified 19 major research questions related to illnesses in gulf war veterans . rwg later added 2 more questions to create a set of 21 key research questions to serve as a guide for federal research on gulf war illnesses . ( see table 3. ) we conducted our work from september 2003 through may 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . ( see app .