award . epa prepares the grant documents and instructs the grantee on technical requirements , and the grantee signs an agreement to comply with all requirements . post - award . epa provides technical assistance and oversight ; the grantee completes the work , and the project ends . closeout of the award . the project officer ensures that the project is completed ; the grants management office prepares closeout documents and notifies the grantee that the grant is completed . epa has had persistent problems in managing its grants . in 1996 , epa's inspector general testified before congress that epa did not fulfill its obligation to properly monitor grants . acknowledging these problems , epa identified oversight , including grant closeouts , as a material weakness — a management control weakness that the epa administrator determines is significant enough to report to the president and congress . epa's fiscal year 1999 integrity act report indicated that this oversight material weakness had been corrected , but the inspector general testified that the weakness continued . in 2002 , the inspector general and the office of management and budget recommended that epa , once again , designate grants management as a material weakness . epa ultimately decided to maintain this issue as an agency - level weakness , which is a lower level of risk than a material weakness . epa made this decision because it believes its ongoing corrective action efforts will help to resolve outstanding grants management problems . however , in adding epa's grants management to gao's list of epa's major performance and accountability challenges in january 2003 , we signaled our concern that epa has not yet taken action to ensure that it can manage its grants effectively . epa faces four major , persistent problems in managing its grants . it must resolve these problems in order to improve its grants management . specifically , epa has not always awarded its discretionary grants competitively or ensured that it solicits these grants proposals from a large pool of applicants ; effectively overseen its grantees' progress and compliance with the terms managed its grants so that they are effectively used to achieve effectively managed its grants management resources by holding its staff accountable for performing their duties , ensuring that the staff are adequately trained and appropriately allocated , and providing them with adequate management information . until september 2002 , epa did not have a policy for competing the discretionary grants that might be eligible for competition — about $719 million of its total $4.2 billion in grant funding in fiscal year 2002 . consequently , epa was not promoting competition . according to epa's own internal management reviews and an inspector general report , epa did not always compete its discretionary grants when competition might have been warranted . by competitively soliciting grants , epa would be able to choose the best project at the least cost to the government and is encouraged by the federal grant and cooperative agreement act of 1977 . epa can award its discretionary grants noncompetitively ; however , it is required by agency guidance to document the reasons for these decisions in a “decision memorandum.” it has not consistently done so , according to epa's internal management reviews .