ii. ) it showed that of the federal contracts provided to nonprofit organizations in fiscal year 2006 , about two - thirds were awarded by the department of energy and the department of defense and about one - tenth by the department of health and human services . even so , the percentage of dollars contracted to nonprofit organizations within these agencies is relatively small . for example , nonprofit contracts constituted only 1 percent of the department of defense's total 2006 contract dollars , while about 10 percent of the department of health and human services' contract dollars were awarded to nonprofit organizations . some programs contract with nonprofit organizations to help administer programs . for example , the centers for medicare & medicaid services contract with quality - improvement organizations , which can be nonprofit organizations , to monitor provider performance . nonprofit organizations also receive grants indirectly through other levels of government , or as subgrantees of other grantees , and are sometimes subcontractors to other federal contractors . some federal programs are set up as large grants to states , with the expectation that they will then be further disbursed for local program implementation , and nonprofit organizations are sometimes used for further service delivery . in general , the federal government loans money and guarantees others' loans as a way of increasing the availability of funding for borrowers or activities it considers important . the rural development electric program , operated by the u.s. department of agriculture's rural development , utilities programs , is an example of a program where loans and loan guarantees are provided directly , in this case to electric utilities to serve customers in rural areas . the loans and loan guarantees help finance the construction of electric distribution , transmission , and generation facilities ; system improvements ; and other activities , including energy conservation programs . in this program , nonprofit organizations can also be intermediaries , issuing loans that are guaranteed by the federal government . similarly , the hospital mortgage insurance program , implemented by the department of housing and urban development's federal housing administration , operates a loan guaranty program that insures loans . these federally guaranteed loans finance the construction , modernization , equipping , or refinancing of acute - care hospitals . the program facilitates affordable financing of nonprofit , for - profit , and government - owned hospitals by protecting lenders against losses they might incur if hospitals fail to make their mortgage payments . the program generally targets hospitals deemed too risky to obtain private bond insurance but able to pass certain agency underwriting tests . in addition , the program serves as a credit enhancement and improves the credit rating of the hospital , resulting in a lower interest rate for the loan . finally , some federal programs use loans and loan guarantees to encourage activities that indirectly result in increased revenues to nonprofit organizations . for example , within student loan programs , the federal government both guarantees loans and provides loans directly to students for postsecondary education , often at nonprofit institutions .