sffas no . 2 states that each credit program should use a systematic methodology to project expected cash flows into the future . to accomplish this task , agencies develop cash flow models . a cash flow model is a computer program that generally uses historical information and various assumptions including defaults , prepayments , recoveries , and the timing of these events to estimate future loan performance . those assumptions that have the greatest impact on the estimated subsidy cost are often referred to as the key assumptions . what are the future prospects for the continued negative subsidy for the federal direct loan program ? what data did education use to project an estimated savings of $4 for every $100 of direct student loans , as it reported in november 1999 ? to respond to your request , we reviewed education's audited financial statements and examined the workpapers of education's independent auditors for fiscal years 1995 through 1999 . we interviewed knowledgeable personnel from education's budget service and obtained information relevant to your questions . we compared education's practices to ( 1 ) federal budgeting and accounting standards — such as statement of federal financial accounting standards ( sffas ) no . 2 , accounting for direct loans and loan guarantees , as amended , and office of management and budget ( omb ) circular a - 11 , preparation and submission of budget estimates — and ( 2 ) the guidance contained in the federal financial accounting and auditing technical release 3 , preparing and auditing direct loan and loan guarantee subsidies under the federal credit reform act . our audit work was conducted in washington , d.c. , from may 2000 through november 2000 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . appendix ii describes our objectives , scope , and methodology in detail . we provided the department of education copies of a draft of this report for review and comment . on december 7 , 2000 , we met with cognizant education officials and obtained oral comments on a draft of this report . because of the number and diverse nature of the questions , we are responding in a question - and - answer format . the next section provides an overview of some of the key points from our review . several circumstances make it difficult to make the best possible determination of fdlp's financial performance at this time . first , because fdlp is a relatively new program , it has a short history of repayment activity and little historical data are available . second , because education lacks historical fdlp data , education relies heavily on data from the guaranteed loan program to develop estimates for most key cash flow assumptions in its fdlp cash flow model , which is used to estimate the subsidy cost of the program . while this is appropriate for the interim , guaranteed loans may perform differently from fdlp loans and therefore , education ultimately will need to use fdlp data . education plans to phase out the use of guaranteed loan data as fdlp data become available . how much financing has been provided to education for the direct loan program through borrowing from treasury and appropriations received ?