more than 40 percent in another region reported the same . we encountered similar complaints during our overseas fieldwork . for example , in morocco , the former public affairs officer stated that so little information had been provided from washington on state's post - september 11 public diplomacy strategy that he had to rely on newspaper articles and guesswork to formulate his in - country public diplomacy plans . during our audit work , we learned that private sector public relations efforts and political campaigns use sophisticated strategies to integrate complex communication efforts involving multiple players . although state's public diplomacy efforts extend beyond the activities of public relations firms , many of the strategic tools that such firms employ are relevant to state's situation . while it is difficult to establish direct links between public diplomacy programs and results , other u.s. government agencies and the private sector have best practices for assessing information disseminating campaigns , including the need to define success and how it should be measured . executives from some of the largest public relations firms in the united states told us that initial strategic decisions involve establishing the scope and nature of the problem , identifying the target audience , determining the core messages , and defining both success and failure . subsequent steps include conducting research to validate the initial decisions , testing the core messages , carrying out pre - launch activities , and developing information materials . each of these elements contains numerous other steps that must be completed before implementing a tactical program . further , progress must be measured continuously and tactics adjusted accordingly . we also found that state is not systematically and comprehensively measuring progress toward its public diplomacy goals . its overseas performance measurement efforts focus on anecdotal evidence and program outputs , rather than gauging progress toward changing foreign publics' understanding and attitudes about the united states . some posts judge the effectiveness of their public diplomacy efforts by simply counting the number of public diplomacy activities that occur in their host country — for example , the number of speeches given by the ambassador or the number of news articles placed in the host - country media . while such measures shed light on the level of public diplomacy activity , they reveal little in the way of overall program effectiveness . state currently has no reporting requirements in place to determine whether posts' performance targets are actually met . at one overseas post we visited , the post had identified polling data showing that only 22 percent of the host country's citizens had a favorable view of the united states — a figure the post used as a baseline with yearly percentage increases set as targets . however , a former public affairs officer at the post told us that he did not attempt to determine or report on whether the post had actually achieved these targets because there was no requirement to do so . officials at the other two overseas posts we visited also cited the lack of any formal reporting requirement for following up on whether they met their annual performance targets .