b . is it fair ? gao , tax expenditures: background and evaluation criteria and questions , gao - 13-167sp ( washington , d.c.: nov. 29 , 2012 ) . the graduated corporation income tax rate is the terminology used in treasury's tax expenditure estimates , but we refer to it as the graduated corporate income tax rate schedule or graduated rates for this report . how does the tax expenditure relate to other federal programs ? what are the consequences for the federal budget of the tax expenditure ? how should evaluation of the tax expenditure be managed ? the guide's questions cover a number of different policy objectives , which sometimes compete with one another . this report provides information in response to the questions , but does not attempt to balance the different objectives or make recommendations . rather , policymakers are in the best position to judge how competing policy objectives should be weighed . as we note in our tax expenditure evaluation guide , the guide is not a “one size fits all” framework for evaluating tax expenditures . we used reasonable judgment in applying the guide's questions and concepts to evaluate the three tax expenditures . in some instances , we focused our discussion on certain questions in the guide because they were more relevant to the tax expenditures we were evaluating . at the same time , we devoted less discussion to other questions that were more technical in nature . see appendix i for the guide's full list of questions . to determine what is known with respect to the deferral tax expenditures and the graduated corporate income tax rate schedule , we reviewed a variety of sources . these sources included studies by gao , the congressional research service ( crs ) , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) , and other federal agencies ; legislation , statutes , and regulations related to each of the tax expenditures ; and academic research . we also interviewed officials at treasury , the internal revenue service ( irs ) , and three external experts , one from crs and two from universities , who have researched and written extensively on the u.s. corporate income tax system . the results from these interviews are not generalizable . when no consensus existed among our sources for the answer to a question , we summarized the debate and provided citations for the various views . we analyzed treasury's tax expenditure estimates from 1998 to 2012 , and 2011 estimates by jct on the revenue effects of changing tax expenditures . we also analyzed 2010 data from the irs statistics of income ( soi ) , the most recent year available at the time of our work , and data from the bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) that covered 1987 to 2012 . to assess the reliability of the data and estimates , we reviewed agency documentation , interviewed agency officials , and reviewed our prior reports that have used them . we determined that the treasury , bea , jct , and irs data and estimates were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .