none . resource allocation continues to be a major public policy issue . yes . discussed under outcomes in the report . yes . discussed under outcomes and comparison of performance plans in the report . va's plan has measures for alternative revenues and for conducting studies to assess and realign its health care system . yes . discussed under outcomes in the report . progress in resolving major management challenge as discussed in the fiscal year 2000 performance report budget: not addressed in report . applicable goals and measures in the fiscal year 2002 performance none . va's budget systems need to be aligned technology to help serve veterans need improvement . performance - based budgeting: va and omb staff jointly developed a proposal to restructure va's budget accounts to facilitate charging each program's budget account for all of the significant resources used to operate and produce its outcomes and outputs . va is continuing to work with major stakeholders on implementation issues . weaknesses remain despite unqualified audit opinion . information technology ( it ) : va implemented a capital investment process that the department uses to select , control , and evaluate it investments . the department reviews it projects that exceed planned expenditures by 10 percent to determine whether to change the scope of funding or terminate the project . the report did not address progress va made in developing a departmentwide it architecture , business process reengineering , or the need to obtain a full - time chief information officer . financial management: va described a number of information security enhancements as described under information security challenge . information technology: va has many initiatives planned or in progress . for example , va is taking steps to develop an architecture that will promote departmentwide interoperability and data sharing . va stated that it has completed the technical component of this architecture and is in the process of developing the logical component . in addition , va stated that efforts are underway to improve its capital investment process in response to gao recommendations . ( app . ii contains va's written comments. ) as we reported , va's performance plan identified actions for resolving each of its major management challenges , even when quantifiable goals and measures were not included . however , omb circular no . a - 11 states , “performance goals for management problems should be included in the annual plan , particularly for problems whose resolution is mission - critical….” in particular , the annual plan should include a performance goal ( s ) covering the major human resources strategies , such as recruitment , retention , and skill development and training , according to omb guidance . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of veterans affairs ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others upon request . if you or your staff have any questions , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7101 .