this authority will cease during a noncontrol period . in a control period , the cfo employs its own legal counsel . the cfo's legal counsel is independent of the district's office of the corporation counsel , which mainly serves the mayor , and is under the direct administrative control of the mayor . current law does not provide the ocfo with authority to employ its own legal counsel during a noncontrol period . in a control period , the cfo is appointed and removed with the approval of the authority . however , in a noncontrol period , the cfo can be removed by the mayor for cause , with the approval of two - thirds of the council . the law does not define “cause.” in a control period , the cfo has the authority to contract for services . this authority will revert to the district's central procurement process during a noncontrol period . during a control period , the cfo's budget request is not subject to revision but is subject to comment by the mayor and council as part of the district's annual appropriation request . during a noncontrol period , the cfo's budget would be included in the district's regular budget process . as the district and congress consider options for ensuring the independence and authority of the cfo , they may wish to consider whether the requirement that the cfo certify the availability of funds for contracts should be amended to expressly include leases and collective bargaining agreements , which can involve significant expenditures but are not currently subject to the cfo's certification . currently , these items are not expressly included in the cfo's legal responsibility for certification , thereby leaving the certification of funds process subject to disagreement . in addition , congress and the district may want to consider whether the cfo's budget , once it is appropriated by congress , should be exempt from being reduced by the mayor . a similar exemption is currently in place for the city council . earlier this week , the chair of the district city council submitted a legislative proposal to the city council to specifically address issues related to the cfo's independence and the scope of the cfo's duties . while we have not had a chance to analyze the proposal in detail , we support efforts by the district to continue or strengthen the independence and authority of the district's cfo in a post - authority environment . our executive guide: creating value through world - class financial management , notes that one of the essential elements of a successful finance organization is clear , strong executive leadership . once the authority suspends its activities , it is important to consider whether the cfo will be able to continue to operate and perform its ongoing fiscal and financial activities in an independent manner , without encroachment by others , especially if the district faces difficult choices caused by financial downturn . the ig is now appointed to a 6-year term and may be removed by the mayor only with authority approval during a control period . audit committees have long been recognized as a key component of the corporate governance system for private sector companies .