risk assessments . preventive medicine units from each of the services have generally used oehs information and reports to develop risk assessments that characterized known or potential hazards when new bases were opened in oif . chppm's formal risk assessments have also been summarized or updated to include the findings of baseline and routine oehs monitoring conducted while bases are occupied by servicemembers , chppm officials said . during deployments , commanders have used risk assessments to balance the identified risk of occupational and environmental health hazards , and other operational risks , with mission requirements . generally , oehs risk assessments for oif have involved analysis of the results of air , water , or soil monitoring . chppm officials said that most risk assessments that they have received characterized locations in oif as having a low risk of posing health hazards to servicemembers . risk control and mitigation . using risk assessment findings , preventive medicine units have recommended risk control and mitigation activities to commanders that were intended to reduce potential exposures at specific locations . for oif , risk control and mitigation recommendations at bases have included such actions as modifying work schedules , requiring individuals to wear protective equipment , and increasing sampling to assess any changes and improve confidence in the accuracy of the risk estimate . risk communication . risk assessment findings have also been used in risk communication efforts , such as providing access to information on a web site or conducting health briefings to make servicemembers aware of occupational and environmental health risks during a deployment and the recommended efforts to control or mitigate those risks , including the need for medical follow - up . many of the risk assessments for oif we reviewed recommended that health risks be communicated to servicemembers . while risk management activities have become more widespread in oif compared with previous deployments , dod officials have not conducted systematic monitoring of deployed military services' efforts to conduct oehs risk management activities . as of march 2005 , neither dod nor the military services had established a system to examine whether required risk assessments had been conducted , or to record and track resulting recommendations for risk mitigation or risk communication activities . in the absence of a systematic monitoring process , chppm officials said they conducted ad hoc reviews of implementation of risk management recommendations for sites where continued , widespread oehs monitoring has occurred , such as at port shuaiba , kuwait , a deepwater port where a large number of servicemembers have been stationed , or other locations with elevated risks . dhsd officials said they have initiated planning for a comprehensive quality assurance program for deployment health that would address oehs risk management , but the program was still under development . as we stated in our report , dod's efforts to collect and report oehs data could be strengthened . currently , oehs data that the deployed military services have collected during oif may not always be comparable because of variations among the services' data collection standards and practices . additionally , the deployed military services' uncertain compliance with oehs report submission requirements casts doubt on the completeness of chppm's oehs archive .