gao - 03-924 . washington , d.c.: august 6 , 2003 . washington , d.c.: october 5 , 2001 . bioterrorism: federal research and preparedness activities . severe acute respiratory syndrome: established infectious disease control measures helped contain spread , but a large - scale resurgence may pose challenges . washington , d.c.: september 28 , 2001 . this department had been attempting to hire more epidemiologists . barriers to finding and hiring epidemiologists included noncompetitive salaries and a general shortage of people with the necessary skills . workforce capacity issues may also hinder implementation of infectious disease control measures . for example , the shortage of epidemiologists could grow worse if , in the event of a severe outbreak , existing health care workers became infected as a result of their more frequent exposure to a contaminated environment or became exhausted working longer hours . workforce shortages could be further exacerbated because of the need to conduct contact tracing . according to world health organization officials , an individual infected with sars came in contact with , on average , 30 to 40 people in asian countries — all of whom had to be contacted and informed of their possible exposure . during our site visits in early 2002 , shortages in laboratory personnel were also cited . officials in one city noted that they had difficulty filling and maintaining laboratory positions and that people that accepted the positions often left the health department for better - paying positions . increased funding for hiring staff cannot necessarily solve these shortages in the near term because for many types of laboratory positions there are not enough trained individuals in the workforce . according to the association of public health laboratories , training laboratory personnel to provide them with the necessary skills will take time and require a strategy for building the needed workforce . for our current work updating these findings , many of the state and local officials we interviewed cited shortages in trained epidemiologists or laboratory personnel as persistent . in 2002 , state and local officials told us that sustained funding would be necessary to address one important need — hiring and retaining needed staff . they told us they would be reluctant to hire additional staff unless they were confident that the funding would be sustained and staff could be retained . these statements are consistent with the findings of the advisory panel to assess domestic response capabilities for terrorism involving weapons of mass destruction , which recommended that federal support for state and local public health preparedness and infrastructure building be sustained at an annual rate of $1 billion for the next 5 years to have a material impact on state and local governments' preparedness for a bioterrorist event . we have noted previously that federal , state , and local governments have a shared responsibility in preparing for terrorist attacks and other disasters . however , prior to the infusion of federal funds , few states were investing in their public health infrastructure . we found that officials were beginning to address communication problems . for example , six of the seven cities we visited in early 2002 were examining how communication would take place in a public health emergency .