ots has since been eliminated . the primary federal regulator is generally the regulator overseeing the lead bank . primary federal regulators of bank holding companies also consult with the federal reserve . referred to an interagency cpp council composed of representatives from the four banking regulators , with treasury officials as observers . the cpp council evaluated and voted on the applicants , forwarding to treasury applications that received “approval” recommendations from a majority of the council members . treasury provided guidance to regulators and the cpp council to use in assessing applicants that permitted consideration of factors such as signed merger agreements or confirmed investments of private capital , among other things , to offset low examination ratings or other attributes of weaknesses . finally , institutions that the banking regulators determined to be the weakest and thus ineligible for a cpp investment , such as those with the lowest examination ratings , received a presumptive denial recommendation . the banking regulators or the cpp council sent recommendations for approval to treasury's investment committee , which was composed of three to five senior treasury officials , including ofs's chief investment officer ( who served as the committee chair ) and the assistant secretaries for financial markets , economic policy , financial institutions , and financial stability at treasury . the investment committee could also request additional analysis or information in order to clear up any concerns before deciding on an applicant's eligibility . after completing its review , the investment committee made recommendations to the assistant secretary for financial stability for final approval . once the investment committee recommended preliminary approval , treasury and the approved institution initiated the closing process to complete the investment and disburse the cpp funds . nine major financial institutions were initially included in cpp.institutions did not follow the application process that was ultimately developed but were included because treasury and the federal banking regulators considered them essential to the operation of the financial system . at the time , these nine institutions held about 55 percent of u.s. banking assets and provided a variety of services , including retail , wholesale , and investment banking and custodial and processing services . according to treasury officials , the nine financial institutions agreed to participate in cpp in part to signal the program's importance to the stability of the financial system . initially , treasury approved $125 billion in capital purchases for these institutions and completed the these transactions with eight of them on october 28 , 2008 , for a total of $115 billion . the remaining $10 billion was disbursed after the merger of bank of america corporation and merrill lynch & co. , inc. was completed in january 2009 . repayments and income from dividends , interest , and warrants from cpp investments have exceeded the amounts originally disbursed , but concerns remain about the financial strength of the remaining institutions and their ability to repay and exit the program . as we have reported , treasury disbursed $204.9 billion to 707 financial institutions nationwide from october 2008 through december 2009 .