gao . postal service: data needed to assess the effectiveness of outsourcing . gao - 08-787 . washington , d.c.: july 24 , 2008 . gao . increase transparency . update amp guidelines to explain how public input is considered in the decision - making process . usps has incorporated into its 2008 amp communication plan several modifications aimed at improving public notification and engagement . most notably , usps has moved the public input meeting to an earlier point in the amp process and plans posts a meeting agenda , summary brief , and presentation slides on its web site 1 week before the public meeting . usps has increased transparency , largely by clarifying its processes for addressing public comments and plans to make additional information available to the public on its web site . in 2007 , we found that stakeholders potentially affected by amp consolidations could not discern from usps's initial notification letters what usps was planning to study and what the outcomes of the study might be . this lack of clarification led to speculation on the part of stakeholders , which in turn increased public resistance to usps's realignment efforts . the initial notification letters were also confusing to stakeholders because they contained jargon and lacked adequate context to understand the purpose of the study . furthermore , in 2007 we reported that stakeholders were not given enough notice about the public meeting , and we recommended that usps improve public notice by providing stakeholders with a date for the public meeting earlier in the amp process . in its 2008 amp communication plan , usps has eliminated most of the jargon from its notification letters and has generally provided more context as to why it is necessary for usps to conduct the feasibility studies . for example , letters now name both facilities that would be affected by a proposed consolidation , whereas previously , only one facility was named . usps also added a requirement that the public be notified at least 15 days in advance of a public meeting . in 2007 , we found that public meetings required for amp consolidations were occurring too late in the decision - making process for the public to become engaged in this process in any meaningful way . at that time , the meetings were held after the area office and headquarters had completed their reviews of the amp consolidation studies and just before headquarters had made its final consolidation decisions . stakeholders we spoke with were not satisfied with the public input process and told us that usps solicited their input only when it considered the amp consolidation a “done deal.” we also found that usps did not publish agendas in advance of public meetings or provide the public with much information about the proposed studies . the only information available was a series of bullet points posted on usps's web site several days before the meetings . this lack of timely and complete information further inhibited the public's ability to meaningfully participate in the process .