omb agreed with the recommendation . the administration's recently proposed legislative framework , cpra , is somewhat responsive to our recommendation in that it addresses legal and financial limitations , as well as stakeholder influences in real property decision making . with the goal of streamlining the disposal process , cpra provides for an independent board to determine which properties it considers would be the most appropriate for public benefit uses . this streamlined process could reduce both the time it takes for the government to dispose of property and the amount the government pays to maintain property . to provide financial assistance to the agencies , cpra establishes an asset proceeds and space management fund from which funds could be transferred to reimburse an agency for necessary costs associated with disposing of property . reimbursing agencies for the costs they incur would potentially facilitate the disposal process . to address stakeholder influences , the independent board established under cpra would , among other things , recommend federal properties for disposal or consolidation after receiving recommendations from civilian landholding agencies and would independently review the agencies' recommendations . grouping all disposal and consolidation decisions into one set of proposals that congress would consider in its entirety could help to limit local stakeholder influences at any individual site . cpra does not explicitly address the government's overreliance on leasing . in 2008 , we found that decisions to lease selected federal properties were not always driven by cost - effectiveness considerations . for example , we estimated that the decision to lease the federal bureau of investigation's field office in chicago , illinois , instead of constructing a building the government would own , cost about $40 million more over 30 years . gsa officials noted that the limited availability of upfront capital was one of the reasons that prevented ownership at that time . federal budget scorekeeping rules require the full cost of construction to be recorded up front in the budget , whereas only the annual lease payments plus cancellation costs need to be recorded for operating leases . in their oversight roles , the audit organizations , who had access to relevant information and officials as the process evolved , helped to improve the accuracy of the data used in the brac process and thus strengthened the quality and integrity of the data used to develop closure and realignment recommendations . for example , the auditors worked to ensure certified information was used for brac analysis , and reviewed other facets of the process , including the various internal control plans , the cobra model , and other modeling and analytical tools that were used in the development of recommendations . there are a number of important similarities between brac and a civilian process as proposed in the administration's cpra . as a similarity , both brac and cpra employ the all - or - nothing approach to disposals and consolidations , meaning that once the final list is approved by the independent commission or board , it must be accepted or rejected as a whole . another important similarity is that both the brac and proposed cpra processes call for an independent board or commission to review recommendations .