public area security . in november 2013 , an armed individual entered the los angeles international airport , firing multiple shots killing a transportation security officer and injuring two others and a passenger . as a result of this and subsequent airport attacks , tsa co - hosted a series of security summits with stakeholders and published the public area security national framework in may 2017 outlining a series of best practices and recommendations to secure airport pubic areas . the tsa modernization act requires tsa and the dhs cybersecurity and infrastructure security agency to establish a public area security working group to promote collaboration between tsa and public and private stakeholders to develop non - binding recommendations for enhancing security in public areas of transportation facilities . the act also requires tsa to periodically share best practices developed by tsa and transportation stakeholders related to protecting public spaces of transportation infrastructure from emerging threats . in march 2019 , tsa officials established the public area security working group to engage with stakeholders to validate and update the best practices that were developed in the 2017 public area security national framework . cuban aviation security . in july 2018 , we reported on tsa's efforts to ensure the security of air carrier operations between the united states and cuba . we found that tsa's inspections and assessments in cuba generally followed standard operating procedures , but tsa did not inspect all air carriers at its own established frequency . we recommended that tsa improve its ability to identify certain air carriers requiring inspection in cuba and develop and implement a tool that more reliably tracks their operations between the united states and cuba . in response to our recommendation and as required under the tsa modernization act , tsa developed several tools and processes that corroborate and validate flight schedule data . for example , tsa developed a tool to analyze aggregate flight data and validate or identify service to the united states from international locations and began issuing monthly reports on unscheduled operations to its inspectors responsible for cuba . by taking these steps , tsa is better able to identify operations requiring inspection and corroborate and validate flight schedule data . tsa is currently reviewing the draft report and is scheduled to provide any comments by early november 2019 . to protect the u.s. aviation sector , including the roughly 440 airports it regulates , tsa deploys technologies to screen passengers and their carry - on and checked baggage for homemade explosives and other prohibited items that could , among other things , cause catastrophic damage to an aircraft . the ongoing threat of terrorism requires tsa to continually assess the effectiveness of its screening operations and , when necessary , develop and deploy new screening technologies . the tsa modernization act includes a provision for us to review whether tsa allocates resources appropriately based on risk at tsa - regulated airports , among other things . our review of tsa acquisition documents found that tsa considers risk at the beginning of the screening technologies acquisition process .