fugitives from justice . a fugitive is generally defined as any person who has fled from any state , either to avoid prosecution or to avoid giving testimony in a criminal case . this definition includes persons who , knowing criminal charges are pending , leave the state of prosecution . unlawful drug users or persons addicted to a controlled substance . this category includes persons who use controlled substances and have lost the power of self control and persons currently using controlled substances in a manner not prescribed by a licensed physician . an inference of current use may be demonstrated by a drug conviction or positive drug test within the past year , or by multiple drug arrests during the past 5 years . illegal or unlawful aliens . this category includes aliens who are in the united states without a valid immigrant , nonimmigrant , or parole status , including aliens who entered the country without inspection and authorization or whose authorized period of stay has expired . in addition , certain other aliens lawfully admitted in nonimmigrant status are also ineligible , unless they meet certain exceptions defined in federal firearms law . persons adjudicated mentally defective or committed to a mental institution . mental defectives are generally defined as persons who have been determined by a court or other lawful authority to be a danger to themselves or others or who lack the mental capacity to manage their own affairs , including persons who have been found to be insane by a court in a criminal case . commitment to a mental institution is generally defined as a formal commitment by a court or other lawful authority , including commitment for mental illness or other reasons such as drug use . it does not include persons voluntarily admitted to a mental institution . persons who have renounced their u.s. citizenship . persons ineligible under this category must have renounced their citizenship before a u.s. diplomatic or consular officer in a foreign country or before an officer designated by the u.s. attorney general when the united states is at war . persons dishonorably discharged from the military . this category includes separation from the u.s. armed forces by a dishonorable discharge or dismissal adjudged by a general court - martial . it does not include separation resulting from any other type of discharge . persons subject to a domestic violence restraining order . this category includes persons who are subject to a court order that prohibits harassing , stalking , or threatening an intimate partner or child of an intimate partner , or placing such persons in reasonable fear of bodily injury . the order must have been issued after a hearing for which the person had actual notice and an opportunity to participate , and the order must either find a credible threat to the intimate partner or child , or by explicit terms prohibit the use , attempted use , or threatened use of physical force . persons convicted of a domestic violence misdemeanor .