this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have . if you have any questions on matters discussed in this testimony , please contact valerie c. melvin , director , information management and human capital issues , at ( 202 ) 512-6304 or melvinv@gao.gov . other individuals who made key contributions to this testimony are mark bird , assistant director ; barbara collier ; neil doherty ; rebecca lapaze ; j. michael resser ; kelly shaw ; and eric trout . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . interoperability can be achieved at different levels . at the highest level , electronic data are computable ( that is , in a format that a computer can understand and act on to , for example , provide alerts to clinicians on drug allergies ) . at a lower level , electronic data are structured and viewable , but not computable . the value of data at this level is that they are structured so that data of interest to users are easier to find . however , the departments have more to do: not all electronic health information is yet shared . in addition , although va's health data are all captured electronically , information is still captured on paper at many dod medical facilities . any level of interoperability depends on the use of agreed - upon standards to ensure that information can be shared and used . in the health it field , standards may govern areas ranging from technical issues , such as file types and interchange systems , to content issues , such as medical terminology . ● for example , vocabulary standards provide common definitions and codes for medical terms and determine how information will be documented for diagnoses and procedures . these standards are intended to lead to consistent descriptions of a patient's medical condition by all practitioners . without such standards , the terms used to describe the same diagnoses and procedures may vary ( the condition known as hepatitis , for example , may be described as a liver inflammation ) . the use of different terms to indicate the same condition or treatment complicates retrieval and reduces the reliability and consistency of data . ● another example is messaging standards , which establish the order and sequence of data during transmission and provide for the uniform and predictable electronic exchange of data . for example , they might require the first segment to include the patient's name , hospital number , and birth date . a series of subsequent segments might transmit the results of a complete blood count , dictating one result ( eg , iron content ) per segment . messaging standards can be adopted to enable intelligible communication between organizations via the internet or some other communications pathway .