( see app . ii for more detail on the recommendations that epa has applied or partially applied to the draft particulate matter regulatory impact analysis. ) epa did not apply the remaining 12 recommendations to the analysis for various reasons . while epa applied some recommendations — either wholly or in part — that require additional studies , methodologies , or data to its particulate matter analysis , the agency had not made sufficient progress in addressing others and therefore did not apply them to the analysis . epa officials viewed most of these recommendations as relevant to its health benefit analyses and , citing the need for additional research and development , emphasized the agency's commitment to continue to respond to the recommendations . see appendix i for a more detailed description of the scope and methodology of our review . we performed our work from january 2006 to july 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . epa is required by the clean air act to conduct reviews of the national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) for the six criteria pollutants , including particulate matter , every 5 years . the overarching purpose of such reviews is to determine whether the current standards are sufficient to protect public health and welfare at large , with an adequate margin of safety , given the latest scientific information available at the time of the review . major steps in the naaqs process include the following: developing a criteria document that synthesizes new research on health preparing a staff paper that assesses the policy implications of the scientific information in the criteria document , which also discusses possible ranges for air quality standards ; and determining whether and how epa should revise the naaqs . if epa decides to revise the naaqs , the agency proposes the changes in the federal register . as part of the federal rule - making process , epa is to comply with executive order 12866 , which directs federal agencies to analyze the costs and benefits of proposed and final rules expected to affect the economy by $100 million or more per year . in september 2003 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) issued its circular a - 4 , which presents guidance and best practices and states that agencies should analyze the costs and benefits in accordance with the principles of full disclosure and transparency . further , in cases such as the particulate matter rule , where expected economic impacts exceed $1 billion annually , circular a - 4 also states that agencies should conduct a comprehensive assessment of key uncertainties in their analyses of costs and benefits , which epa also refers to as regulatory impact analyses . epa's january 2006 regulatory impact analysis presents estimates of the costs and benefits for the proposed particulate matter rule . the focus of the national academies' 2002 report was on how epa estimates the health benefits of its proposed air regulations . to develop such estimates , epa conducts analyses to quantify the expected changes in the number of deaths and illnesses that are likely to result from proposed regulations .