not met . few , if any , actions towards meeting the criterion have been taken . we are removing two areas — dod supply chain management and mitigating gaps in weather satellite data — from the list due to the progress that was made in addressing the high - risk issues . as we have with areas previously removed from the high - risk list , we will continue to monitor these areas to ensure that the improvements we have noted are sustained . if significant problems again arise , we will consider reapplying the high - risk designation . we added two areas to the high - risk list since our 2017 update — government - wide personnel security clearance process and va acquisition management . we are removing the area of dod supply chain management from the high - risk list because , since 2017 , dod has addressed the remaining two criteria ( monitoring and demonstrated progress ) for the asset visibility and materiel distribution segments . congressional attention , dod leadership commitment , and our collaboration contributed to the successful outcome for this high - risk area , which had been on gao's high - risk list since 1990 . dod's actions for the asset visibility segment of this high - risk area included ( 1 ) providing guidance for the military components to consider key attributes of successful performance measures during metric development for their improvement initiatives ; ( 2 ) incorporating into after - action reports , information relating to performance measures ; and ( 3 ) demonstrating sustained progress by , for example , increasing its visibility of assets through radio - frequency identification ( rfid ) , an automated data - capture technology that can be used to electronically identify , track , and store information contained on a tag . according to dod , the use of rfid tags to provide visibility of sustainment cargo at the tactical leg ( i.e. , the last segment of the distribution system ) resulted in $1.4 million annual cost savings . dod's actions for the materiel distribution segment of this high - risk area included ( 1 ) making progress in developing its suite of distribution performance metrics ; ( 2 ) incorporating distribution metrics , as appropriate , on the performance of all legs of the distribution system , including the tactical leg ; ( 3 ) making progress in refining its materiel distribution improvement plan and incorporating additional actions based on interim progress and results ; and ( 4 ) improving its capability to comprehensively measure distribution performance , identifying distribution problems and root cause , and implementing solutions . according to dod , initiatives focused on distribution process and operational improvements have resulted in at least $1.56 billion in distribution cost avoidances to date . as we have with areas previously removed from the high - risk list , we will continue to monitor this area to ensure that the improvements we have noted are sustained . appendix i provides additional information on this high - risk area .