schedulers . schedulers plan , develop , manage , execute , and control the program schedule in order to ensure the timely completion of the project . designers . designers have core knowledge of sustainable design . legal counsel . counsel should have the expertise to assist with acquisition - related and legal issues such as the award of contracts , intellectual property rights , licenses , and other matters . operational support personnel . these personnel are responsible for activities such as system operations , implementation / deployment management , software maintenance , training , customer service , and system performance . they can be from external organizations that have a relationship with the program to provide specialized expertise or fill a specified role , such as it system installation , customization , or training . ideally , the team will not only consist of members from a wide selection of subject matter disciplines , but individual members will also have a variety of technical skills and expertise . in addition , important soft skill sets may also be considered . these include skills such as problem solving and decision - making , interpersonal skills , ability to communicate and work with customers , team building , and conflict resolution . one of the more important soft skills is the ability to deal with adversity and ever changing circumstances . specifically for the program manager , important selection criteria include: ( 1 ) lack of bias , ( 2 ) technical expertise , ( 3 ) project management skills , ( 4 ) ability to manage external environment , ( 5 ) team engagement skills , ( 6 ) decisiveness , ( 7 ) time management skills , ( 8 ) ability to effectively elevate and delegate decisions , and ( 9 ) commitment to the ipt's work . several agency officials discussed the value of both technical and non - technical attributes . specifically: officials with commerce's office of the cio explained that a desirable characteristic of an ipt is integration , which is embodied by bringing together different organizations that have a stake in the program , each providing differing perspectives and skills which are vital to the successful outcome . each team should possess the knowledge to collaboratively identify problems and propose solutions , minimizing the amount of rework that has to be done . according to officials from noaa's office of the cio , members should be capable of providing input regarding multiple disciplines , not just their area of primary responsibility . they added that on a multidisciplinary team often the best team members are individuals who have multiple types of expertise . representatives from noaa's geostationary operational environmental satellite - r series program stated that ipts should have personnel with specialized skill sets to bridge any gaps in the program . they should also have cross - functional skill sets that enable effective communication with managers inside and outside of their primary knowledge domain . gsa assisted acquisition services , federal systems integration and management center officials explained that they have created a structure that integrates the acquisition workforce with the technical resources under the same management .