( see fig . because the total amount of ssi benefits received by a household includes benefits for all recipient residents , households with multiple recipients received higher monthly average ssi benefit payments ( an estimated $1,131 ) compared to households with one recipient ( an estimated $507 ) . we then joined the two files using the pik . this approach is not documented publically , but follows guidance we received from the bureau staff . since the sipp is a longitudinal survey , missing data can accumulate across waves as members of the original sample stop participating . according to bureau documentation , sample loss rates range from 19.4 percent in wave 1 to 53.1 percent in wave 16 . our analysis used data from multiple waves for each reference month of interest , including later waves that have moderate levels of unit nonresponse . to adjust for potential bias , we used the weighting cell adjustments that are integrated into the weights provided by the bureau . as a further check , we compared select estimates to known values from ssa publications . specifically , we compared , by age group , estimates of total beneficiaries and total and mean ssi benefits . if our estimates' confidence intervals did not span the control values , we applied an additional post - stratification adjustment to align the results . because many of our key estimates involve total beneficiaries and benefit amounts by age group , post - stratification adjusted for unit nonresponse bias for our specific population , supplementing the general bureau adjustments . when the bureau cannot assign a pik to sipp respondents , as discussed above , they have a zero probability of matching the ssr and contribute additional unit missing data . rates of pik assignment in our matched data ranged from 89.4 percent to 90.6 percent , depending on the sipp wave , which implies that the matching process adds a small amount of missing data . however , bureau research suggests that younger , non - white , and lower household income respondents , among others , are more likely to lack piks . as a result , we estimated the relationship between variables relevant to our analysis , such as age , income , and disability status , and the probability of a missing pik , in order to mitigate potential bias and scale up estimated totals back to the controls used in the bureau post - stratification adjustment . the latter goal is particularly important , because our analysis estimated many population totals . we used nonparametric weighting class methods to adjust for missing data due to record linkage . first , we cross - classified the adjustment variables to obtain a categorical variable identifying joint group membership , collapsing groups containing less than 0.1 percent of the sample into a residual group to avoid excessive weight variance and instability . letting xij denote the joint adjustment variable for respondent i , having levels j = {1 , 2 , … , j} , and letting yi = i ( missing pik ) , we estimated the probability of a missing pik conditional on the adjustment variable with where wi is the final person weight provided by the bureau .