alis . alis is the primary sustainment tool for the f - 35 and is intended to predict maintenance and supply issues , automate logistics support processes , and provide decision aids to help reduce life - cycle sustainment costs and improve force readiness . alis is one of three major components that make up the f - 35 air system , along with the aircraft and the engine , and comprises both hardware and software . the f - 35 program is delivering alis capabilities incrementally , which include: operations , maintenance , supply chain , customer - support services , training , tech data , system security and external interfaces . reliability and maintainability ( r+m ) . r+m measures aircraft performance to determine how often the aircraft experiences failures and how much time it takes to repair those failures . r+m is monitored through a series of metrics that measure the intended performance of the aircraft in meeting its requirements by maturity at a cumulative 200,000 flight hours with at least 50,000 flight hours per variant . r+m drives sortie - generation rates and a reduced logistics footprint for the f - 35 , as well as informing program o&s costs , which are tied to the performance of the system at maturity . o&s costs . o&s consists of sustainment costs incurred from the initial system deployment through the end of system operations and includes all costs of operating , maintaining , and supporting a fielded system . the f - 35 jpo develops an annual estimate for the o&s costs of maintaining and supporting the f - 35 for 56 years.the estimate was $1.03 trillion ; in 2012 , it was $857 billion ; and in 2013 , it was $916 billion in then - year dollars . additionally , cape conducts independent cost estimates on certain programs at different points in the acquisition cycle . in recent years , cape's f - 35 o&s cost estimate has been reported in dod's annual sar as the official o&s cost estimate for the program . in 2013 , that estimate was about $1.02 trillion in then - year dollars . as stated earlier , recent changes to dod's acquisition guidance and policy have also focused on making sustainment decisions earlier in the acquisition process , by identifying the attributes of an effective performance - based logistics arrangement and requiring strategies that identify and manage technical data rights . both of these areas will play an important role in the future of the f - 35 program . performance based logistics ( pbl ) .based logistics strategy ties objective metrics for delivered logistical system performance to incentives that will motivate the support provider ( i.e. , the contractor ) . in recent years , f - 35 program managers have reaffirmed their commitment to employing a robust performance - based logistics system for the f - 35 to help determine options for pursuing the most value - driven performance - based agreements with the support provider . technical data rights . technical data for weapon systems include the details necessary to ensure the adequacy of performance , as well as instructions for operation , maintenance , and other actions needed to support weapon systems .