staff . compacts also varied in their provisions for staff to conduct day - to - day operations and provide technical assistance to the commissions . only 8 of the 46 compacts explicitly required that their commissions hire staff , an additional 34 compacts left it to the commissions' discretion to hire staff , and 4 compacts made no provisions for staff . in practice , we found that 67 percent of the commissions that responded to our survey reported having an administrative staff . among these commissions , the number of full - time equivalent staff ranged from 1 to 85 . advisory committees . the way compacts provided for committees to advise the commission varied . only 4 of the 46 compacts we reviewed expressly required their commissions to establish an advisory committee , while another 13 expressly authorized them . for example , the pacific states marine fisheries compact required that its commission establish a permanent advisory committee to represent the interests of the commercial fishing industry on an ongoing basis , as well as short - term advisory committees to draft position papers on a specific commission issue , such as ecosystem management . in practice , however , about 75 percent of the commissions responding to our survey reported having at least one advisory committee , and about 56 percent of these commissions reported that members of the public served on at least one of their advisory committees . the powers and authorities granted to the compact commissions also varied . in some cases , the commission only had advisory authority . for example , the gulf states marine fisheries commission makes recommendations to its member states on the conservation , development , and utilization of fishery resources in the gulf of mexico , but it does not have the authority to implement its recommendations . in other cases , the compacts explicitly granted commissions the authority to issue regulations . for example , the ohio river valley water sanitation commission has the authority to set water pollution control standards for the ohio river . we also found cases where the commissions had both advisory and regulatory authority . for example , the delaware river basin commission studies and advises states on approaches to water management , but also regulates water quality and water supply . in some cases , we had difficulty determining from a compact's language whether the commission was advisory or regulatory in nature . however , over 55 percent of the commissions that responded to our survey reported that they had the authority to issue regulations , with 95 percent of these commissions reporting that they have sufficient authority to enforce the regulations they issue . the 46 compacts with commissions that we reviewed also differed in their provisions for resolving disputes among the compact states or between the commission and those it regulates . while compact disputes generally can be brought before a court for review , litigation can be expensive . possible alternatives to litigation include the following: arbitration — a process by which the parties refer a dispute to an agreed - upon , independent third party for resolution . mediation — a process by which a neutral person facilitates discussion between the disputing parties to help them reach agreement .