iii ) . credit loss data do not reflect the reasons why credits were not accepted , though there are a variety of reasons why credits may not transfer successfully . 10 in app . in some cases , the credits students attempt to transfer may not be applicable or comparable to the coursework at the destination school . for example , vocational or remedial coursework from a 2-year school may not be transferable to a 4-year degree program . to what extent are students provided with information about transfer policies to help them plan their college path ? to address these questions , we used a variety of methods . what are possible financial implications associated with transferring credits ? to estimate how many college students transfer , we analyzed transfer rate data from the department of education's ( education ) most recently completed 2004 to 2009 beginning postsecondary students longitudinal study ( bps ) and mid - point data from the 2012 to 2017 bps study , which has not yet been completed . to examine any challenges students face in transferring credits , we obtained perspectives from a range of knowledgeable stakeholders from 25 higher education organizations and schools . according to mid - point data from the more recent bps cohort , many transfer students who started school in academic year 2011-12 also received pell grants ( 55 percent ) and federal direct loans ( 62 percent ) in their first 3 years . access to such aid is affected by the length of time needed to complete a degree . the pell grant program imposes a lifetime limit of 12 semesters ( 6 years ) of eligibility . direct subsidized loans , which are loans in which the government pays part of the interest , are limited to a maximum timeframe of 150 percent of the published length of a program at a school ( eg , 150 percent of a 120-credit , 4-year degree program would be 6 years ) . according to our analysis of both bps cohorts during their first 3 years in school , an estimated 48 percent of students in the 2004 cohort received direct subsidized loans and an estimated 57 percent of students in the 2012 cohort received direct subsidized loans . according to stakeholders we interviewed from higher education organizations and schools , transfer students may exhaust available aid before they complete their degree . transfer students who lose credits must pay for and spend additional time to retake credits needed to graduate , which may make them exceed time frames for financial aid eligibility . bps data do not indicate whether students exhausted their financial aid eligibility before obtaining a degree . however , many transfer students who started college in academic year 2003-04 , an estimated 40 percent , did not obtain any type of degree within a 6-year time period .