gao - 17-78 . washington , d.c.: november 17 , 2016 . medicaid fee - for - service: state resources vary for helping beneficiaries find providers . ( see fig . recognizing the importance of federal state collaboration on program integrity issues , in november 2016 , along with the office of management and budget , we convened a meeting with state auditors , cms , and other federal officials to discuss ways to strengthen collaboration between the federal government and the states . in recent years , medicaid expenditures and enrollment grew under ppaca . growth in enrollment is primarily due to more than half of the states choosing to expand their medicaid programs by covering certain low - income adults not historically eligible for medicaid coverage , as authorized under ppaca . in addition to expanding medicaid eligibility , ppaca required the establishment of health insurance exchanges in all states , and provided for federal subsidies to assist qualifying low - income individuals in paying for exchange coverage . states may elect to establish and operate an exchange , known as a state - based exchange , or allow cms — which is responsible for overseeing the exchanges — to do so within the state , known as a federally facilitated exchange ( ffe ) . as of march 2015 , cms operated an ffe in 34 states , and 17 states were approved to operate state - based exchanges . cms has taken steps to improve medicaid program integrity and reduce improper payments ; however , additional actions should be taken to help further prevent improper payments . specifically , our work has identified four key program integrity issues for the medicaid program — enrollment verification , managed care , provider screening , and coordination between medicaid and the exchanges — along with cms's progress in addressing them , and additional necessary actions . since 2011 , cms has taken steps to make the medicaid enrollment - verification process more data - driven to improve the accuracy of eligibility determinations . for example , in response to ppaca , cms established a more rigorous approach to verifying financial and nonfinancial information needed to determine medicaid beneficiary eligibility . cms created a tool called the data services hub that was implemented in fiscal year 2014 to help verify beneficiary applicant information used to determine eligibility for enrollment in qualified health plans and insurance - affordability programs , including medicaid . the hub routes to and verifies application information in various external data sources , such as the social security administration and the department of homeland security . according to cms , the hub can verify key application information , including household income and size , citizenship , state residency , incarceration status , and immigration status . despite cms's efforts , there continue to be gaps in the agency's efforts to ensure that only eligible individuals are enrolled into medicaid . in particular , our work found that federal and selected state - based marketplaces approved health insurance coverage and subsidies for 9 of 12 fictitious applications made during the 2016 special enrollment period .