iii ) . in the comments , state said that the report is a fair and accurate representation overall of the department's overseas construction process and provided additional information on ( 1 ) how state prioritizes and plans for its construction projects , ( 2 ) the problems in funding usaid building projects , and ( 3 ) other capital construction projects being implemented by obo . we revised the text of the report to include information on how diplomatic security and obo view the relative vulnerability of facilities at overseas posts . state also provided technical comments , which we incorporated in the report where appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 10 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to other interested members of congress . we will also provide copies of this report to the secretary of state and the director of the office of management and budget . we also will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www . if you or your staff has any questions about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-4128 . another contact and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix iv . to determine whether the bureau of overseas buildings operations ( obo ) has mechanisms in place to more effectively manage state's construction program to replace vulnerable embassies and consulates , we ( 1 ) reviewed the report of the overseas presence advisory panel and earlier gao reports that outlined problems in embassy security and state's embassy construction program and ( 2 ) interviewed obo and contractor officials about specific steps obo has taken to improve program management , including the usefulness of and rationale behind both the standard embassy design for new embassy and consulate compounds and the design - build contract delivery method . we also attended quarterly meetings of the industry advisory panel where industry representatives provided advice and information on industry best practices to senior obo management officials , as well as monthly project performance reviews where senior obo officials addressed issues related to embassy construction projects . further , we visited two field locations — in sofia , bulgaria , and yerevan , armenia — where we observed the level of management and supervision at the new embassy construction sites and the contractor's performance on the projects . to determine the status of the overall construction program , as well as its current and potential challenges , we reviewed capital projects — whether a completely new embassy or consulate compound , a new building , or a major retrofit of an existing building — that would bring the post up to current security standards . table 3 provides the list of projects included in this review: 7 completed projects and 15 ongoing projects whose contracts were awarded from fiscal years 1999 through 2002 . we excluded the dili , east timor , project from the scope of our review because it was an interim office building .