gao - 06-391 . washington , d.c.: march 31 , 2006 . military readiness: dod needs to identify and address gaps and potential risks in program strategies and funding priorities for selected equipment . gao - 06-141 . washington , d.c.: october 25 , 2005 . the comments appear in appendix ii . dod partially concurred with our recommendation that the secretary of defense determine the necessary number of ea - 6bs equipped with icap iii electronic suites to deal with the existing and near - term capability gap . dod agreed that the navy's airborne electronic attack inventory needs review and has directed a study of department wide airborne electronic attack forces to be issued on september 15 , 2006 . however , it is unclear from dod's response if the department's review will specifically identify , as we recommended , the necessary number of icap iii - equipped ea - 6bs needed to address the existing and near - term capability gap . in light of the end of planned icap iii production this year , dod needs to identify this specific number , as it is a necessary prerequisite to our second recommendation . dod also partially concurred with our recommendation that the secretary of defense consider procuring the determined number of icap iii upgrades and that if dod takes this option , the department ( 1 ) continue icap iii production and ( 2 ) restructure the ea - 18g low - rate initial production plans so that the procurement of the aircraft occurs after the aircraft has demonstrated full functionality . regarding the first part of our recommendation , dod agreed that it should consider procuring the required icap iii upgrades , as determined by the ongoing airborne electronic attack review , but stated that it is premature to make a decision until the icap iii inventory levels are determined . we agree that such determination is a prerequisite and have so stated in our first recommendation . however , that determination needs to be completed before the icap iii production line ends in fiscal year 2006 . with regard to the second part of our recommendation , dod stated that the current ea - 18g low - rate initial production plan provides the best balance of risk and cost to expeditiously meet warfighters' needs . we remain concerned that producing ea - 18g aircraft before testing demonstrates that the design is mature unnecessarily increases the likelihood of design changes that will lead to cost growth , schedule delays , and performance problems . in the past , congress has raised concerns about the costly outcomes of highly concurrent development and production efforts that are not "flying before buying. starting production before flight tests demonstrate the full icap iii equivalent capability works as intended places the $2,297.1 million low - rate initial production investment at significant risk . the procurement of additional icap - iii - equipped ea - 6bs would allow the time to properly test the ea - 18g before making a production decision and reduce the risk of costly retrofitting of the initially produced ea - 18gs . therefore , we continue to believe that our recommendation should be implemented .