what the agency lacked was sufficient information on market prices . such information , along with current local , as well as national , data on beneficiaries' use of services and program expenditures , is key to setting rates administratively . this minimizes the potential for actions to have unintended consequences . however , seeking and responding to public input from various provider and supplier groups can be a time - consuming process that can sometimes thwart efficient program management . prior to 1987 , medicare payments for medical equipment and supplies were based on supplier charges , subject to some limitations . as part of their responsibilities to administer medicare claims , individual medicare carriers raised or lowered payments to suppliers in their local areas to align them with market prices . when carriers sought to adjust payments on this basis , they employed a process that involved gathering relevant pricing data from local area markets , determining new payment levels on the basis of the price information obtained , and notifying area suppliers of the changes . although hcfa monitored carriers' performance in carrying out these steps , it did not evaluate the appropriateness of the new payment levels established . in 1987 , the congress and hcfa began the process of moving the medicare program from paying on the basis of individual providers' charges for medical equipment and supplies and covered outpatient drugs , to developing payment methods intended to pay more prudently through use of program - determined amounts . specifically , the congress introduced fee schedules for medical equipment and supplies in 1987 . statewide fees were determined on the basis of average supplier charges on medicare claims allowed in each state in 1986 and 1987 , and were updated for inflation in some years . however , the agency lacked mechanisms to otherwise adjust fees to reflect marketplace changes . as a result , disparities between fee schedule amounts and market prices developed over time , and medicare significantly overpaid for some medical equipment and supplies . in recent years , we and the hhs oig reported on instances where medicare payments for certain medical equipment and supplies and outpatient drugs were excessive compared with retail and other prices . one notable example of excessive medicare payments is included in our 1995 report on surgical dressings . we estimated that medicare could have saved almost $20 million in 1995 if it had paid the lowest wholesale prices available in a national catalog for 44 types of surgical dressings . although medicare's fee schedule for surgical dressings was based on medians of retail prices found in supply catalogs when the schedule was set , medicare's statute did not permit hcfa to lower the fee schedule when retail prices for dressings decreased . another instance of excessive medicare payment was for home oxygen equipment and supplies provided to patients with pulmonary insufficiency . medicare fee schedule allowances for home oxygen were significantly higher than the rates paid for almost identical services by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , which in fiscal year 1995 paid for home oxygen benefits for over 23,000 patients .