we provided a draft of this report to sec for its review and comment . to identify the factors that might impede or promote competition in this industry , we reviewed the relevant literature and examined studies relating to the level of competition in the industry , and we spoke with various industry professionals . we did not attempt to evaluate the level of competition in this industry and , therefore , did not come to any conclusions about the extent to which competition exists . finally , to explore institutional investors' use of proxy advisory services to help vote proxies and the influence proxy advisory firms may have on proxy voting , we conducted structured interviews with 31 institutional investors selected randomly by type , including mutual funds , corporate pension funds , government pension funds , and union pension funds , as well as asset management institutions . our sample included several of the largest institutional investors and was derived from standard & poor's money market directories ( january 2006 ) . the sample consisted of a population of mutual funds and pension funds with over $1 billion in assets , and included large and small institutional investors from each investor type . we defined “large” and “small” institutional investors as the top and bottom 15 percent of each institutional investor type . in total , these large and small institutional investors accounted for over 72 percent of assets under management held by mutual funds and pension funds with over $1 billion under management . although we randomly selected these institutional investors , the size of the sample was small and may not necessarily be representative of the universe of institutional investors . as a result , we could not generalize the results of our analysis to the entire population of institutional investors . we conducted structured interviews with 20 large and 11 small institutional investors . initially , we had contacted a total of 126 mutual funds and pension funds that were randomly selected from our sample of institutional investors and 20 ( 13 large and 7 small institutions ) reported using proxy advisory firm services and agreed to participate in our structured interviews . the other 106 institutional investors we had initially contacted declined to participate in the structured interviews for several reasons . in particular , many of these institutions said that they do not vote proxies themselves , but rather hire asset management institutions to both manage their investment portfolios and vote proxies on their behalf . we conducted interviews with 11 ( 7 large and 4 small institutions ) of these asset management institutions , which were referred to us by several of the pension funds we had initially contacted . the results of these asset manager interviews are included among the total of 20 large and 11 small institutional investors that we interviewed . in addition , some of the 106 institutional investors declined to participate because they vote proxies themselves or do not vote proxies at all , while others refused to participate or could not be reached . in our structured interviews with the 31 institutional investors , we spoke with officials from the organizations who are responsible for proxy voting activities .