gao - 09-489 . washington , d.c.: june 12 , 2009 . human capital: trends in executive and judicial pay . gao - 06-708 . washington , d.c.: june 21 , 2006 . mspb has a role in disciplining aljs . under its authority to issue regulations implementing the apa , the opm regulations divide the responsibilities for hiring , pay and performance management among opm , the alj agency and the mspb . table 1 lists how the major hiring , pay and individual performance management responsibilities are divided between opm and the alj agency . opm has a number of responsibilities for aljs under the statutory framework of the apa . opm is responsible for administering the exam and creating a register of qualified candidates for alj positions . opm also has the authority to prescribe regulations regarding ( 1 ) various sections of the apa governing aljs ; ( 2 ) implementing the section governing the appointment of aljs ; ( 3 ) implementing the requirements that aljs be assigned cases in rotation as so far as is practicable and not perform duties inconsistent with their duties and responsibilities as aljs ; ( 4 ) implementing the detail provisions of the apa , which allow details of aljs to agencies with occasional or temporary needs for aljs as selected by opm ; ( 5 ) regulations excluding aljs from the definition of employee for the purposes of performance appraisals ; and ( 6 ) implementing the three levels of basic pay for aljs and allowing opm to provide for appointment of an alj in the lowest level at an advanced rate where opm deems it appropriate . in the hiring of aljs , opm is responsible for examining applicants and certifying qualified candidates , while the alj agency is responsible for identifying the number of new aljs they require and appointing individual aljs from opm's list of certified candidates . as required by the apa , opm sets the three levels of pay for aljs , determines the qualifications required for appointment to each level , assigns each of the agency's alj positions to one of the pay levels , and determines the time - in - service required to advance to a higher pay level . opm must provide prior approval before an alj agency can appoint retired annuitants , pay an alj applicant a higher rate of pay due to superior qualifications , promote aljs to higher pay levels , or execute noncompetitive placements ( e.g . transfers ) , intra - agency details or temporary assignments . once the alj is employed , opm and the alj agency share responsibility for managing the alj's performance . for example , opm defines those management practices that alj agencies may not perform , such as issuing performance ratings and awards and the alj agency is responsible for day - to - day management . according to its implementing regulation , opm shares the responsibility with the alj agency for ensuring the alj's decisional independence . the apa divides the responsibility for disciplining of aljs between the alj agency and the mspb .