iii. ) while current law does not permit less - than - halftime students to participate in the stafford loan programs , some have proposed that these students be allowed to participate . this change to the loan program would increase federal subsidy costs associated with the stafford programs . we met with a range of administrators at these institutions . we discussed with them the factors associated with less - than - halftime enrollment among adult students , and from 10 of these institutions we obtained data on less - than - halftime enrollment and completion among adult students . to answer question two , we analyzed data from the npsas , surveyed states about financial aid for less - than - halftime students , and interviewed postsecondary administrators . to answer question three , we reviewed the federal student aid handbook , and used data from npsas . education officials provided us with information on federal subsidy rates for stafford loans and reviewed our estimation methodology . appendix i provides details on the study's scope and methodology . because npsas and bps are samples , there is sampling error associated with estimates obtained from them . these sampling errors are reported in appendix ii . we did our work from october 2002 to august 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . each year millions of adults participate in organized learning in the united states , in a wide range of venues . in 1999 , an estimated 90 million persons 16 and older reported that they had participated in some sort of formal learning activity , ranging from personal development courses — such as family genealogy or cooking classes — to apprenticeship and advanced degree programs . much of this learning takes place outside of formal credential programs that confer a certificate or degree — - most often in the workplace , where employers offer classes for job - specific skills , or in the many courses offered by postsecondary institutions that are not part of a credential program , such as a continuing education class . enrolling in a certificate or degree program at a postsecondary institution is an important opportunity , however , for millions of adults who seek personal growth , or advancement in their working lives . in the 1999-2000 academic year , an estimated 7.1 million adults were enrolled as undergraduates in the nation's postsecondary institutions , comprising about 40 percent of all undergraduate students . about three - quarters of these adult undergraduates were between the ages of 24 to 40 , while about one - quarter were 41 or older . compared with undergraduate students under the age of 24 , adult students enrolled in 1999-2000 were more likely to be working full time ( 35 or more hours per week ) , to be married , to have dependents , and to lack a conventional high school diploma . ( see table 1. ) while the majority of undergraduates under the age of 24 were enrolled in baccalaureate programs , adult undergraduate students were primarily enrolled in certificate or associate programs in 1999-2000 .