visibility of supplies and equipment . these challenges include unmet delivery standards and time lines for cargo shipments ; incomplete delivery data for many surface shipments ; inadequate radio - frequency identification ( rfid ) information to track all cargo movements to and within afghanistan ; lack of a common operating picture for distribution data that integrates dod's many transportation information systems ; difficulties in collecting information on all incidents of pilferage of and damage to cargo ; and ineffective tracking and managing of cargo containers . we stated that these challenges have hindered the distribution of supplies and equipment to the warfighter and will likely continue to affect operations in afghanistan and limit dod's visibility and oversight of the supply chain . we made a number of recommendations to address these concerns . dod concurred with five of our recommendations and partially concurred with another six . although dod acknowledged that several challenges remain , it did not concur with our four remaining recommendations . dod did not concur with three of our recommendations because its view is that transcom as distribution process owner does not and should not have any oversight between the logistics hubs in afghanistan and the warfighter . dod also did not concur with one recommendation because the department believes that adequate policy and procedures already exist to ensure that content - level detail is entered onto rfid tags . in july 2011 , we also recommended that dod develop a comprehensive corrective action plan for improving asset visibility , and we identified key elements that should be included in such a plan to maximize its usefulness . to determine the extent to which dod is aware of its components' efforts to achieve in - transit visibility , we obtained and analyzed information from the defense components on efforts covering fiscal years 2009 through 2015 . we included u.s. central command because we have previously reported on weaknesses in dod supply chain management in u.s. central command's area of responsibility and noted that asset visibility is one of the focus areas for improvement . cost information for each of the in - transit visibility improvement efforts — including obligations for fiscal years 2009 through 2011 and projected costs for fiscal years 2012 through 2015 . we interviewed officials from the defense components to clarify the purpose and scope of each effort . to determine the extent to which dod has a strategy to achieve in - transit visibility that includes the key elements of a comprehensive strategic plan , we reviewed and analyzed relevant defense policies , guidance , and plans regarding in - transit visibility , and we interviewed officials from the office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for supply chain integration and from the defense components . we also reviewed dod's november 2012 draft of its strategy to improve asset visibility ( tracking ) and in - transit visibility to determine whether specific elements of effective strategic planning were included . to do so , we conducted a content analysis of the draft strategy . two analysts independently compared the strategy to the specific elements , then discussed their individual reviews and reached a consensus .