the agency concurred with this recommendation . on may 16 , 2016 , cms provided us with supporting documentation that shows that the agency replaced its current pecos address verification software to include delivery point verification ( dpv ) — which is similar to the software we used when conducting the work in the june 2015 report — as an addition to the existing functionality . according to cms officials , this new dpv functionality flags addresses that may be cmra , vacant , or invalid . by updating the address verification software , cms can ensure that providers with ineligible practice location are not listed in pecos . second , we recommended in our june 2015 report that cms revise its guidance for verifying practice locations to include , at a minimum , the requirements contained in the guidance in place prior to march 2014 . such a revision would require that macs conduct additional research , beyond phone calls to applicants , on the practice location addresses that are flagged as a cmra , vacant , or invalid address to better ensure that the address meets cms's practice location criteria . the agency did not concur with this recommendation , stating that the march 2014 guidance was sufficient to verify practice locations . however , our audit work shows that additional checks on addresses flagged by the address - matching software as a cmra , vacant , or invalid can help verify whether the addresses are ineligible . as our report highlighted , we identified providers with potentially ineligible addresses that were approved by macs using the process outlined in the existing guidance . therefore , we continue to believe that the agency should update its guidance for verifying potentially ineligible practice locations . in february 2016 , cms officials told us that , as part of configuring the pecos address verification software to include the dpv functionality and flag cmras , vacancies , invalid addresses , and other potentially questionable practice locations , the agency plans to validate the dpv through site visits and follow its current process to take administrative action if the results are confirmed . cms officials told us that they believe that by implementing the first recommendation by incorporating software flags and revising its guidance for verifying potentially ineligible practice location , if necessary , the second recommendation will be addressed . as of may 17 , 2016 , cms had not provided us with details and supporting documentation of how it will revise its guidance . accordingly , it is too early for us to determine whether the agency's actions would fully address the intent of the recommendation . we plan to continue to monitor the agency's efforts in this area . cms has taken some actions to remove or recover overpayments from potentially ineligible providers and suppliers that we referred to it , based on our june 2015 report . on april 29 , 2015 , we referred 286 unique providers to cms for further review and action as a result of our identification of providers with potentially ineligible practice location address . from august 2015 to may 2016 , cms has provided updates on these referrals .