cms did not complete this initiative . in september 2008 , we reported that the extent of dental disease in medicaid - enrolled children had not decreased between 1988 through 1994 and 1999 through 2004 . we also reported that millions of medicaid - enrolled children were estimated to have untreated tooth decay , and that children in medicaid were often not receiving dental services . the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) authorized an estimated $87 billion in additional federal medicaid funding for states in the form of a temporary increase in the funds that the federal government contributes toward state medicaid programs , including the provision of medicaid dental services for children . the recovery act provides this money to states through a temporary , 27-month increase in the federal medical assistance percentage formula — the formula that determines the federal share of a state's medicaid service expenditures . in july 2009 , we reported that the receipt of an increased federal share may reduce the states' share of expenditures for their medicaid program , and states have reported using these available funds for a variety of purposes , such as maintaining program eligibility , covering increased medicaid caseloads , and maintaining local health care reform initiatives . in response to our survey , most states reported using multiple strategies to monitor and improve access to medicaid dental services , but they also reported that persistent barriers hinder improvements . all 21 states that provided medicaid dental services under managed care arrangements reported that they set measurable access standards for mcos , however more than half also reported that mcos in their state do not meet any , or only meet some , of the state's dental access standards . further , some states reported that they do not routinely verify the adequacy of mco provider networks . almost all states described initiatives to recruit dental providers and enhance outreach to beneficiaries' families , but barriers persist and access rates remain low . in response to our survey , all 51 states reported that they monitor the provision of dental care to medicaid - enrolled children , but how they do so varies . the majority ( 39 states ) reported that they use multiple methods — often three or more — to monitor the provision of dental care . these methods included surveys of oral health , monitoring dental claims , and collecting utilization data ( see table 1 ) . see appendix i for a list of the monitoring methods reported by each state . states also reported using various measures to monitor children's access to medicaid dental services . the most common reported measure — used by 40 ( of 51 ) states for their fee - for - service programs and by 18 ( of 21 ) states that also used managed care — was the percentage of children who had a dental visit in the previous year ( see table 2 ) . in the 21 states where both fee - for - service and managed care programs are used to provide dental services to medicaid - enrolled children , state monitoring can vary by service delivery method .