department of homeland security . to facilitate implementation of cnra in the cnmi , dhs led meetings with the other departments charged with implementing cnra ; reported to congress on the budget and personnel needed by the dhs components ; and initiated outreach to the cnmi government . however , dhs has not finalized an interdepartmental agreement with other u.s. departments regarding implementation of cnra and has not specified changes in its resource requirements as directed by congress . dhs issued an interim rule for the cnmi - only work permit program on october 27 , 2009 , but a court injunction has prevented implementation of the rule . the interim rule establishes ( 1 ) the number of permits to be issued , ( 2 ) the way the permits will be distributed , ( 3 ) the terms and conditions for the permits , and ( 4 ) the fees for the permits . in issuing the interim rule , which was scheduled to take effect on november 27 , 2009 , dhs announced that it would accept comments in the development of the final rule but was not following notice - and - comment rulemaking procedures , asserting that it had good cause not to do so . in its november 2 , 2009 , amendment to its ongoing lawsuit to overturn portions of cnra , the cnmi filed a motion for a preliminary injunction to prevent the operation of the dhs interim rule . the cnmi argued in part that dhs had violated procedural requirements of the administrative procedure act , which requires notice and the opportunity for public comment before regulations can go into effect . on november 25 , 2009 , the federal district court for the district of columbia issued an order prohibiting implementation of the interim rule , stating that dhs must consider public comments before issuing a final rule . in response to this preliminary injunction , dhs reopened the comment period from december 9 , 2009 , until january 8 , 2010 . as of may 18 , 2010 , dhs had not yet issued a final rule , and as a result , cnmi - only work permits are not available . dhs received numerous comments on the interim rule from the cnmi government , a private sector group , and interested businesses and individuals . the cnmi government commented that the rule was incomplete and would damage cnmi workers , employers , and community . as of march 1 , 2010 , dhs components lacked direct access to cnmi immigration and border control data contained in two cnmi databases , the labor information data system ( lids ) and the border management system ( bms ) . the cnmi government assigned a single point of contact in the cnmi department of labor to respond to cbp , ice , and uscis queries from the database , most commonly for verification of an individual's immigration status . dhs component officials have expressed concerns about the reliance on a single cnmi point of contact . ice officials expressed the following concerns , among others: relying on one cnmi point of contact to verify immigration status for individuals subject to ice investigations could compromise security for ongoing operations .