the office of the cio . in its most recent program health assessments , the enterprise business management office partially based its rating of moderately low risk on cbp's use of earned value management ; however , the program manager stated to us that the cbp program is not utilizing earned value management because neither it nor its development contractor had the capability to do so . similarly , even though ice had not reported recent cost or schedule data for its program — an issue that may signal a significant problem — the office of the cio rated ice's program as medium risk . the reliance on incomplete and inaccurate data raises questions about the validity of the risk ratings . office of program accountability and risk management . in the july 2013 quarterly program accountability report , dhs's office of program accountability and risk management rated both tecs mod programs as high value with low risk . however , cbp's low - risk rating was based in part on the quality of the program's master schedule and acquisition program baseline ; however , as we stated earlier , problems with the agency's schedule raise questions about the validity and quality of those milestones . further , the low - risk rating it issued for ice was based , in part , on its assessment of ice's performance between april and september 2012 , which rated the program's cost performance with the lowest possible risk score . yet , during that same time period , program documents show that ice tecs mod's cost and schedule performance was declining and varied significantly from its baseline . for example , program documents show that , as of june 2012 , ice tecs mod had variances of 20 percent from its cost baseline and 13 percent from its schedule baseline . moreover , the quarterly program accountability report is not issued in a timely basis , and as such , is not an effective tool for decision - makers . for example , the most recent report was published on july 7 , 2013 , over 9 months after the reporting period ended and therefore did not reflect that , since then , ice has experienced the issues with its technical solution described earlier in this report . as discussed , these issues have caused the program to halt development and replan its entire acquisition . consequently , the newly - issued issued report is not reflective of ice's current status , and thus is not an effective tool for management's use in providing oversight . until these governance bodies base their reviews of performance on timely , complete , and accurate data , they will be limited in their ability to effectively provide oversight and to make timely decisions . in our report , we made several recommendations to improve dhs's efforts to develop and implement its tecs mod programs .