chairman and members of the committee , this concludes my statement . system edit checks are most effective if performed before distribution of a payment . edit checks should include ensuring that ( 1 ) the same social security number was not used on multiple registrations and ( 2 ) the registrant provides a verifiable physical address on which the disaster damage is based . in the case of fema's ihp program , ineffective edit checks resulted in millions paid to registrants who claimed the same damages twice , once for hurricane katrina and once for hurricane rita , and registrants who submitted multiple registrations using the same name , social security number , or address . ineffective edit checks also resulted in payments being made based on obviously false data , including payments of millions of dollars to individuals who used a post office box as their damaged physical address in order to receive assistance . beyond validation and edits , lessons learned show that other controls , including a well - trained work force that is aware of the potential for fraud , can help prevent fraud . fraud awareness training with frontline personnel — specifically on the potential for fraud within the program and the likely types of fraud they could encounter — is crucial to stopping fraud before it gains access into the program . in addition , when implementing any new controls , it is important to field test all systems prior to putting them in place . on top of reducing the risk of untested controls allowing substantial fraud , field testing also helps to ensure that new controls do not improperly deny benefits to valid registrants . findings from these audits and our related investigations show the result of ineffective preventive controls . as shown by our ihp work , ineffective preventive controls can result in hundreds of millions or potentially billions of dollars in improper and fraudulent payments . in addition , our work on dhs purchase cards showed that control weaknesses in government purchasing programs can also result in fraud , waste , and abuse . a safety net for those registrants who are wrongly denied disaster relief due to preventive controls should always be in place to ensure they receive assistance . even with effective preventive controls , there is substantial residual risk that fraudulent and improper disaster relief payments can occur . our work has shown that agencies must continue their efforts to monitor fraud and improper payment vulnerabilities in the execution of disaster relief programs , even if these efforts are more costly and less effective than preventive controls . detection and monitoring efforts are addressed in the standards for internal control in the federal government and include data - mining for fraudulent and suspicious transactions and reviews to establish the accountability of funds . the statistical sample testing used to reach this estimate found payments made on registrations that contained invalid identities , bogus addresses , addresses which the registrant did not live in at the time of the disaster , and duplicate registrations .