at that time , all such items were all in the collections of the natural history museum . this varied from 1 month to 18.3 years . appendix ii provides details on the length of time taken by the museums to respond to repatriation claims . according to the smithsonian's legal views , case reports need to be detailed in order to meet both the act's statutory requirements and the smithsonian's fiduciary duties . under the smithsonian's legal views , the smithsonian has an affirmative obligation to prepare inventories and to use the best available scientific and historical documentation to identify the origins of such remains and funerary objects . accordingly , smithsonian officials told us that once they had addressed all of the pending requests , they would begin culturally affiliating the human remains and objects still in their collections . in preparing case reports , case officers generally review relevant documentation , including relevant information held by the smithsonian , and consult with tribes . while the smithsonian sometimes holds the best available information about its collections , according to officials , case officers sometimes review sources held outside of the smithsonian as well , such as articles published in journals , state site files , and relevant archival information . in some cases , case officers have traveled to archives across the country to review relevant information , such as notes taken by collectors in the field , according to the natural history museum's repatriation manager . the slow progress can be attributed , in part , to the smithsonian's view that it has a legal and fiduciary duty to use the best available scientific and historical documentation to determine the cultural affiliation of human remains and objects . the two museums have established internal goals for the number of case reports they will complete in 2011 — 5 at the natural history museum and 4 at the american indian museum . however , smithsonian officials could not estimate when they will complete this process for human remains and funerary objects . using this information , we calculated the length of time from the date of a tribal claim to the date of a case report using available month and year information , where applicable and when such dates were available . in the couple of instances when case reports had no month , we imputed january . we used the date of the official claim letter as the basis for the report - processing times because information on when the smithsonian actively started working on each claim was not routinely available . as a result , the processing times include the time that the claims were inactive while they were awaiting active consideration . for the natural history museum , we used the date that the nmai act was originally enacted — november 28 , 1989 — for claims submitted prior to that time . for the american indian museum , we used the date the museum officially took control of its collections — june 1 , 1990 — for claims submitted prior to that time . we supplemented the case report review by reviewing all claim letters submitted from enactment through december 2010 to both museums .