loop . a loss of import capacity at the loop could increase the price of crude oil and refined products . loop is a key energy facility — a terminal in the gulf of mexico that , according to doe , accounts for more than 10 percent of total u.s. crude oil imports . loop and its storage terminals are connected to more than 50 percent of the refining capacity in the united states . loop is also the only facility in the united states that can receive tankers of the ultra - large and very large types . performance measures are critical for setting priorities to effectively allocate federal funds . the captain of the port may assist local authorities in reviewing the adequacy of the port's overall marine firefighting and salvage capability . such qualitative reviews assess a range of factors related to the nature of operations within the port . however , these assessments cannot set priorities for addressing these shortfalls because they do not have quantitative performance measures that would provide a way to compare one shortfall against another to determine such priorities . other related assessments face the same priority - setting issues . a recent qualitative advisory report for siting a potential future lng facility illustrates this problem . the assessment identified the need to send firefighters to specialized fire schools on an annual basis to become trained in fighting lng fires , as well as to provide local firefighters with additional training on hazardous materials and confined space rescue . the assessment also identified a range of equipment procurement needs , including additional fireboats capable of mitigating a large lng spill on water as well as dry chemicals and foam caches for extinguishing any resulting fire . while all these shortfalls may need to be addressed , the assessments do not provide a road map for setting federal funding priorities . the ship - based supply chain for energy commodities remains threatened and vulnerable , and appropriate security throughout the chain is essential to ensure safe and efficient delivery . this report addresses three questions: what are the types of terrorist threats to tankers carrying energy commodities and the potential consequences of a successful attack ? what measures are being taken to protect these tankers , and what challenges do federal agencies face in making these actions effective ? if a terrorist attack succeeds despite these protective measures , what plans are in place to respond and what are the potential challenges in responding to an attack ? to address these objectives , we conducted a wide range of activities overseas and in the united states . overseas , we met with officials from the imo , foreign government security agencies , vessel and facility operators , international industry associations , vessel and cargo insurers , and risk management companies . we conducted our overseas work primarily in five countries , which we selected for specific reasons related to their role in the supply chain , the sophistication of their security procedures , or the presence of key stakeholders .