dhs agreed with our recommendations . managed by dhs's customs and border protection ( cbp ) , sbinet is to strengthen cbp's ability to detect , identify , classify , track , and respond to illegal breaches at and between ports of entry . cbp's sbi program office is responsible for managing key acquisition functions associated with sbinet , including tracking and overseeing the prime contractor . in september 2006 , cbp awarded a 3-year contract to the boeing company for sbinet , with three additional 1-year options . as the prime contractor , boeing is responsible for designing , producing , testing , deploying , and sustaining the system . our objectives are to determine the extent to which dhs has ( 1 ) defined the scope of its proposed system solution , ( 2 ) developed a reliable schedule for delivering this solution , ( 3 ) demonstrated the cost effectiveness of this solution , ( 4 ) acquired this solution in accordance with key life cycle management processes , and ( 5 ) addressed our recent recommendations . we plan to report our results in april 2010 . sbinet's contractor management and oversight . our objectives are to determine the extent to which dhs ( 1 ) has established and implemented effective controls for managing and overseeing the sbinet prime contractor and ( 2 ) is effectively monitoring the prime contractor's progress in meeting cost and schedule expectations . we plan to report our results during the summer of 2010 . security border initiative financial management controls over contractor oversight . our objectives are to determine the extent to which dhs has ( 1 ) developed internal control procedures over sbinet contractor invoice processing and contractor compliance with selected key contract terms and conditions and ( 2 ) implemented internal control procedures to ensure payments to sbinet's prime contractor are proper and in compliance with selected key contract terms and conditions . we plan to report our results during the summer of 2010 . ( 310665 ) this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . in september 2009 , cbp extended its contract with boeing for the first option year . cbp is acquiring sbinet incrementally in a series of discrete units of capabilities , referred to as “blocks.” each block is to deliver one or more system capabilities from a subset of the total system requirements . in august 2008 , the dhs acquisition review board decided to delay the initial deployment of block 1 of sbinet so that fiscal year 2008 funding could be reallocated to complete physical infrastructure projects .