not met . the metric definition did not align with the effective metric characteristics . omb's virtualization metric counted the number of servers and mainframes serving as a virtual host in an agency - managed data center . this progress information was obtained from the it dashboard . we then compared the agencies' current optimization progress information to agencies' fiscal year 2019 optimization targets , as documented on the it dashboard . in addition , to assess the reliability of agencies' optimization progress information on omb's it dashboard , we reviewed the information for errors or missing data , such as progress information that was not available for certain metrics . we also compared agencies' optimization progress information across two reporting quarters to identify any inconsistencies in agencies' reported progress . we also followed up with the agencies to understand the steps they took to insure that what they reported to omb was accurate and reliable . we determined that the data were sufficiently complete and reliable to report on agencies' progress information for virtualization , advanced energy metering , and server utilization . however , for the fourth metric — data center availability — our analysis identified variances in how agencies reported their data . according to omb's quarterly reporting instructions , agencies were to report the number of hours , in the 3-month reporting period , that each data center was expected to be available to provide services . instead , several agencies reported information based on annual , instead of quarterly , calculations . in addition , department of agriculture officials stated that , for one data center , they reported the total number of availability hours for multiple instances where they provided data center services to other agencies . because of these variances and the impact they had on the reported information , we determined that the availability metric data were insufficiently reliable to report on agencies' progress . to assess whether omb's new performance metrics met key characteristics of an effective performance measure , we adapted principles from the green book that described characteristics of effective performance measures . the green book provides an overall framework for establishing and maintaining an effective internal control system that includes monitoring through performance measures . we then compared each omb optimization performance metric , as defined in the revised dcoi guidance and reported on omb's it dashboard , to the criteria we identified from the green book to determine the extent to which each metric met each characteristic . we conducted this performance audit from april 2019 to march 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . since the enactment of fitara in december 2014 , we have reviewed and verified the quality and completeness of each covered agency's inventory and data center optimization initiative ( dcoi ) strategy annually . accordingly , we have published reports documenting the findings and recommendations from each of these reviews .