vi. ) we provided a draft of this report to hhs for review and comment . hhs provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of health and human services , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or farbj@gao.gov . i for a sample vignette and app . ii for our alignment of the five key lccp components with equivalent components in our list of selected billing codes. ) we finalized our preliminary list of billing codes based on our review of this information as well as input from cms and 19 stakeholders , including the ama , physician specialty societies , and other provider groups . to identify these stakeholders , we reviewed a list of over 300 organizations that had participated in a chronic care working group organized by the senate committee on finance in 2015 . we narrowed the list to national umbrella organizations representing a mix of physician and non - physician groups ( such as the american college of physicians and the national association of social workers ) that had specifically commented on the need for a new billing code . ( see app . iii for a list of stakeholders. ) to determine trends in medicare spending on lccp - type services , we analyzed medicare part b claims data from 2013 through 2017 for the specific billing codes we identified as covering lccp - type services . we examined trends in spending and utilization on these services , including the number of beneficiaries receiving these services and the number of providers billing for these services . we report spending and utilization trends in the aggregate as well as by provider specialty ( for example , internal medicine or family practice ) , and by setting ( for example , facility settings such as hospitals and hospices , and nonfacility settings such as physicians' offices ) . we assessed the reliability of the medicare claims data in several ways , including reviewing relevant cms data documentation , performing manual and electronic tests of the data to identify any outliers or anomalies , and comparing it with data from published sources . we determined that the claims data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives . to obtain stakeholder perspectives on the need for a new billing code for the lccp service as defined in the 2018 bba , we interviewed cms and the 19 stakeholder groups we had selected for our study and reviewed written materials they provided to us . we obtained their perspectives on the extent to which the billing codes we had identified covered the lccp service as defined in the 2018 bba . where stakeholders expressed support for a new billing code , we obtained their perspectives on how the new code should be structured , including beneficiary and provider eligibility , and the frequency with which the service could be billed ( e.g .