( recommendation 4 ) . both assessments determined that the program was not susceptible to significant improper payments . we found that the quantitative evaluation , based on statistical sampling , provided a reasonable basis for usda's determination that the program was at low risk for susceptibility to significant improper payments . specifically , based on its statistical sample , usda estimated that arc / plc's improper payment rate was 0.73 percent of program outlays with an estimated improper payment amount of $38.6 million . as such , the analysis clearly demonstrated that arc / plc did not meet the statutory definition of significant improper payments under ipia — estimated improper payments that may have exceeded either ( 1 ) 1.5 percent of program outlays and $10 million or ( 2 ) $100 million ( regardless of the improper payment rate ) . properly executed improper payment risk assessments are a cornerstone of government - wide efforts to estimate and reduce such payments . in its written comments , hhs stated that it concurs with both recommendations and is committed to reducing improper payments in all of its programs . hhs also described actions it plans to take to address these recommendations , including ( 1 ) issuing a written policy directing divisions to maintain supporting documentation for risk assessments , ( 2 ) documenting the agency review procedures for risk assessments that the divisions perform and the rationale for assigning weights to the risk factors , and ( 3 ) developing an automated program identification process for monitoring and inclusion in risk assessments to help ensure that all programs and activities are reviewed . head start was originally aimed at 3- to 5-year - olds . the head start program makes grants directly to approximately 1,600 local organizations , including community action agencies , school systems , tribal governments and associations , and for - profit and nonprofit organizations . the head start program has several primary eligibility criteria to enroll in the program — including that the child's family earns income below the federal poverty level ; the child's family is eligible for or , in the absence of child care , would potentially be eligible for public assistance ; the child is in foster care ; or the child is homeless . head start services are to be provided free of charge to eligible families . prior to fiscal year 2013 , hhs reported improper payment estimates for the head start program . however , as of fiscal year 2013 , hhs , in consultation with its office of inspector general ( oig ) and with approval from omb , no longer reports annual improper payment estimates related to the program . according to hhs , head start's fiscal year 2017 outlays were approximately $9.4 billion . public debt is defined as treasury - issued securities , primarily consisting of marketable treasury securities ( i.e. , bills , notes , and bonds ) , and a smaller amount of nonmarketable securities , such as savings bonds and special securities issued to state and local governments . a portion is debt held by the public and a portion is debt held by federal government accounts .