contracts . we also interviewed officials at dpap , dcaa , dcma , the defense finance and accounting services ( dfas ) ; army , navy , and air force officials at headquarters and the commands , as well as individual contracting offices . we interviewed one contractor and two contractor industry associations to obtain their views on the incurred cost audit and contract closeout backlogs . to address the options outlined in the committee report , we reviewed applicable laws , related agency policies and guidance , and solicited input about the availability and potential usefulness of the options in our interviews with representatives from dcaa ; dcma ; military department headquarters , commands , and contracting offices ; the military departments' general counsel ; dfas ; and contractor representatives . appendix i provides additional details on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from february 2012 to december 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . closing out contracts involves a number of tasks , such as verifying that goods or services were provided , making final payment to the contractor , and deobligating excess funds . a contract is generally eligible to be closed once all option provisions have expired , the contractor has completed performance , and the government has accepted the final delivery of goods or services , or when the government has provided the contractor a notice of complete contract termination . from this point , contracts are considered physically complete , and should be closed within time frames set by the far — 6 months for firm - fixed - price contracts and 36 months for flexibly priced contracts . the far prohibits the closing of contract files if the contract is in litigation , under appeal , or where the contract is being terminated and all termination actions have not been completed . contract documents can be stored and retained after the contracting officer signs and files the contract completion statement . contractors are required by the far to submit proposals that include information on all of their flexibly priced contracts in a fiscal year . once submitted , dcaa audits the proposal to determine if the costs incurred are reasonable , allowable and allocable to government contracts ( see figure 2 for incurred cost audit process ) . there is not a one - to - one relationship between an incurred cost audit and an individual contract . in a single fiscal year , a contractor may incur costs on multiple flexibly priced contracts , and all of these contracts would be included in the proposal . the total value of the proposal , called the auditable dollar value ( adv ) , is the sum of all the costs on flexibly priced contracts for that contractor during the fiscal year .