get into water ! the colorado department of labor and employment and the colorado workforce development council jointly awarded funding to plan a sector partnership strategy for the drinking water and wastewater industry . the funding provided by colorado was part of federal workforce investment act funds provided to the state for sector partnership strategies . the initiative , called “get into water ! ” involved four counties in the denver metro region . although the drinking water and wastewater industry was not among the top three industries in those counties , a study of the region's drinking water and wastewater utilities identified workforce challenges and opportunities in the region . the initiative , which was active between 2009 and 2011 , developed entry - level training courses to introduce high school students and adults to career opportunities in the drinking water and wastewater industry . one of the programs that was developed — at emily griffith technical college — remains active after the conclusion of the initiative . one of the selected large utilities that we interviewed was involved in a sector partnership strategy called “get into water ! ” funded by the colorado department of labor and employment and the colorado workforce development council . the funding provided by colorado was a part of federal workforce investment act funds provided to the state for sector partnership strategies . none of the other selected large or small utilities reported taking part in a federally funded sector partnership strategy . one of the selected large utilities we interviewed used dol's registered apprenticeship program as a way to recruit and hire water operators . it also used the apprenticeship to cover plumbers . improve employment opportunities for veterans with disabilities . according to the memorandum of understanding , veterans represent a major recruiting opportunity for water utilities . according to the epa and va memorandum of understanding , prior military experience gives veterans an understanding of teamwork , discipline , and personal accountability that can make them excellent employees in these fields . in addition , many veterans already have technical skills and training that are directly transferrable to careers in the drinking water and wastewater industry . epa also worked with va to create military occupational specialty equivalent job descriptions for water - related military jobs to show how they equate to civilian water utility jobs . under the memorandum with epa , va receives referrals of open positions from the water and wastewater industry and disseminates the information to disabled veterans who are looking for jobs . according to a va official , over the past 5 years , the va estimated sharing nearly 5,500 water utility job leads with its 56 regional offices and the national capital region benefits office . va tracks the number of disabled veterans who have been rehabilitated to employment , but it does not track the number of disabled veterans who take jobs at water utilities . strategies under the workforce innovation and opportunity act in implementing the workforce innovation and opportunity act , states are required to incorporate specified strategies in their state plans , including the following: career pathways strategies help job seekers obtain education and job experience leading to a career .