what do we do best ? what are our strongest assets ? what do we bring to the table that is unique , particularly with respect to the interagency process ? on the basis of the above , identify prospective and emerging nuclear proliferation and nuclear / radiological security challenges , gaps , needs , and opportunities that will require greater attention by the usg and its allies , and where it makes sense for dnn to take a proactive role in meeting these challenges . based on these challenges , and the status of programmatic efforts , identify gaps , needs , and opportunities . taking into account that unanticipated events may occur between now and 2021 that could involve a dnn response . develop a set of recommendations for dnn offices to factor into their future programs and activities consistent with the analysis above . recommendations will consider scope of programs , resources , and organizational structure . in addition to the individual named above , jonathan gill ( assistant director ) , antoinette capaccio , william hoehn , cynthia norris , sophia payind , steven putansu , dan royer , and kiki theodoropoulos made key contributions to this report . work will begin immediately . define the threat environment and its trends as insight to how the threats may evolve over the next 5 to 10 years , focusing on aspects of the threat most relevant to dnn . this would be informed by the already completed nis effort . identify core strengths of the dnn functional bureaus . ( see app . ii for a list of the unclassified proliferation - related threats and trends identified in each of the three reports to date. ) we were able to schedule and conduct interviews with 15 of these participants . we determined that the responses from these participants were consistent enough to constitute saturation , and we did not schedule any additional interviews . we compared the methods nnsa used to established methods for designing evaluations , as discussed in gao - developed guidance , and in criteria adopted by the department of energy that were used or recommended by the office of management and budget and the national academy of sciences . to address our second objective , we interviewed nnsa officials regarding the dnn reorganization and the rationale for changing the dnn program structure , and the extent to which information provided through the oth initiative regarding future proliferation - related threats and trends informed the restructuring of the dnn programs . in addition , we reviewed the march 2015 nnsa strategic plan and draft classified appendix describing the planned activities of dnn and other nnsa programs to prevent , counter , and respond to nuclear terrorism and proliferation threats over the next 5 years , and we interviewed nnsa officials about the plan and the extent to which it was informed by information generated through the oth initiative . because it was outside the scope of our review , we did not assess the plan or the reorganization themselves , for example , by comparing them against established criteria for effective strategic planning or effective organizational transformation .