gao - 08-350 . washington , d.c.: february 13 , 2008 . defense business transformation: a full - time chief management officer with a term appointment is needed at dod to maintain continuity of effort and achieve sustainable success . gao - 08-132t . washington , d.c.: october 16 , 2007 . dod personnel clearances: delays and inadequate documentation found for industry personnel . gao - 07-842t . washington , d.c.: may 17 , 2007 . washington , d.c.: june 28 , 2005 . high - risk series: an update . gao - 07-310 . our work was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions , based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence we obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . a list of our related gao products can be found at the end of this statement . as with servicemembers and federal workers , industry personnel must obtain security clearances to gain access to classified information . clearances are categorized into three levels: top secret , secret , and confidential . the level of classification denotes the degree of protection required for information and the amount of damage that unauthorized disclosure could reasonably cause to national security . the degree of expected damage that unauthorized disclosure could reasonably be expected to cause is “exceptionally grave damage” for top secret information , “serious damage” for secret information , and “damage” for confidential information . dod's office of the under secretary of defense for intelligence has responsibility for determining eligibility for clearances for servicemembers , dod civilian employees , and industry personnel performing work for dod and 23 other federal agencies , and employees in the federal legislative branch . that responsibility includes obtaining background investigations , primarily through opm . within ousd ( i ) , dss uses opm - provided investigative reports to determine clearance eligibility of industry personnel . dod has responsibility for adjudicating the clearances of servicemembers , dod civilians , and industry personnel . two dod offices are responsible for adjudicating cases involving industry personnel: the defense industrial security clearance office within dss and the defense office of hearings and appeals within the defense legal agency . accordingly , the defense industrial security clearance office adjudicates cases that contain only favorable information or minor issues regarding security concerns ( eg , some overseas travel by the individual ) . the defense office of hearings and appeals adjudicates cases containing major security issues ( eg , an individual's unexplained affluence or criminal history ) that could result in the denial of clearance eligibility and possibly lead to an appeal . recent significant events affecting dod's clearance program include the passage of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 and the issuance of the june 2005 executive order 13381 , “strengthening processes relating to determining eligibility for access to classified national security information.” the act included milestones for reducing the time to complete clearances , general specifications for a database on security clearances , and requirements for reciprocity of clearances .