vaxgen was one of the awardees . the other awardee was avecia , ltd. , of manchester , united kingdom . niaid's development effort with avecia to prepare a candidate rpa anthrax vaccine for potential purchase for the stockpile is ongoing . vaxgen's first development contract , awarded in september 2002 , had three major requirements: characterize the chemical composition of the pilot lot ; conduct phase 1 clinical trials to determine the basic safety profile of the vaccine ; and produce a feasibility plan to manufacture , formulate , fill and finish , test , and deliver up to 25 million doses of cgmp vaccine . the initial period of performance for this first contract was 15 months , to be completed in september 2003 . however , niaid twice extended the period of performance to accommodate problems , including stability testing . the final completion date of the contract was december 2006 . the second development contract was awarded to vaxgen in september 2003 to continue development of its vaccine . this contract covered 36 months and was scheduled to end in october 2006 . the final eua guidance was issued in july 2007 . cdc's role: since 1999 , cdc has had the major responsibility for managing and deploying the medical countermeasures stored in the strategic national stockpile . the omnibus consolidated and emergency supplemental appropriations act ( public law 105-277 ) first provided the stockpile with a fund specially appropriated for purchases . since then , cdc has maintained this civilian repository of medical countermeasures , such as antibiotics and vaccines . dod is not currently a part of project bioshield . beginning in 1998 , dod had a program to vaccinate all military service members with biothrax . dod's program prevaccinates personnel for deployment to iraq , afghanistan , and the korean peninsula with biothrax . for other deployments , this vaccination is voluntary . dod also has a program to order , stockpile , and use the licensed anthrax vaccine . dod estimates its needs for biothrax doses and bases its purchases on that estimate . multiple agencies , including hhs and dhs , provide input on priority - setting and requirements activities . for bioshield purchases , the secretaries of hhs and dhs prepare a joint recommendation , which requires presidential approval before hhs enters into a procurement contract . the secretary of hhs currently coordinates the interagency process ; the national science and technology council previously handled the coordination . anthrax is a rare but serious acute infectious disease that must be treated quickly with antibiotics . anthrax is caused by the spore - forming bacterium bacillus anthracis . it occurs most commonly in herbivores in agricultural regions that have less effective veterinary and public health programs . anthrax can infect humans who have been exposed to infected animals or products from infected animals such as hide , hair , or meat . human anthrax occurs rarely in the united states from these natural causes . however , the anthrax exposures in september and october 2001 through mail intentionally contaminated with anthrax spores resulted in illness in 22 persons and the death of 5 . an fda - licensed anthrax vaccine , biothrax , has been available since 1970 .