the services expect to field both systems in 2004 . the services have initiated additional research and development efforts to improve their ability to suppress enemy air defenses , but they face technology challenges and / or a lack of funding priority for many of these programs . the miniature air launched decoy ( mald ) , which an air force analysis has shown could make a significant contribution to aircraft survivability , illustrates this problem . mald is supposed to mimic an aircraft and draw enemy air defenses away from the real aircraft . a recently completed advanced concept technology demonstration , it had been funded by the air force for an initial small procurement of 300 decoys , with potential for further procurement . according to the air force , after experiencing technical problems , mald did not meet user needs , and its procurement cost estimates increased . thus , the air force canceled the procurement and restructured mald to address deficiencies highlighted in the demonstration . the navy has been developing its own decoy , the improved tactical air launched decoy ( itald ) , but it has procured only part of its inventory objective . despite recurring congressional increases for the past several fiscal years , the navy has not submitted budget requests for italds or procured units to complete its inventory objective because of competing priorities . also , the navy is upgrading the harm missile used to attack shipborne and ground - based radars . the first phase of the upgrade improves missile accuracy by incorporating global positioning and inertial navigation systems into the missile . we interviewed defense intelligence agency officials and reviewed related intelligence documents to ascertain the capabilities of current and future enemy air defense systems . we also discussed air defense suppression programs and issues with various dod contractors , including rand corporation , northrup - grumman corporation , general atomics aeronautical systems , incorporated , and raytheon systems company . we reviewed pertinent dod , service , and contractor documents addressing the status of suppression capabilities , plans for maintaining them , and potential solutions for closing the gap in capabilities . specific locations we visited are listed in appendix i . we performed our review from october 2001 through august 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as you know , the head of a federal agency is required under 31 u.s.c . 720 to submit a written statement of actions taken on our recommendations to the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform not later than 60 days after the date of the report and to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of the report . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of the army , air force , and navy ; the commandant of the marine corps ; and interested congressional committees . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .