other uses . several other current or potential uses for facial recognition technology have been cited by industry stakeholders: facial search engines . internet search engines are being developed to allow users to conduct a search using a facial image , or to enter a name to search for images that match the name . online dating . some online dating companies use facial recognition to determine the facial features a user finds most attractive and search their database for individuals with similar features . memory support . a memory support application for smartphones assists people with prosopagnosia ( face blindness ) or other memory - related conditions by confirming the identities and providing the names of family members , friends , caregivers , or others . hospitality . facial recognition technology can be used by hotel and guest services industries to identify guests and enable personalized service without having to ask for a guest name or a room number . ntia staff told us that the next major expansion for facial recognition technology could be in mobile applications for consumers . industry representatives and some experts and privacy advocacy organizations have noted that the technology can be deployed in cell phone applications to compare faces captured by the phone to a database of facial images . some academics have noted that in the future , these types of applications could be integrated into wearable systems , such as eyeglasses . facial recognition technology is currently being used in a number of commercial applications in the united states , but the full extent of its present use is not known . the international biometrics & identification association , other industry trade organizations , and ftc staff told us they knew of no comprehensive reliable information on the extent to which u.s. businesses use facial recognition technology . similarly , our review of literature associated with the technology identified no such data . representatives of the national retail federation and retail industry leaders association told us that their sense was that retailers are not using the technology broadly . several large companies contacted on our behalf by trade associations declined to speak with us about their use of the technology . an industry trade organization representative told us that companies may be reluctant to discuss the technology for competitive reasons . two applications in which facial recognition technology appears to now be widely used are photograph identification and management and security access . one large social networking service with more than 1 billion monthly users started using facial recognition technology in 2011 to facilitate “tagging” users' friends in photographs . other large companies have incorporated the technology into photograph management and social networking applications . representatives of six other top social networking companies told us that they do not currently use facial recognition technology . facial recognition technology also has become relatively widely used in providing secure access . for example , versions of one major operating system allow users to unlock devices via facial recognition , as do two of the best - selling home video game systems . many other companies also offer hardware , software programs , or mobile phone applications using facial recognition technology for photograph management or secure access .