fleet. ) according to nasa , about 100 engines using one of these technology options are currently in service on passenger and cargo aircraft . according to industry officials , knowledge gained from developing these options is contributing to ongoing nitrogen oxides reduction research . a study of emissions at los angeles international airport is expected to shed some light on the subject . in addition , faa is involved in a study on identifying methods to measure aircraft particulate matter emissions . in the upper atmosphere , aircraft emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases can contribute to climate change . we summarized this information for each specific model and engine combination . and ( 3 ) how have improvements in aircraft and engine design affected aircraft emissions ? to address these questions , we reviewed the results of environmental reviews conducted over the past 3 years at major airports located in areas ( called nonattainment areas ) that have not attained air quality standards required by the clean air act ; surveyed air quality officials from the 13 states that have major airports in nonattainment areas ; and visited seven airports . ( 2 ) what additional efforts are being undertaken in other countries to reduce aviation - related emissions ? to identify trends in aircraft emissions , we analyzed aircraft landing and takeoff data for the u.s. commercial aircraft fleet in 2001 using a computer model developed by faa . in addition , we interviewed and gathered information from officials representing faa , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , the international civil aviation organization ( icao ) , airlines , aircraft manufacturers , and state and local governments . we also reviewed previous reports on aviation emission issues and available information on international efforts to reduce aviation emissions . we conducted our work from september 2001 through february 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . see appendix i for additional information on our objectives , scope , and methodology . although aviation - related activities currently account for only 0.5 percent of total air pollution in the united states , the types of pollutants emitted by these activities are among the most prevalent and harmful in the atmosphere , and are expected to grow over time . the major sources of aviation - related emissions are aircraft , which emit pollutants at ground level as well as over a range of altitudes ; the equipment ( such as vehicles that transport baggage ) that services them on the ground at airports ; and vehicles transporting passengers to and from the airport . the amount of emissions attributable to each source varies by airport . a 1997 study of mobile source emissions at four airports found that ground access vehicles were the most significant source ( accounting for 27 to 63 percent of total mobile source emissions ) , followed by aircraft ( 15 to 38 percent of the total ) and ground service equipment ( 12 to 13 percent of the total ) .