gao - 16-408 . washington , d.c.: may 5 , 2016 . ssa generally agreed with our recommendations . we also interviewed a judgmental selection of social security experts from academia , public policy organizations , and financial firms to obtain their views on how ssa could provide information to better inform people about claiming benefits . based on our review of studies and on expert interviews , we identified key information categories that are central to making an informed decision about when to claim retirement benefits . we identified materials to review from our own examination and search of ssa's website . for example , the statement for the age 25-to - 34 cohorts has a section titled “why should i think about retirement now ? ” for those 55 and older , there is additional information on monthly benefit amounts at different claiming ages and working while receiving benefits . in addition to benefit estimates , the statement shows the individual's history of earnings on which he or she paid social security ( and medicare ) taxes , and total taxes paid . it also explains how people qualify for benefits , assumptions ssa uses in their benefit estimates , and information on the gpo and wep provisions that generally apply to people who receive pensions from non - covered employment . for those 55 and older , a section on the retirement earnings test explains that some benefits can be withheld from workers under fra who earn over a certain amount , but goes on to explain that at fra the worker's benefit amount will be increased to account for the benefits that were withheld . the statement does not , however , include some basic information that may help people understand some critical details about their benefits . specifically , while the statement includes an example of how a claimant's monthly benefits would differ based on age when claiming , it does not make clear that the monthly benefit amount at claiming is permanent , except for cost - of - living adjustments . an ssa official said that a common misunderstanding by statement recipients is that a claimant will receive higher amounts as they get older even if they claim benefits at 62 . further , even though a section of the statement is titled “how your benefits are estimated,” it does not explain that benefits are calculated based on the individual's highest 35 years of earnings . it also does not say that an individual's claiming age affects not only his or her own benefit but potentially a spouse's survivor benefit . finally , the statement does not mention that benefits , once they are received , may be subject to income tax . according to various studies and surveys that looked at the statement , individuals who received the social security benefits statement were , in general , more knowledgeable about social security . according to ssa in 2012 , surveys ssa has conducted found that 70 percent of respondents age 60 and older said they had enough information about social security from the benefits statement to plan for their financial future . however , ssa's studies did not assess whether receipt of the statement changed behavior .