( see app . i for a map and an aerial photograph of the enclave. ) the federal government has no jurisdiction over this land . together , the navy - retained and navy - transferred property is called the philadelphia naval business center . the navy's 270-acre enclave in philadelphia is made up of several distinct noncontiguous areas separated by the transferred acreage . the navy retained 67 buildings that house more than 2,300 civilian , contractor , and military employees . in contrast , the non - navy part of the business center includes about 45 private firms with approximately 2,500 employees . this part is being developed by the philadelphia industrial development corporation , the city of philadelphia's private economic development corporation . the corporation is authorized by the local redevelopment authority to attract private business to the philadelphia naval business center , a business and industrial park that is undergoing redevelopment utilizing the 1,180 transferred acres . the navy facilities are protected by a federal fire service consisting of 26 personnel and 2 fire engines located on the enclave . the navy estimated that the cost was $2.5 million to operate the federal fire department at the enclave during fiscal year 2001 . the city of philadelphia is responsible for providing fire protection services to private development on non - navy property at the business center . it is also responsible for providing additional fire protection to the navy facilities according to a march 2000 mutual aid assistance agreement . the agreement was signed by both navy and city of philadelphia officials , and it is intended to provide additional fire equipment and firefighters to respond to fires and other emergencies on each other's property at the business center . ( see app . ii for a copy of the agreement. ) although not specified in the agreement , enclave command officials and navy and city fire department officials told us that in practice , the navy firefighters are first responders to all fire alarms at the business center — on both navy and non - navy property . the city fire department automatically responds to fire calls on non - navy property at the business center ; it responds to a fire on navy property if it is called by the navy fire department . the dod fire and emergency services program provides policy that governs fire protection at military installations . the policy states that the first arriving fire apparatus shall meet a travel time of 5 minutes for 90 percent of all alarms and that the remaining apparatus shall meet a travel time of 10 minutes for all alarms . the policy also states that the initial response to a fire will be two engine companies and one ladder company but that another engine company may replace the ladder company . the number of full - time fire and emergency service personnel and equipment needed to meet these standards at any installation may depend on the extent to which equivalent forces are available from outside sources . the dod policy encourages installations to enter into reciprocal agreements with local fire departments for mutual fire and emergency services to meet these standards . navy policy mirrors that of dod .