this control resulted in the fan being rejected . a similar control prevented our bogus firm from having its cfl bulb certified . twenty products were created for proactive testing . specifically , on the product application for our room air cleaner , we stated that we met the specific safety standard for ozone emission set forth by underwriters laboratories , an actual independent third - party laboratory designated by energy star . however , while energy star officials asked if we met this standard , they never verified our certification with the underwriters laboratories or requested the specific testing file as required on the qpi form . we found that for most of the bogus products we submitted , the energy star program preventive controls were ineffective , rendering the program vulnerable to fraud and abuse . our work was not designed to systematically test all controls within the energy star program , but approval of 15 fictitious products submitted with bogus energy - efficiency data shows weaknesses in the programs preventative controls . a lack of controls over the access to energy star product certification labels exposes the program to unauthorized use . ineffective and nonexistent controls over validation of claimed energy efficiencies could also allow firms to fraudulently overstate product efficiencies . in addition , the overreliance on manufacturer integrity , industry self - policing , and after - market product testing ignores the potential for products to be put on the market and sold to consumers before fraudulent activity is identified . despite the lack of up - front controls , there have been a few recent examples of successful identifications of fraudulent or inaccurate energy - efficiency claims by manufacturer's competitors that resulted in action from doe . additional details on our scope and methodology are included in appendix i . the energy star program was introduced by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) in 1992 , under the authority of the clean air act , as a voluntary labeling program designed to promote — and a llow consumers to identify — energy - efficient computers and monitors . through 1995 , epa expanded the label to additional office equipment and residential heating , ventilation , and cooling ( hvac ) equipment , and partnered with the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) in 1996 . the energy star label is now found on over 60 product categories , including major appliances , office equipment , lighting , home electronics , new homes , and commercial and industrial buildings , with a reported energy - efficiency savings of up to 10 to 25 percent over the minimum federal standards . as of 2009 , over 40,000 individual product models were energy star - qualified by over 2,400 manufacturers . manufacturers who wish to use the energy star logo must enter into a partnership agreement with either the epa or doe , under which the manufacturer agrees to comply with energy star eligibility criteria and identity guidelines .