roles and responsibilities . cybersecurity strategy documents have assigned high - level roles and responsibilities but have left important details unclear . several gao reports have likewise demonstrated that the roles and responsibilities of key agencies charged with protecting the cyber assets of the united states are inadequately defined . for example , the chartering directives for several offices within the department of defense assign overlapping roles and responsibilities for preparing for and responding to domestic cyber incidents . in an october 2012 report , we recommended that the department update its guidance on preparing for and responding to domestic cyber incidents to include a description of roles and responsibilities . further , in march 2010 , we reported that agencies had overlapping and uncoordinated responsibilities within the comprehensive national cybersecurity initiative and recommended that omb better define roles and responsibilities for all key participants . in addition , while the law gives omb responsibility for oversight of federal information security , omb transferred several of its oversight responsibilities to dhs . omb officials stated that enlisting dhs to perform these responsibilities has allowed omb to have more visibility into agencies' cybersecurity activities because of the additional resources and expertise provided by dhs . while omb's decision to transfer these responsibilities is not consistent with fisma , it may have had beneficial practical results , such as leveraging resources from dhs . nonetheless , with these responsibilities now divided between the two organizations , it is remains unclear how they are to share oversight of individual departments and agencies . additional legislation could clarify these responsibilities . linkage with other key strategy documents . existing cybersecurity strategy documents vary in terms of priorities and structure , and do not specify how they link to or supersede other documents . nor do they describe how they fit into an overarching national cybersecurity strategy . for example , in 2012 , the obama administration identified three cross - agency cybersecurity priorities , but no explanation was given as to how these priorities related to those established in other strategy documents . given the range and sophistication of the threats and potential exploits that confront government agencies and the nation's cyber critical infrastructure , it is critical that the government adopt a comprehensive strategic approach to mitigating the risks of successful cybersecurity attacks . in our february report , we recommended that the white house cybersecurity coordinator develop an overarching federal cybersecurity strategy that includes all key elements of the desirable characteristics of a national strategy . such a strategy , we believe , will provide a more effective framework for implementing cybersecurity activities and better ensure that such activities will lead to progress in securing systems and information . this strategy should also better ensure that federal government departments and agencies are held accountable for making significant improvements in cybersecurity challenge areas by , among other things , clarifying how oversight will be carried out by omb and other federal entities . in the absence of such an integrated strategy , the documents that comprise the government's current strategic approach are of limited value as a tool for mobilizing actions to mitigate the most serious threats facing the nation .