loans . the magnuson - stevens act allows nmfs to offer loans . under this provision , for example , nmfs has established a low - interest loan program for new entrants and fishermen who fish from small boats in the halibut and sablefish fisheries off alaska . the fishermen can use these loans to purchase or refinance quota . since the program's inception in fiscal year 1998 , alaska has approved 207 loans , totaling nearly $25 million . the magnuson - stevens act also provides for the creation of a central registry where owners and lenders can register title to , and security interests ( such as liens ) in , ifqs . according to the national research council , a registry would increase lender confidence and provide opportunities for individuals to obtain financing to enter ifq fisheries . although nmfs has not yet established this registry , its alaska region maintains a voluntary registry where creditors , such as private banks , the state of alaska , and private lenders can record liens against quota shares . the alaska region reported that most lending institutions take advantage of this service . the registry contained 2,581 reported interests in quota share at the end of 2002 . grants or other subsidies . grants or other subsidies could decrease the costs associated with buying or leasing quota . since grants do not have to be repaid , they could give fishermen of limited means the opportunity to enter the fishery and then build their capital in order to increase their quota holdings . in addition to grants , fishery managers could establish a “lease - to - own” quota program — new entrants would pay for the quota while using it . also , quota could be made available for purchase or lease at below market prices . iceland , for example , is considering adopting a discount program to make quota more affordable . this discounting scheme would allow crews of small vessels to purchase quota from the government at 80 percent of its market value . in considering methods to protect communities and facilitate new entry into ifq fisheries , fishery managers face issues about efficiency , fairness , and design and implementation . community protection and new entry methods are designed to achieve social objectives , but achieving these objectives may undermine economic efficiency , one of the primary benefits of an ifq program , and raise questions of equity . moreover , community protection and new entry methods present a number of design and implementation challenges . however , given the particular circumstances of the fishery and the goals of the ifq program overall , it is unlikely that any single method can protect every type of fishing community or facilitate new entry into every ifq fishery . it is also unclear how beneficial these protective methods can be . fishery managers face an inherent tension between the economic goal of maximizing efficiency and the social goal of protecting communities or facilitating new entry . according to fishery experts we spoke with , this tension occurs because a community or new entrant often may not be the most efficient user of quota .