as a result , certification will only include residency this year . we agree that our applicable recommendations have been considered . whether the strategies irs adopted to deal with the concerns that led to our recertification report recommendations are successful will not be known until irs evaluates the certification test . our recertification report described three aspects of the recertification process that caused problems for taxpayers . specifically , one form used for recertification was of questionable value to irs and another form was potentially confusing to taxpayers ; taxpayers were asked to submit information that was difficult for them to obtain or inconsistent with what many irs examiners considered acceptable ; and irs examiners' inconsistent assessment of documentation submitted by taxpayers could result in different recertification decisions for taxpayers in similar circumstances . irs has taken steps to deal with all of these concerns in designing the certification process . regarding the problems with recertification forms , the form that was of questionable value to irs , which was essentially a means for taxpayers to tell irs that they wished to be considered for recertification , is not applicable to the certification program . the other recertification form told taxpayers what they had to submit to establish their eligibility for the eic . little or no detail is provided on how taxpayers would be selected for such a survey , what types of questions would be asked , and when the survey would be done ; however , some of this information is shown in a subsequent draft document . because taxpayers will not have completed their certification experience until sometime next filing season , irs has some time to decide whether to do such a survey and how to define its parameters . as a key part of its processing strategy , irs plans to dedicate employees at its kansas city campus to process cases , answer a special toll - free number , and make updates to a certification database based on responses from the test of the 25,000 taxpayers . the kansas city site will have about 180 staff , the bulk of whom will come on - board between september and december 2003 . approximately 40 staff took initial training between april and june 2003 . given the persistently high eic overclaim rates , that the certification program is a test , and that irs has taken key steps to address burden issues and focus the test on individuals least likely to meet the qualifying child residency requirements , we believe irs has struck a reasonable balance between preventing unreasonable burden on eic taxpayers and balancing the need to obtain information on whether certification can be a useful approach to improving eic compliance . in addition , with the recent program changes announced in august , it appears that irs is taking even more steps to be mindful of these concerns . although certification during the 2004 filing season gives irs somewhat more time to modify the forms and take other actions to potentially further reduce the burden on taxpayers subject to the test , it also creates new challenges for irs . the test will no longer be a direct test of the original concept of certifying taxpayer eligibility in advance of the filing season .