5 and app . iv. ) in all rating areas , consumers could select from at least one bronze , one silver , and two gold level plans and about 58 percent of rating areas had plans available at all five metal levels . 4 and app . ii. ) similarly , the total number of plans available to consumers in a given rating area through the exchanges varied greatly . for example , in the individual exchanges , the total number of plans available in a given rating area ranged from 7 to 178 , averaging about 41 plans . ( see fig . however , in the remaining 42 percent of rating areas , consumers did not have access to a platinum plan . the trends for the small - business exchanges were similar , and all rating areas had at least one silver and one gold plan available . while these represent the number of plans available to consumers through the exchanges , the total number of plans available to a consumer in each market would include the additional plans that were available outside the exchanges . these plans were required to meet many of the same requirements as the exchange plans , but individuals enrolling in plans outside the exchanges were not eligible for premium tax credits and cost - sharing reductions to make the coverage more affordable.businesses enrolling in coverage outside of the exchanges were similarly ineligible for tax credits . we received technical comments on a draft of this report from the department of health and human services and incorporated them as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of health and human services . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or dickenj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . in this appendix , we present the 2012 market share of issuers that participated in the 2014 individual and small - business exchanges . table 3 provides this information for those issuers in the 2014 individual exchanges ; table 4 provides this information for those issuers in the 2014 small - business exchanges . table 5 presents information from interactive figure 4 on the number of issuers participating in the individual and small business exchanges in 2014 , by state . table 6 presents information on the number of plans issuers offered in each state in the individual and small - business exchanges across rating areas in 2014 . table 7 presents information from interactive figure 5 on the number of plans issuers offered in each state for the individual and small - business exchanges in 2014 . john e. dicken , ( 202 ) 512-7114 or dickenj@gao.gov .