dod concurred with our recommendations . dod did not follow its existing operation plans after the events of september 11 , 2001 , to mobilize nearly 300,000 reservists . dod's traditional mobilization process relies on requirements from operation plans that have been coordinated with key mobilization officials prior to the start of the mobilization process . the operation plans in existence on september 11 , 2001 , did not include all the requirements that were needed to respond to the domestic terrorist threat . overseas operation plans did not focus on terrorist threats or the uncertain political environment in southwest asia . nor did operation plans adequately address the increasing requirements for individuals and small , tailored task forces . because dod could not rely on existing operation plans to guide its mobilizations , it used a modified mobilization process that was slower than the traditional mobilization process . dod has called about 300,000 of the 1.2 million national guard and reserve personnel to active duty since september 2001 . these reservists fought on the front lines in iraq ; tracked down taliban and al qaeda members throughout asia and africa ; maintained the peace in the balkans , afghanistan , and now iraq ; and participated in domestic missions ranging from providing security at airports and at the salt lake city olympics to fighting drug trafficking and providing disaster relief . with many of these missions — including those associated with the global war on terrorism — expected to continue , reserve force mobilizations are likely to persist for the foreseeable future . dod recognized before september 11 , 2001 , that no significant operation could be conducted without reserve involvement . dod's mobilization process was designed to mobilize reservists based on the execution of combatant commander operation plans and a preplanned flow of forces . as a result , the mobilization process operates most efficiently when operation plans accurately and completely capture mobilization requirements . however , since dod develops its operation plans using a deliberate planning process that involves input and coordination from osd , the joint staff , and the services , the process can take years , and operation plans have not been quick to respond to changes in the threat environment . prior to the events of september 11 , 2001 , we issued a number of reports highlighting the need for effective u.s. efforts to combat terrorism domestically and abroad . for example , we recommended that the federal government conduct multidisciplinary and analytically sound threat and risk assessments to define and prioritize requirements and properly focus programs and investments in combating terrorism . threat and risk assessments are decision - making support tools that are used to establish requirements and prioritize program investments . dod uses a variation of this approach . we also reported on dod's use of a risk - assessment model to evaluate force protection security requirements for mass casualty terrorists' incidents at dod military bases . while dod's goal is to conduct mobilizations based on operation plans developed through a deliberate planning process , the department recognizes that during the initial stages of an emergency it may have to resort to a crisis action response rather than adhering to its operation plans .