comprehensively define hud's workload . napa reported that a more analytical and well - documented approach to defining workload and determining needs would be helpful in understanding the agency's justification . hud and its program offices use various tools and processes to define and analyze workload . centrally , the office of field and policy management tracks manager and staff projects and reports on progress , budget , and timelines for achieving strategic goals . the hud offices of community planning and development , public and indian housing , and fair housing and equal opportunity reported using reap data as a starting point to project workload and to prepare their workload justification submissions for the salaries and expenses section of the budget requests . these program offices also reported using other tools and processes to define workload and estimate resources . although officials from the program offices we spoke with described individual efforts , officials from the office of the chief financial officer indicated that budget requests are not predicated on a comprehensive analysis of the agencies' workload . instead , budget requests are based on a budget amount predetermined by the office of the chief financial officer . program offices then work backwards to determine what work can be accomplished with that amount . provide central guidance on how work is defined and data collected . hud's office of the chief financial officer provides central budget formulation guidance to the program offices on how work is defined and data are collected . in addition , the office of the chief financial officer issues a memorandum to the program offices detailing technical guidance on how to develop a congressional budget justification . the memorandum directs the program offices to include legislative policy proposals associated with significant new initiatives and staffing requirements derived from reap . according to the guidance , the program offices should provide a narrative that clearly explains what the program office requests funding for , the expected results of that funding level , and the effect decreased funding would have on the taxpayers and communities the program serves . additionally , office of the chief financial officer guidance includes decisional outlines for the salaries and expenses portion of the budget request and requires that program offices explain any change in requests from one fiscal year to another . allow program assistant secretaries to retain decision - making authority over the systems used in their organizations . budget decisions involve tradeoffs that hud and the program offices make to ensure hud has the resources needed to meet its mission . hud's program assistant secretaries and the office of the chief financial officer provide input during budget deliberations . for example , program assistant secretaries discuss the effect of funding decreases on program activities . officials from the office of the chief financial officer told us that hud's priority goals had a direct impact on program office decisions . involve headquarters and field staff in the workload definition process . with the implementation of reap in 2002 , hud changed how it estimated its fte needs by engaging both headquarters and field staff in the process .