u.s. cyber command has developed a concept of operations . the document , signed by the commander of u.s. cyber command in september 2010 and released in november 2010 , lays out broad roles and responsibilities for cyberspace operations and our evaluation showed that it generally meets joint guidance . joint guidance calls for a concept of operations to include , among other things , the following actions: state the commander's intent ; describe the central approach the joint force commander intends to take to accomplish the mission ; provide for the application , synchronization , and integration of forces and capabilities in time , space , and purpose ; focus on friendly and adversary centers of gravity , and their associated critical vulnerabilities ; and relate the joint force's objectives and desired effects to those of the next higher command and other organizations as necessary . the concept of operations states in its commander's intent section that the commander of u.s. cyber command's top priorities include the following: improving the security and defense of u.s. military networks , maturing u.s. cyber command , working with the services to build the cyber force , and collaborating with partners . additionally , the concept of operations states that u.s. cyber command will exercise control of assigned and attached forces to operate and defend dod networks as well as conduct offensive cyberspace operations , as directed . to assess the extent to which dod had addressed command and control issues for cyberspace operations , we reviewed dod directives , doctrine , and policy and interviewed relevant officials from dod , u.s. cyber command , and the four military services . specifically , we reviewed dod directive 5100.01 ; joint publication 1 ; joint publication 1-02 , department of defense dictionary of military and associated terms ( november 8 , 2010 , as amended through december 31 , 2010 ) ; joint publication 5-0 ; and the 2008 unified command plan to identify criteria for delineating “supported” and “supporting” command and control relationships between combatant commands and the military services . additional information on our scope and methodology appears in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from may 2010 to may 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . table 2 lists the dod offices we contacted . to assess the extent to which roles and responsibilities for the military services had been identified for cyberspace operations , we reviewed dod doctrine and policy and interviewed relevant officials from dod , u.s. cyber command , and the four military services . specifically , we reviewed joint publication 1 , doctrine for the armed forces of the united states ( may 2 , 2007 , incorporating change 1 , march 20 , 2009 ) ; dod directive 5100.01 , functions of the department of defense and its major components ( december 21 , 2010 ) ; and joint guidance related to the joint operation planning and execution system to identify the criteria , definitions , and other guidance that dod and u.s. cyber command should be following as they identify the appropriate roles and responsibilities for the military services and other organizations that support dod cyberspace operations .