wyo . mich. r.i. nebr . pa. conn. n.j. ill. ind . colo. w.va. del . md . kans . mo . ark . s.c. miss . ala. ga. la . tex . fla. oftd is responsible for conducting covert operations at u.s. ports of entry and checkpoints to test the capabilities for detecting and interdicting nuclear and radiological materials smuggled into the united states , as well as testing capabilities in foreign locations . in selecting sites for covert operations , oftd considers a universe of 655 sites . these sites include the 477 facilities at the 328 ports of entry , 35 permanent checkpoints , as well as 143 sites consisting of domestic user fee airports and express consignment carrier facility airports as well as preclearance locations and container security initiative ( csi ) ports in foreign locations . the technology , policies , and procedures to detect and interdict nuclear and radiological material smuggled across the border differ across ports of entry and checkpoints , but consist of four similar functions: ( 1 ) the ability to detect radiation , ( 2 ) the ability to locate the radiation source , ( 3 ) the ability to identify the radiation source , and ( 4 ) the ability to contact laboratories and scientific services ( lss ) and transmit data as needed when additional adjudication is required.vehicles or containers entering the united states must pass through rpms that can detect the presence of neutron - and gamma - emitting radioactive material . as we have previously reported , different radioactive materials emit varying types of radiation , and although sources of neutron radiation are less common than gamma radiation , neutron radiation is emitted from some materials that are used to make nuclear weapons . thus , rpms and other tools that can detect neutron radiation are at land and sea ports of entry , particularly important for national security purposes , including securing our borders . rpms detect the presence of radioactive material , which can include plutonium , kitty litter , or granite . if an rpm detects the presence of radioactive material in a scanned container or vehicle , the responding cbp officer is to utilize a device called a radiation isotope identification device ( riid ) to identify the radiation source . for some sources , such as industrial radioactive sources , cbp officers must contact the cbp lss staff to verify the type of source material in question and , if necessary , verify the nuclear regulatory commission licensee and shipper information through the national law enforcement communications center . cbp officials reported that cbp officers and usbp agents in checkpoint and air ports of entry locations generally rely on devices called personal radiation detectors ( prd ) to protect the health and safety of agency personnel . these devices detect elevated levels of radiation .