e . dod and nasa ha actions that influenced t d begun to address . table 1 provides a timeline of he guidance and that have followed its issuance . in march 2006 , dod issued guidance on using award fees that was in direct response to our recommendations . this guidance stated that it is imperative that award fees are linked to desired outcomes such as discrete events or milestones . such milestones include design reviews and system demonstrations for weapons systems . questions may be referred to susan truslow at ( 202 ) 395-6810 or struslow@omb.eop.gov or pat corrigan at ( 202 ) 395-6805 or pcorrigan@omb.eop.gov . thank you for your attention to this important matter . the guidance also stated that while award fee contracts should be structured to motivate excellent contractor performance , award fees must be commensurate with contractor performance over a range from satisfactory to excellent performance . ensure market research documentation and the acquisition plan sufficiently state desired outcomes , performance requirements , milestones , risks and cost benefits associated with choice of contract type ( far 7.105 ) . conduct and document risk and cost / benefit analyses that support use of an incentive type o conduct a risk assessment and ensure incentive strategies are consistent with the level of risk assumed by the contractor and motivate the contractor by balancing awards with negative consequences ; o determine whether administrative costs associated with managing the incentive fee are outweighed by the expected benefits ; and o ensure sufficient human resources are available to properly structure and monitor the contract . ensure evaluation factors are: o meaningful and measurable ; o directly linked to cost , schedule , and performance results ; and o designed to motivate excellence in contractor performance by making clear distinctions in possible award earnings between satisfactory and excellent performance . ensure the incentive fee plan: o defines clearly the standards of performance for each rating category ( eg , satisfactory , above satisfactory , excellent ) ; o defines clearly the percentage of fee the contractor should be paid for each of these o documents roles and responsibilities for those involved in monitoring contractor performance and determining award fees ; o provides detailed guidance on steps in the evaluation process for agency o establishes a base fee . good business practice allows the contractor more than 0% for base fee . this way , the award fee promotes above average performance ; and o obtains appropriate approval in accordance with agency policy . ensure rollover fees are allowed only in limited circumstances in accordance with agency policy . the following is gao's comment on the department of homeland security's letter dated may 28 , 2009 . while we agree dhs has taken several steps to improve the use of award fee contracts since the issuance of ofpp's guidance , dhs's changes to the homeland security acquisition manual do not fully address the issues in the ofpp guidance . as we point out in our report , the manual does not describe standards or definitions for determining various levels of performance nor does it address issues related to rollover .