each of these poses challenges to bcbp . information is key to identifying high - risk cargo . such information can come from manifests for air and sea shipments , from importers , or from intelligence units within or outside dhs . accurate information can help bcbp make reliable risk determinations , particularly when it is used in dhs computerized models that help assess cargo risk . obviously , when information or intelligence is incomplete or unreliable , it can adversely impact on bcbp's ability to identify potentially risky cargo for inspection . we are currently reviewing how bcbp is targeting cargo for further inspection and how such cargo is inspected at ports . in this regard , we are reviewing how bcbp developed the model used in targeting , how bcbp is handling the targets generated by the model at sea ports , and whether and how bcbp intends to evaluate targeting . since this work is ongoing , and involves information that bcbp also considers to be law enforcement sensitive , we are precluded from discussing specific aspects of this matter in this unclassified statement . however , in the broadest terms , our work to date shows that bcbp's targeting efforts face a range of challenges relating to threat assessments , actionable intelligence , and nonintrusive inspection technology . having sufficient numbers of well - trained and motivated staff is also key to identifying high - risk cargo . however , we found that the initial plan did not provide sufficient information about ins commitments for the system , such as what specific system capabilities and benefits will be delivered , by when , and at what cost . we concluded that this lack of detail is a material limitation in the first plan that will become even more problematic in the future as the magnitude and complexity of the system acquisition increases , as will the importance of creating plans with the appropriate level and scope of information . responsibility for implementing u.s. visit now resides in the border and transportation security directorate . we are currently reviewing the fiscal year 2003 expenditure plan and will ascertain whether these problems were addressed . we designated implementation and transformation of the new department of homeland security as high risk based on three factors . first , the implementation and transformation of dhs is an enormous undertaking that will take time to achieve in an effective and efficient manner . second , components to be merged into dhs — including those that now form bcbp — already face a wide array of existing challenges , some of which we have described in this statement . finally , failure to effectively carry out its mission would expose the nation to potentially very serious consequences . in the aftermath of september 11 , invigorating the nation's homeland security missions has become one of the federal government's most significant challenges . we reported that it would take at least 5 more years ( until 2006 ) to reach the minimum number of agents the border patrol believed it needed along the southwest border if ( 1 ) the administration's agent hiring goals at that time were maintained and met and ( 2 ) all new agents were deployed to the southwest border .