classification of data . another challenge that both efforts faced is the classification of aggregated data . readiness data are classified ; budget data are generally not . when these data are combined , the resulting data are classified , potentially making the tool less useful and available to officials seeking to make informed decisions about resource allocation . for example , c2ram is currently an unclassified system that captures fiscal and training data , but not readiness data . however , officials at i marine expeditionary force told us that if readiness data were incorporated into the tool , it could become classified , which would limit its availability and usefulness to lower unit levels . as the marine corps found in its fiscal year 2012 strategic health assessment , its stove - piped processes often require integration at the senior leadership level to develop a comprehensive view of issues , including the effect of dollars on readiness . development of c2ram and prm , however , was not integrated , resulting in two separate systems — each devoted to tackling the same problem , but in different ways and with similar weaknesses , such as data quality limitations . moreover , there was some overlap between the two systems . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the acting secretary of defense , the secretary of the navy , and the commandant of the marine corps . for example , c2ram was one of the many data sources for prm . in addition , both prm and c2ram used some of the same data sources . sics are not used consistently across units . the marine corps uses sics to track funds associated with individual training exercises . however , units , including the mef and its subordinate units , do not consistently use sics in identifying funds associated with all training exercises . specifically , officials at all three mefs told us that units generate sics for large - scale training exercises directed at the mef or division level , but may not generate sics to track expenses for small - scale exercises at lower unit levels such as the regiment and battalion , making it difficult to track those funds . officials at i mef and ii mef stated that tracking costs associated with small - scale exercises is less consistent because units are not required to use sics to track funds associated with exercises at those levels , and sics associated with each exercise may change from year to year . further , officials at i mef and ii mef stated that supply officers are responsible for financial management at units below the division level , and they may not prioritize use of sics . officials at iii mef stated that tracking costs associated with specific exercises was difficult because officials could not attribute several large one - time training expenses to specific training exercises . officials at all three mefs stated that there is currently no systematic way to ensure that sics are used accurately to associate funds executed with training exercises , which means they do not have complete or consistent data on costs associated with individual training exercises .