ncta provided no comments . sbca officials noted that , in addition to the factors we discuss in the report , the inability of dbs providers to carry certain programming developed by cable operators also influences the dbs penetration rate in certain markets . in particular , sbca noted that fcc's program access rules require that vertically integrated cable operators make satellite - delivered programming available to competing subscription video providers , such as dbs providers , but that the program access rules do not apply to terrestrially delivered programming . sbca officials note that the ability of cable operators to deliver programming terrestrially , especially popular programming such as regional sports networks , and therefore deny dbs providers access to this programming , negatively affects the dbs penetration rate in certain markets . in addition , we used the survey to define variables measuring ( 1 ) system megahertz ( the capacity of the cable system in megahertz ) , ( 2 ) homes passed by the cable system serving the franchise area and perhaps other franchises in the same area , ( 3 ) regulation — a dummy variable equal to 1 if the franchise is subject to rate regulation of its basic service tier , ( 4 ) horizontal concentration — a dummy variable equal to 1 if the franchise area is affiliated with one of the largest msos with at least 1 million subscribers nationally , and ( 5 ) the status of nonsatellite competition — a dummy variable equal to 1 if the franchise faced competition from a second wireline company that provides cable service . from the satellite broadcasting and communications association , we obtained dbs subscriber counts as of january 2004 for each zip code in the united states . we used this information to calculate the number of dbs subscribers in a cable franchise area , which , when divided by the number of housing units , was used to define the dbs penetration rate . we used the most recent data from the census bureau to obtain the following demographic information for each franchise area: housing units , median household income , proportions of urban and rural populations , housing units accounted for by structures with more than five units ( multiple dwelling units ) , population density , and nonmetropolitan statistical areas . for average wage , we used may 2003 estimates for installation , maintenance , and repair occupations from the bureau of labor statistics' ( bls ) national occupational employment and wage estimates . we used metropolitan area data for most franchise areas , and state - level data for those franchise areas located outside of metropolitan areas . we used data from bia media accesspro™ to determine the number of broadcast television stations in each television market . to define the dummy variable indicator of vertical integration , we used information on the corporate affiliations of the franchise operators provided in fcc's survey . we used this information in conjunction with industrywide information on vertical relationships between cable operators and suppliers of program content gathered by fcc in its tenth annual report on the status of competition in the market for delivery of video programming .