fas no . 154 requires nongovernmental entities to disclose that their previously issued financial statements have been restated , a description of the nature of the error , the effect of the correction on each financial statement line item , and the cumulative effect of change in the statement of financial position . further , the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) now requires companies to disclose restatements in the form 8-k . specifically , under the form 8-k requirements , if a company is advised by its auditor that disclosure should be made to prevent future reliance on a previously issued audit report or completed interim review related to previously issued financial statements , the company should disclose ( 1 ) the date on which it was so advised or notified , ( 2 ) the financial statements that should no longer be relied upon , ( 3 ) a brief description of the information provided by the auditor , and ( 4 ) a statement of whether the audit committee or the board of directors discussed with the auditor the matters disclosed in the filing . america's taxpayers deserve no less in terms of transparency , accountability , disclosure , and notification from federal agencies . between september 2005 and january 2006 , we issued reports covering five of the nine cfo act agencies that had received unqualified audit opinions on , but subsequently restated , their originally issued fiscal year 2003 financial statements . we reported that these restatements generally resulted from ( 1 ) lack of effective internal controls over the processing and reporting of certain transactions and ( 2 ) failure of the auditors to design and / or perform adequate audit procedures to detect such misstatements . during our fieldwork , december 2004 through october 2005 , our review of these nine agencies also focused on the following two key areas: ( 1 ) the extent of transparency exhibited in disclosing the nature and cause of the misstatement and its impact on the financial statements and the reissued or updated audit report and ( 2 ) the timing of communicating the material misstatement to users of the financial statements . this capping report , which summarizes the results of our review of the nine agencies , provides our overall observations on their transparency and timeliness , and includes governmentwide recommendations based on our work at these agencies . federal agencies' management responsibilities for their financial statements include , among other things , preparing the financial statements in conformity with gaap and establishing and maintaining internal controls over financial reporting . auditors of these financial statements are required to plan and perform their audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement . while restatements to previously issued financial statements can happen and may not be surprising given weaknesses in the financial reporting environment at many federal agencies , inherently , restatements raise questions about the reliability of other information in previously issued financial statements . in addition , frequent restatements to correct misstatements can undermine public trust and confidence in both the entity and all responsible parties .