software management . doe quality assurance procedures require that software used to support analysis and conclusions about the performance and safety of the repository be tested or created in such a way to ensure that it is reliable . from 1998 to 2003 , multiple doe audits found recurring quality assurance problems that could affect confidence in the adequacy of software codes . for example , in 2003 , doe auditors found problems related to software similar to those found previously in areas such as technical reviews , software classification , planning , design , and testing . in 2001 , and again in 2003 , doe audits found that project personnel were not properly following procedures — specifically in the areas of model documentation , model validation , and checking and review . further , the 2003 audit concluded that previous corrective actions designed to improve validation and reduce errors in model reports were not fully implemented . after many years of working to address these quality assurance problems with data , software , and models , doe had mostly resolved these problems and closed the last of the associated condition reports by february 2005 . as doe prepares to submit the yucca mountain project license application to nrc , it has relied on costly and time consuming rework to ensure that the documents supporting the application are accurate and complete . specifically , doe has relied on inspections and rework by doe personnel to resolve quality assurance problems with the traceability and transparency of technical work products . these efforts to deal with quality problems at the end , rather than effectively ensuring that work organizations are producing quality products from the beginning , add to the project's cost and could potentially delay doe's submission of the license application to nrc . in addition , doe's efforts indicate that some corrective actions have been ineffective in resolving problems with the quality assurance process . further , doe is now detecting quality assurance problems in design and engineering work that are similar to the quality assurance problems it experienced with its scientific work in the late 1990s . although doe did not initiate its major effort to address these problems until 2004 , the department and nrc for years had known of quality assurance problems with the traceability and transparency of technical work products called analysis and model reports ( amr ) . amrs are a key component of the license application , and contain the scientific analysis and modeling data demonstrating the safety and performance of the planned repository . among other quality requirements , amrs must be traceable back to their original source material and data , and must also be transparent in justifying and explaining their underlying assumptions , calculations , and conclusions . in 2003 , based in part on these problems as well as doe's long - standing problems with data , software , and modeling , nrc conducted an independent evaluation of three amrs . the scope of the review was to determine if the amrs met nrc requirements for being traceable , transparent , and technically appropriate for their use in the license application . nrc found significant problems .