antiterrorism and force protection . the revised plans call for more powerful weapons for national security cutters , offshore patrol cutters , and fast response cutters . manual gun mounts on cutters will be replaced with selected sensor - integrated , remote - operated , and semi - automated gun systems . this weaponry is to give the coast guard enhanced capabilities to protect its own cutters and other high value assets by , for example , providing cutters with the ability to stop terrorists who have taken control of a ship by disabling that ship's propulsion with precision fire . airborne use of force and vertical insertion and delivery . the revised plans call for the deepwater helicopters to be fitted with weapons and equipment that will enable armed teams to land on a vessel , such as in the event a hostile group has taken over the vessel . crew members can use machine guns to provide cover while a team travels by rope from the hovering helicopter to the vessel's deck . additionally , for certain terrorist and criminal scenarios , the helicopter can use disabling fire to stop an illegally operated boat . in the event of a terrorist attack and the right circumstances , the disabling fire can be changed to deadly fire if necessary to stop terrorists . interoperability with the departments of defense and homeland security , as well as rescue - 21 equipment . all deepwater vessels and aircraft are to receive c4isr enhancements that make them interoperable with other dhs entities , dod assets , and local first responders . these enhancements include added circuits and equipment that provide full voice communication and limited data communications between these entities . extended / enhanced flight deck . the flight decks of the national security cutter and offshore patrol cutter are to be enlarged so that helicopters from other department of homeland security components and from dod can land on the cutters . in may 2001 , we reported that affordability was the biggest risk for the deepwater program because the coast guard's contracting approach depends on a sustained level of funding each fiscal year over the life of the program . for the 2005 revised implementation plan , these funding levels average over $1 billion per year and range from $650 million to over $1.5 billion per year through fiscal year 2026 . according to coast guard officials , any significant or sustained deviation from the planned funding levels would be costly to the coast guard in the short term and set off ripples affecting the acquisition of deepwater equipment for years to come . the officials added that significant shortfalls would likely result in increased costs , late delivery of equipment , and degradation of deepwater asset performance . in revising the deepwater asset mix to meet new mission demands , the coast guard undertook a series of analyses that used a computer simulation model to project the operational effectiveness of a variety of potential deepwater force structures or asset mixes . we found that this model contains reliable information and is useful for guiding decisions on the revised deepwater asset mix .