education . county officials in new york described how a local community college helps youth complete financial aid forms , and conducts college day simulations and resume - building workshops . financial literacy . county officials in maryland told us they offer classroom instruction on financial literacy which includes how to understand financial aid , good banking practices , and how to asses loans and grants . employment . in california , county officials told us about several programs they offer to help youth meet their employment goals , such as a youth worker program in which 16- to 21-year - olds are hired to rotate through different county departments for 18 months . health . county officials in maryland told us they offer yoga classes and other stress reduction techniques , as well as outings to local clinics for youth to learn about family planning resources . mentoring . county officials in california told us they host weekly social events to establish community connections between youth in care , and youth have regular meetings with supportive adults focused on building connections with family and friends . daily living . officials at a private agency in illinois told us the youth in their housing programs have a set schedule to participate in different life skills activities , such as cooking , doing laundry , and other chores . although officials in all five selected states said they offer a variety of training and supports to help youth in extended care develop independent living skills , officials in these states also said that youth may experience challenges using these skills . for example , officials said youth in private residences may have difficulty covering their living expenses , which can lead to evictions . a new york county official said some youth living on their own may struggle with the lack of structure and the amount of independence in making their own decisions and setting their schedule . officials we spoke with said that caseworkers can use these benchmarks to assess a youth's progress towards living independently , create an individual service plan based on their progress , and direct youth to additional resources as needed ( see fig . in addition , title iv - e requires that caseworkers assist youth with developing a transition planning document . according to state and local officials , youth periodically meet with their caseworkers to discuss their progress on their goals , and caseworkers may provide additional guidance and support as needed during these meetings . for example , a caseworker in tennessee described providing youth funds for driver's education classes and licenses , prom expenses , and extracurricular activities , based on conversations with youth about their needs . officials we spoke with in all five states also discussed providing financial incentives to encourage youth to participate in independent living services . for example , according to officials in illinois , if youth complete the financial literacy course offered by the state child welfare agency , they receive $1,200 when they exit care . county officials in maryland described participating in the jim casey opportunity passport program .