this section further describes these four disincentives . some agency , university , and industry officials we contacted said the march - in authority could have a “chilling effect” on the willingness of venture capital firms and other investors to provide funding for the further commercial development of federally funded inventions . for example , three of the technology transfer officials we contacted said the chilling effect on investors would be increased if agencies used the march - in authority under circumstances that were not well supported by the facts . according to these officials , investors are looking for profitable technologies and inventions that either have , or are close to obtaining , a patent , which allows them to capture profits in relative safety . they said that for some investors the mere existence of an agency's march - in authority makes such investments more risky because , should an agency actually exercise its authority , investors may believe the value of their investment could evaporate or decline significantly and these perceived risks could increase significantly . however , executives from two bio - technology firms — both of which hold licenses to commercialize technologies developed in part with federal funds and which must raise money from investors to pursue commercialization — told us the perceived risk that an agency might march in is far less important to investors than other risks they face . for example , they cited the product's likely efficacy as perhaps the key factor for investors to consider in making such decisions . the executives added that one of the greatest concerns of their potential investors is how soon the product or process can be marketed and , as a result , return a profit on their investment . these executives expressed confidence that if licensees take care to follow the requirements of the bayh - dole act , then march - ins would be rare and should not negatively affect the flow of federally funded inventions to the market . in addition , technology transfer officials noted that at the time the act was passed companies were often unwilling to enter into licensing agreements due to concerns about how agencies would use the authority . they said such concerns have diminished , in part because the small number of fact - finding proceedings has not led agencies to march in . the march - in authority would also have a chilling effect if researchers , particularly private - sector researchers , were unwilling to apply for federally funded projects because the potential for an agency to march in creates uncertainty with regard to ownership of an invention . however , none of the officials we contacted was aware of specific instances when a researcher had declined to apply for federal funding and they said it is impossible to know the extent to which researchers decide against applying for federal funds due to such concerns . in contrast , officials at doe said they do not believe the potential for a march in is a concern for their contractors . for example , doe officials noted that following the release of a recent solicitation , 60 small businesses called with questions about the march - in authority .