some of the design changes led to substantial cost increases . for example , in some areas the corps tripled the depth from almost 20 to almost 60 feet of cutoff walls designed to prevent seepage beneath the levees . the corps also decided to close gaps in the cutoff walls in areas where bridges or other factors caused gaps . these changes added $24 million and $52 million , respectively , to a project that was originally , in 1996 , estimated to cost $44 million . by the time the corps reported these cost increases to the congress in 2002 , it had already spent or planned to spend more than double its original estimated cost of the project . the corps also made mistakes in estimating the benefits from this project because in 1996 it incorrectly counted the number of properties protected by the project by almost 20 percent and incorrectly valued these protected properties . although the corps updated its benefit estimate in 2002 to reflect new levee improvements authorized in 1999 , we found that even this reanalysis contained mistakes in estimating the number of properties that would be protected and therefore continued to estimate higher benefits from the project than would be warranted . as with the delaware river deepening study , we found that all three organizational review levels within the corps reviewed and approved the benefit analyses for this project , but these reviews did not identify the mistakes that we found . the corps concurred with our report's recommendations and is working on a general reevaluation report for the uncompleted portions of the project that is due in the spring of 2007 . in a 2000 report to the congress , the corps recommended that one of its dredges remain in a reserve status and that another be added to that status . however , we found that the corps could not provide support for these conclusions and that its cost and benefit analyses supporting these conclusions had analytical shortcomings . we also found that the corps did not perform a comprehensive analysis of the ready reserve program and in fact could not provide any documentation of what analysis , if any , it had done . in addition , the corps' recommendation that the reserve program be continued because it was beneficial was contradicted by evidence in the report showing that the price the government paid for dredging was higher after a corps dredge was placed in reserve than before . we also questioned whether it was prudent to add another dredge to the reserve fleet without a comprehensive analysis in light of the fact that the dredge needed significant repairs to remain in service , even in reserve . we also determined that the corps had used outdated data and used an expired policy that could raise the government's cost estimate for hopper dredging work . this cost estimate is pivotal in determining the reasonableness of private contractor bids . if all bids exceed the government estimate by more than 25 percent , the corps may elect to perform the work itself . moreover , in making its estimate , the corps had not obtained comprehensive industry data since 1988 although it had obtained some updated data for some cost items .