however , these initiatives have not resolved the problems associated with collections . one key component of the u.s. ad / cv duty system is its unique retrospective nature , which creates risks of uncollected duties both because of time lags and rate changes . as discussed earlier , importers pay the estimated amount of ad / cv duties when products enter the united states , but the final amount of duties owed is not determined until later . in 2008 , we found that the average time elapsed between entry of goods and liquidation was more than 3 years . prospective ad / cv duty systems create a smaller burden for customs officials because the full and final amount of ad / cv duties is assessed at the time of importation , whereas , according to cbp , the retrospective ad / cv duty system of the united states places a unique and significant burden on cbp's resources . depending on the design of the prospective ad / cv duty systems , the amount of duties assessed is based on dumping or subsidization that occurred in a previous period , and therefore may not equal the amount of actual dumping or subsidization , whereas under a retrospective ad / cv duty system , the amount of duties assessed reflects the actual amount of dumping by the exporter for the period of review . however , in practice , a substantial amount of retrospective ad / cv duty bills are not collected . in response to a recommendation in our 2008 report , commerce reported to congress in 2010 on the advantages and disadvantages of retrospective and prospective systems . while the commerce report cites a variety of strengths and weaknesses for both systems , it states that retroactive increases in ad / cv duties are particularly harmful for small businesses such as shrimp and seafood importers . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . u.s. law authorizes the imposition of ad / cv duties to remedy these unfair trade practices , namely dumping ( i.e. , sales at less than normal value ) and foreign government subsidies . the u.s. ad / cv duty system is retrospective , in that importers pay estimated ad / cv duties at the time of importation , but the final amount of duties is not determined until later . by contrast , other major u.s. trading partners have ad / cv duty systems that , although different from one another , are fundamentally prospective in that ad / cv duties assessed at the time a product enters the country are essentially treated as final . two key u.s. agencies are involved in assessing and collecting ad / cv duties owed . the department of commerce ( commerce ) is responsible for calculating the appropriate ad / cv duty rate , which it issues in an ad / cv duty order .