customers not on the advisory board . to develop and analyze themes emerging from our focus groups and interviews , we conducted a content analysis of participants' discussions and responses to our questions . we conducted this performance audit from january 2011 to january 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . jmd has overall responsibility for managing the working capital fund and aff . excess unobligated balances in aff can be transferred into the super surplus account . the super surplus amounts include prior - year declared excess unobligated balances . the assets forfeiture management staff , in conjunction with jmd budget staff , determine the amounts needed to ( 1 ) maintain aff solvency by covering anticipated forfeiture - related expenses , ( 2 ) ensure a reserve for pending equitable forfeited assets and third - party payments with partners and victims ( referred to as major sharing reserves ) , and ( 3 ) retain funding to cover rescissions . any remaining funds can be declared as excess unobligated balances and used to increase the super surplus balance . justice leadership uses a four - step process to make final decisions on how to use the working capital fund's ubt and aff's super surplus . when excess unobligated balances are available , justice components submit requests for funds to jmd . these requests must provide sufficient justification to allow senior justice officials to make informed decisions about the use of these funds . jmd budget staff consider each funding request in light of the priority resource needs of the department and the authorized purposes for which ubt and super surplus balances are available . jmd budget staff present their recommendations to the aag / a for review and approval . the aag / a , with input from the attorney general and other departmental leaders , makes the final decision on how to allocate these balances . before using the excess unobligated balances , jmd notifies omb and the house and senate appropriations committees' commerce , justice , and science subcommittees on how much they will use from the ubt and super surplus and for what purpose . while justice is only required to notify congress and omb of its uses , it generally waits for approval before using the funds . in the past , justice has used the working capital fund ubt to fund general administrative acquisitions , such as improving justice's financial management system . clearly delineate roles and responsibilities: appropriate delineation of roles and responsibilities promotes a clear understanding of who will be held accountable for specific tasks or duties , such as authorizing and reviewing transactions , implementing controls over working capital fund management , and helping ensure that related responsibilities are coordinated . in addition , this reduces the risk of mismanaged funds and tasks or functions “falling through the cracks.” moreover , it helps customers know who to contact if they have questions .