ibid . doctrine are completed . however , until the revised doctrine publications are released , the full extent of the changes and their inclusion of cyber - related information will be unknown . while all of these efforts represent significant progress toward enhancing joint doctrine , there is no timetable for the completion of all cyber - related updates to existing joint publications . dod is also currently debating the merits of developing a single , overarching cyber joint doctrine publication in addition to updating all existing doctrine . separate joint doctrine publications are devoted to other major elements of operations in various “domains,” including such topics as mine warfare , amphibious operations , urban operations , operations other than war , counterdrug operations , and space operations . in 2007 the national military strategy for cyberspace operations implementation plan tasked a number of dod commands and organizations with cyber - related studies , some of which evaluated cyber - related joint doctrine . there has subsequently been broad agreement within dod about the need for improved joint doctrine . however , not all commands agreed about the need for a separate cyber - specific doctrine publication . table 4 provides examples of some of the conclusions and recommendations stemming from studies related to cyber joint doctrine . in may of 2009 , u.s. strategic command proposed the development of an overarching joint publication for cyberspace operations dedicated to all aspects of cyberspace operations . as the dod command responsible for evaluating joint doctrine proposals , u.s. joint forces command conducted a front end analysis that reviewed and analyzed the proposal to determine if a doctrinal void exists and if the proposal is appropriate for inclusion in the doctrine community . additionally , the u.s. joint forces command officials we spoke with expressed concern about developing a separate cyber joint publication and that this might create inefficiencies and disconnects with existing related doctrine in such areas as information operations . the front end analysis recommended that further consideration of a separate joint doctrine publication be postponed and that u.s. strategic command develop a joint test publication for cyberspace operations . in september 2009 , the joint staff approved the development of the cyberspace operations joint test publication . a joint test publication is a proposed version of a joint doctrine that normally contains contentious issues . after the test publication is developed , it will be evaluated through u.s. joint forces command , resulting in one of the following recommendations: ( 1 ) that dod convert the cyber joint test publication into a joint publication ; ( 2 ) that dod incorporate the joint test publication or portions of it into existing joint publications ; or ( 3 ) that dod determine that the cyber joint test publication is not sufficient and discontinues work on it with no effect on joint doctrine . a test publication is not considered approved doctrine . the joint staff established a milestone of june 2010 for completion of the draft test publication . the joint staff told us it expects evaluation of the test publication to take 6 to 12 months .