( see figs . while 55 percent of multiemployer plans are large , only 13 percent of single - employer plans are large and 73 percent of single - employer plans have had fewer than 250 participants , as shown in figure 2 . however , distribution of participants by plan size for multiemployer and single - employer plans is more comparable , with over 90 percent of both multiemployer and single - employer participants in large plans , as shown in figure 3 . although data limitations preclude any comprehensive assessment , available evidence suggests that since 2000 , many multiemployer plans have experienced significant reductions in their funded status . pbgc estimated in its 2003 annual report that aggregate deficit of underfunded multiemployer plans had reached $100 billion by year - end , up from a $21 billion deficit at the start of 2000 . in addition , pbgc reported a net accumulated deficit for its own multiemployer program of $261 million for fiscal year 2003 , the first deficit since 1981 and its largest ever . ( see fig . while most multiemployer plans continue to provide benefits at unreduced levels , pbgc has also reported that the deficit was primarily caused by new and substantial “probable losses,” increasing the number of plans it classifies as likely requiring financial assistance in the near future from 58 plans with expected liabilities of $775 million in 2002 to 62 plans with expected liabilities of $1.25 billion in 2003 . private survey data and anecdotal evidence are consistent with this assessment of multiemployer funding losses . one survey by an actuarial consulting firm showed that the percentage of its multiemployer client plans that were fully funded declined from 83 percent in 2001 to 67 percent in 2002 . other , more anecdotal evidence suggests increased difficulties for multiemployer plans . for example , discussions with plan administrators have indicated that there has been an increase in the number of plans with financial difficulties in recent years , with some plans reducing or temporarily freezing the future accruals of participants . in addition , irs officials recently reported an increase in the number of multiemployer plans ( less than 1 percent of all multiemployer plans ) requesting tax - specific waivers that would provide plans relief from current funding shortfall requirements . as with single - employer plans , falling interest rates coincident with stock market declines and generally weak economic conditions have contributed to the funding difficulties of multiemployer plans . the decline in interest rates in recent years has increased the present value of pension plan liabilities for db plans in general , because the cost of providing future promised benefits increases when computed using a lower interest rate . at the same time , declining stock markets decreased the value of any equities held in multiemployer plan portfolios to meet those obligations . finally , because multiemployer plan contributions are usually based on the number of hours worked by active participants , any reduction in their participant employment will reduce employer contributions to the plan . despite their relative financial stability , the multiemployer system has experienced a steady decline in the number of plans and in the number of active participants over the past 2 decades .