the payment process is the most automated . our study did not include these other components . together , the ensemble is designed to provide maximum protection to the warfighter against chemical and biological contaminants without negatively affecting the ability to perform mission tasks . the focus of our review was to map the flow of data associated with the procurement , inventory control , and payment for jslist . according to dod , for each jslist coat and trousers set they pay approximately $204 . dod began procuring jslist in fiscal year 1997 and expects to purchase about 4.4 million garments at a cost of about $1 billion over a 14-year period ending in fiscal year 2011 . according to dod , this amount includes the jslist procurement cost and a dla surcharge for services , such as clarifying requirements , developing contract specifications and negotiating production levels with the contractors , developing and maintaining delivery schedules , and storing jslist until issued to the military services . according to the jslist program office , by the end of fiscal year 2001 , dod had procured approximately 1.6 million jslist , and about 1.2 million had been issued to the military services . according to the joint service set - aside project office , the jslist are expected to last about 14 years . the joint service set - aside project office is responsible for testing jslist after 5 years in inventory , which represents the manufacturer's warranty period . he stated that he was not aware that jslist garments were being excessed and sold and acknowledged that dod does not have visibility over the jslist garments . he also stated that military service units were “clamoring” for jslist garments for training purposes . further , he stated that none of these garments should have been turned in to drmo . we suggested that he take action to terminate the sale of these garments . he indicated that he would initiate immediate action to do so . private sector companies , driven by today's globally competitive business environment , have developed innovative best business practices to cut costs and meet customer needs by streamlining their logistics operations . best business practices refer to the processes , practices , and systems identified in public and private organizations that performed exceptionally well and are widely recognized as improving an organization's performance and efficiency in specific areas . some of the most successful improvement efforts include a combination of practices that are focused on improving the entire logistics pipeline — an approach known as supply chain management . dod has acknowledged that best business practices of private industry offer opportunities for making significant improvements to its business operations . as evidenced by the information presented today , implementation of fundamental private sector supply chain management practices by dod would substantially improve it efficiency and effectiveness . our discussions with two leading - edge retail companies — sears and wal - mart — identified business practices that are vastly different than those employed by dod . unlike dod , which has a proliferation of nonintegrated systems , nonstandard data , extensive use of manual processes , and limited visibility over inventory , sears and wal - mart are at the other end of the spectrum .