i for more details. ) premium costs presented here are for single workers coverage . family coverage premiums increased by 43 percent between 1996 and 2003 — from an annual average of $6,732 to $9,654 . the real premium included both the employee's and employer's share . to control for the effect of inflation in health insurance premiums , dollars are reported in 2004 terms by using the bls consumer price index for medical care . inflation in medical care has been great , and using an all items cpi would overstate the growth in premium costs . some employees' deductibles and co - payments also increased during this period . the percentage of establishments offering insurance , the percentage of employees eligible , and the percentage of eligible employees enrolled ranged across all types of employers . this suggests that some employees were more likely to receive employer - sponsored health insurance than others ( see fig . for example , the percentage of employees who worked at small firms ( 1 to 9 employees ) offering health insurance was 46 percent compared with 99 percent for those in firms of 1,000 or more employees . the same was true for the percentage of employees eligible to participate in the health insurance plans offered by companies . for example , of those employed part - time , 32 percent were eligible while 89 percent of those who worked full - time were eligible . this was also the case for participation among those eligible . for most types of employers , over 75 percent of eligible employees enrolled in the company's health plan . this trend was true across firm sizes , for most industries , and union status . the exception to this trend was in retail where the enrollment rate was 67 percent and for part - time workers at 48 percent . the health insurance premium increases seen overall were true for every type of employer regardless of characteristics , such as firm size or industry . for each type , the average annual single worker premiums increased between 1996 and 2003 by at least 24 percent ( see fig . by 2003 , the average premium ranged between $3,445 and $4,278 , after adjusting for inflation . the mining industry experienced the largest increase over the time period , while premiums for employers and workers in the transportation and utilities industry increased the least . employees' shares of these premiums ranged between 12 percent and 21 percent . at the high end of the range were employees in the retail industry , which also had one of the largest declines in enrollment across the period examined . employee participation in retirement plans did not change significantly between 1990 and 2003 . roughly half of all workers participated in an employer - sponsored retirement plan , and closer to 60 percent of those who were full - time employees did so . however , there was a noticeable shift that occurred from defined benefit retirement plans to defined contribution plans ( see table 5 ) . employers who sponsor defined benefit retirement plans agree to make future payments during the employee's retirement .