partnership agreements . october 2002. www.nhtsa.dot.gov / people / injury / ems / pub3 / index.htm ( viewed july 2003 ) . rinehard , tammy a. , anna t. laszlo , and gwen o. briscoe . collaboration toolkit: how to build , fix , and sustain productive partnerships . a special report prepared at the request of u.s. department of justice , office of community oriented policing services . crs.uvm.edu / nnco / cd / collabh3.htm ( viewed july 2003 ) . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . you can print these documents in their entirety , including charts and other graphics . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . the list contains links to the full - text document files . to have gao e - mail this list to you every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to e - mail alerts” under the “order gao products” heading . august 29 , 2001. www.gsa.gov / portal / content / pubs_content.jsp ? contentoid=119122&conte nttype=1008 ( viewed july 2003 ) . collaborative leadership: how citizens and civic leaders can make a difference . san francisco: jossey - bass publishers , 1994 . gray , barbara , and eric trist . collaborating: finding common ground for multiparty problems . san francisco: jossey - bass publishers , 1989 . keller , b . breaking down the walls: collaboration in the public sector . gartner ( www.gartner.com ) , october 5 , 2001 . keller , b. , f. caldwell , and c. baum . mr. president , take down those e - government roadblocks . gartner ( www.gartner.com ) , march 2 , 2001 . mahoney , j . public sector: beware of incompatible partners . gartner ( www.gartner.com ) , september 18 , 2002 . mattessich , paul w. , marta murray - close , and barbara r. monsey . collaboration: what makes it work , 2nd ed . saint paul , minnesota: wilder publishing center , 2001 . peterson , k. determining your role in c - commerce relationships . gartner ( www.gartner.com ) , october 12 , 2001 . phelan , p. implementing best practices for collaborative processes . gartner ( www.gartner.com ) , october 22 , 2002 .