can affect humans ? horses , donkeys , mules , and goats usda identifies other domestic animal diseases of concern in federal regulations , including acute swine erysipelas ( affects swine ) , anthrax ( all domestic species ) , bluetongue ( all domestic species ) , chlamydiosis ( poultry ) , eastern equine encephalomyelistis ( horses ) , mycoplasma gallisepticum ( poultry ) , mycoplasma meleagridis ( poultry ) , mycoplasma synoviae ( poultry ) , salmonella enteritidis ( poultry ) , salmonella gallinarum ( poultry ) , salmonella pullorum ( poultry ) , scabies ( cattle ) , infectious salmon anemia , and spring viremia of carp . additional foreign animal diseases of concern identified by usda include equine viral arteritis ( horses , donkeys , mules , ponies , and zebra ) ; hendra ( horses ) ; nipah ( swine and horses ) ; rift valley fever ( cattle , sheep , and goats ) ; rinderpest ( cattle , sheep , and goats ) ; venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis ( all equine species ) ; and vesicular stomatitis ( swine , cattle , sheep , and goats ) . this appendix provides the names and affiliations of 32 academic , government , and other experts who , as members of our expert panel on nais , completed a web - based questionnaire from december 2006 to january 2007 regarding usda's implementation of nais . we also spoke with a select number of these experts regarding animal id and tracking technology , among other issues . we conducted the following survey as part of our review of usda's implementation of nais . we received a 100 percent response rate from a panel of 32 experts who filled out a web - based questionnaire in late december 2006 and early january 2007 . for presentation purposes in this appendix , we have combined the category “no expertise on topic” with “no answer” and the category “50% or less” with “51 to 60%.” however , when the experts filled out the questionnaire , those categories were not combined . the views expressed by the panel members do not necessarily represent the views of gao . what do you believe will be the percentage of premises registered for each sector of livestock production under the nais voluntary program ? what do you believe will be the percentage of animals identified ( as individuals or , where applicable , as a group ) for each species of animal under the nais voluntary program ? what do you believe will be the percentage of animals tracked for each sector of livestock production under the nais voluntary program ? the next four questions ask for your opinion on the participation levels in nais that are necessary for producers and animal health officials to respond quickly and effectively to animal disease events by tracing livestock animals throughout the production process . usda's draft nais user guide does not define the time period for rapid trace back . in your opinion , what time period defines a "rapid" trace back in an animal disease event ? what percentage of premises registered do you believe is necessary to achieve the nais program's goal of rapid and effective animal disease trace back ?