who are the consolidation stakeholders , and how will they be affected ? how have the stakeholders been involved in the decision , and how have their views been considered ? on balance , do stakeholders understand the rationale for consolidation ? what problems , if any , will be created ? we also interviewed current and former officials from the office of the secretary of transportation . to determine what we have previously identified as key practices for successful transitions that might be instructive , we reviewed our prior reports on key practices for mergers and organizational transformations and questions to consider for consolidations . for this prior work , we developed these key merger and transformation practices by convening a forum to identify and discuss useful practices and lessons learned from major private and public sector organizational mergers , acquisitions , and transformations ; interviewing knowledgeable officials ; reviewing relevant literature and agency documentation ; and reviewing the status of high risk issues . to identify key questions that federal agencies should consider when evaluating whether to consolidate physical infrastructure or management functions , we reviewed prior gao work that identified and reviewed relevant literature on public sector consolidations produced by academic institutions , professional associations , think tanks , news outlets , and various other organizations , and reviewed examples of agency consolidations . this information complemented our review of gao's extensive body of work on government reform . we conducted this performance audit from may 2017 to october 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in 1984 , the commercial space launch act gave dot the authority , among other things , to license and monitor the safety of commercial space launches and to promote the industry . executive order 12465 designated dot as the lead federal agency for enabling private - sector launch capability . the office of commercial space transportation and its responsibilities , which were originally within the office of the secretary of transportation , were transferred to faa in 1995 . the u.s. commercial space launch industry has achieved several milestones since 1984 . for example , in recent years spacex , a commercial space launch company , has successfully tested reusable elements of expendable launch vehicles and landed them back on land and on an off - shore landing vessel called a drone ship . therefore , if a decision were made to move the office , an implementation plan would be needed , consistent with our key mergers and transformation practices . implementing a large - scale organizational transformation requires the concentrated efforts of both leadership and employees to accomplish new organizational goals .