dod has not determined this . further , although dod has a number of systems for tracking medical conditions in theater , the current databases have not been modified to capture data on known preexisting conditions for this specific operation . for example , the joint medical workstation ( jmews ) provides medical treatment status and medical surveillance information , as well as tracks and reports patient location within a theater of operations and during evacuation from frontline medical units to stateside medical treatment facilities . the u.s. transportation command ( transcom ) utilizes the transcom regulating command and control evacuation system ( trac2es ) to document patient movements , such as medical evacuations . the joint patient tracking application ( jpta ) was initially designed for use within landstuhl regional medical center in germany as a way to manage operations enduring freedom and iraqi freedom patients . in 2004 , the services were directed by the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs to implement jpta at military treatment facilities in theater and the continental united states to improve patient tracking and management . the disease nonbattle injury ( dnbi ) rates for the services in operations enduring freedom and iraqi freedom are tracked in the dnbi database by the air force institute for operational health . we did not evaluate these systems since they do not distinguish care provided for preexisting medical conditions . although dod does not systematically develop or report information about the extent of care that was provided in theater to reserve component members for preexisting medical conditions , senior military medical officials who served in theater have provided examples of reserve component members who were deployed with preexisting medical conditions that could not be adequately addressed in theater . some officials told us that such treatments strained in theater medical capabilities and infrastructure . according to a senior military official in the surgeon's office of the commander in chief of the u.s. central command ( centcom ) , there were many instances of individuals , from all services , who deployed into the iraq and afghanistan theater of operations with conditions for which they should have been considered nondeployable . also , medical officials from both the army and navy cited examples of conditions seen in theater that should have rendered members nondeployable . among the examples cited were members with a history of heart attack , severe asthmatics ( the desert conditions were not suitable for these members ) , severe hypertension , a woman 4 months into chemotherapy for breast cancer , and a man who had received a kidney transplant 2 weeks prior to deploying . other examples included cases involving members deployed with sleep apnea requiring machines that are run by electricity , even though electricity was either unavailable or unpredictable . another soldier , we were told , who arrived in theater was diabetic and required an insulin pump for treatment . we were also told of a number of psychiatric patients who were suffering from conditions such as bipolar disorder who should not have been in the desert because the medications that they were taking caused them to sweat profusely .