however , that is not what we recommended . va subsequently implemented this recommendation . in june 2017 , the house appropriations committee expressed concern that there were geographic pockets in the country where veterans remain unserved , and that va had failed to meet its goal of ensuring that veterans have reasonable access to burial options . house report 115- 188 , to accompany a bill for the military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies appropriations act , 2018 , included a provision for us to examine and provide a report on rural veterans' access to national cemeteries . this report ( 1 ) describes va's plan for increasing reasonable access to burial options for veterans and ( 2 ) assesses va's progress in implementing its plan and any challenges experienced . for objective one , we reviewed applicable va and nca documents covering fiscal years 2011-2024 , such as strategic plans , annual budget proposals , and press releases on new veterans' cemeteries , to identify va and nca plans for expanding reasonable access to burial options for veterans . in addition , we reviewed nca's 5-year strategic and long - range plans and its plans of actions and milestones , as well as va annual performance plans . further , we interviewed knowledgeable nca officials to discuss the agency's strategy for increasing burial access , and whether nca has a plan to continually reexamine burial options and implement necessary changes . for objective two , we determined the implementation status of va's and nca's plans and evaluated whether timelines and goals had been met . specifically , we compared historical information on construction and project timeline changes from fiscal years 2011-2020 with the information outlined in nca's timeline and goals . we interviewed knowledgeable nca officials to gather information on the project timelines and status of nca's urban and rural initiative sites , as well as any challenges confronted in the implementation of the plans . we also gathered and reviewed project summary and cost - estimate information on nca's urban and rural initiatives from fiscal years 2011-2020 . we conducted an in - depth assessment of the cost - estimating policies and practices nca uses to calculate estimated costs for its urban and rural initiatives and other cemetery construction projects . specifically , we assessed va's 2011 manual for preparation of cost estimates and related documents for va facilities ( manual ) ; va's 2011 architect / engineer ( a / e ) submission requirements for national cemetery projects program guide pg 18-15 volume d ( guide ) ; and nca's construction program conceptual estimate worksheet ( worksheet ) , and we compared them with the 12- step cost - estimating process established in gao's cost estimating and assessment guide: best practices for developing and managing capital program costs ( cost guide ) . because nca's worksheet along with va's manual and guide collectively guide nca's cemetery project cost estimating , we refer to these three documents collectively as “nca's cost - estimating guidance” throughout the report . nca's cost - estimating guidance substantially met the step of “updating the estimate” in that it requires cost estimates to be regularly updated .