see figure 2 . other one - time purchases made with recovery act funds enhanced districts' capacity to provide services in the future , sometimes with anticipated long - term cost savings . in massachusetts , we visited two leas — newton public schools and new bedford public schools — that used idea , part b recovery act funds to provide or expand their services for students with special needs instead of paying more expensive schools or facilities to provide the alternative programs and services . lea officials in fairfield - suisun unified school district in california told us they used idea , part b recovery act funds to implement two initiatives they expected to lead to significant cost savings in the future . the first initiative involved partnering with the nearby university of the pacific to recruit recent speech pathology graduates . in exchange for externships and student loan stipends paid for with recovery act funds , the students committed to working in the district for 3 years upon graduation . these newly licensed therapists would be paid salaries around $45,000 per year , considerably less than the contracted therapists that cost the district over $100,000 per year . further , because of the 3-year commitment , officials stated the graduates were more likely to continue working in the district as permanent employees . officials estimated that this initiative could save them $800,000 in the 2011-2012 school year . the second initiative used idea , part b recovery act funds to start a public school for emotionally disturbed students who previously attended non - public schools at the district's expense . according to the officials , remodeling the old school building was both cost - effective and programmatically effective , since non - public schools for emotionally disturbed students could cost up to $85,000 per student , with additional costs for occupational and speech therapy if needed . the new public school costs from $25,000 to $35,000 per student , according to district officials . additionally , officials at hinds community college in mississippi used sfsf education stabilization funds to invest in energy conservation . specifically , the college contracted with an organization to help educate students and staff on energy conservation efforts , such as turning off lights and computers . the officials stated that they saved approximately $1 million on utilities in fiscal year 2010 , which offset the need to increase tuition . compared to the year prior to receiving recovery act funds , a large majority of leas reported being able to , with the use of recovery act funds , maintain or increase the level of service they could provide to students ( see table 1 ) . lea officials in the center point - urbana community school district in iowa told us that recovery act funds allowed the district to maintain its core curriculum , provide professional development to instructional staff , and maintain the collection of assessment data that helps them align the district's curriculum with the state's core curriculum . lea officials in the water valley school district in mississippi stated that sfsf funds allowed the district to maintain its reform efforts because they allowed students greater access to teachers .