( see fig . osha plans to expand the number of voluntary compliance program participants and its compliance assistance activities and has established strategic goals for doing so . according to osha officials , the agency's fiscal year 2004 goals include the addition of 45 new vpp worksites and 50 vpp challenge worksites , as well as 50 new strategic partnerships and 75 new alliances . furthermore , osha officials have set a target goal of increasing the number of vpp worksites eight - fold — from 1,000 worksites to 8,000 worksites . although it is difficult to quantify , the voluntary compliance programs appear to have extended the agency's influence . for example , through the agency's enforcement program , osha and its state partners conducted almost 96,000 inspections in 2002 — reaching no more than and probably fewer than 96,000 worksites . the vpp and strategic partnership program in 2003 directly reached some 6,000 employers , who may not have otherwise been selected for osha inspections . these two programs , together with the state consultation program , covered approximately 2.3 million of the more than 100 million employees under osha's oversight . additionally , although osha may not have direct contact with an employer as part of its alliance program or training and outreach activities , employers are reached indirectly through the dissemination of safety and health information , which , according to our discussions with alliance participants , has helped employees learn about workplace safety and health issues . the resources osha devotes to its voluntary compliance strategies consume a significant and growing portion of the agency's limited resources . in fiscal year 2003 , osha executed its numerous programs under a $450 million budget . the agency spent $126 million on its voluntary compliance programs and compliance assistance activities — approximately 28 percent of its total budget — and about $254 million , about 56 percent of its budget , on enforcement activities . the percentage of resources dedicated to voluntary compliance programs and compliance assistance activities has increased by approximately 8 percent since 1996 , when these programs represented about 20 percent of the agency's budget . during this same period , the proportion of resources osha dedicated to its enforcement activities fell by 6 percent , from about 63 percent to about 56 percent of the agency's total budget , although the total funds devoted to enforcement have remained fairly constant because of increases in osha's total budget over this period . in addition , enforcement efforts , as measured by the number of inspections , have remained constant or increased slightly each year , according to agency officials . while it cannot be determined that resources were directly redistributed from enforcement to compliance assistance activities , funding for osha's other programs remained relatively stable , with only small increases or decreases in funding since 1996 ( see fig . notwithstanding their voluntary nature , all of osha's voluntary compliance programs require agency oversight to ensure that participants comply with requirements or agreements and this growing administrative responsibility requires concerted agency resources . for example: to certify a worksite as a vpp worksite requires a comprehensive on - site review that usually lasts 1 week and involves approximately three to five osha personnel .