rulemaking . since july 2016 , cfpb's market - monitoring efforts have informed certain rulemaking efforts . for example , markets offices analysis of the small - dollar lending market informed cfpb's november 2017 payday rule , according to staff and the proposed and final rules . staff said they had found that some borrowers were caught in a cycle of using payday loan products without the ability to repay the loans . under the final rule , lenders for certain loans must reasonably determine up front that borrowers can afford to make the payments on their loans without needing to re - borrow within 30 days , while still meeting their basic living and other expenses . in addition , cfpb's november 2016 prepaid accounts rule reflected market - monitoring information and other research that staff helped collect on prepaid accounts . the rule incorporated findings from cfpb's 2014 analysis of prepaid account agreements , which cfpb conducted to understand the potential costs and benefits of extending existing regulatory provisions — such as error resolution protections — to such agreements . further , cfpb's market intelligence reports we reviewed from 2017 and 2018 reflected markets offices staff's communication with industry regarding a debt - collection rule — a topic that has been on cfpb's public rulemaking agenda since 2013 , based in part on market - monitoring findings . industry supervision and policy positions . markets offices staff's market - monitoring findings have informed cfpb's efforts to supervise institutions and communicate policy positions to industry participants . staff assist the supervision , enforcement , and fair lending division in its annual risk - based prioritization process . in 2018 , for example , staff provided information on market size and risk for more than a dozen market areas , which helped the supervision division prioritize its coverage of those market areas in its examination schedule . coordination with other regulators . cfpb engages with the federal prudential regulators and other federal and state agencies to inform its routine market - monitoring efforts . this engagement can occur through mechanisms such as working groups , task forces , and information - sharing agreements . for example , cfpb is a member of a working group of federal housing agencies , whose members share market intelligence and discuss risks they have observed in the mortgage markets . markets offices staff also receive quarterly , publicly available bank and credit union call report data through the federal financial institutions examination council and the national credit union administration , with which it has information - sharing agreements . cfpb has supplemented its routine monitoring by conducting targeted research and data collection to inform rulemaking efforts , meet statutory reporting requirements , and learn more about a particular market for consumer financial products . as noted earlier , the dodd - frank act authorizes cfpb to collect certain data from covered persons and service providers . since july 2016 , to support bureau rulemaking efforts , markets offices staff have augmented their routine monitoring with targeted use of supervisory data collected through cfpb's examinations of covered persons and service providers . the research , markets , and regulations division has a formal information - sharing agreement with cfpb's supervision , enforcement , and fair lending division .