see figure 1 . to make these determinations , ids considers hundreds of factors about a case while carrying out two activities that facilitate closures , prioritization , and routing: modeling is a statistical process that analyzes the results of previously closed cases to predict likely case outcomes . see appendix iii for data on nonfiler cases for taxpayers who failed to file tax returns . table 2 shows the mix of closed cases by inventory type . about nine percent were in one of acs's five special inventories , which align with irs collection program priorities . about one - third of cases were from the model priority inventories , in which irs predicts the case has a certain potential to result in full payment or an installment agreement , among others , and the remaining cases were in acs's general inventory . broken out by type of taxpayer , about 60 percent of the balance due and nonfiler cases acs closed in fiscal year 2014 were business taxpayers . these taxpayers included ( 1 ) business entities , such as corporations ; ( 2 ) businesses which failed to file or remit fully their employment taxes ; and ( 3 ) individuals with business income or losses . of the 3.52 million cases closed in or transferred out of acs in fiscal year 2014 , about 1.76 million cases ( 50 percent ) were either resolved by irs when the taxpayer paid the tax liability in full , or established an installment agreement to pay the liability partially or in full , or when irs secured the delinquent return . irs collected almost $6.2 billion in delinquent revenue for the federal government from those cases closed in fiscal year 2014 . these inventories contain cases that irs predicts as having a probability of resulting in full payment or installment agreements , among other outcomes . to make this determination , acs uses the predictive model scores generated by ids . to determine which internal control standards were most relevant , we utilized our internal control management and evaluation tool , in conjunction with observations based on our preliminary audit work , to select the standards that most closely related to acs activities . we then focused our assessment of acs internal controls around our selected standards by interviewing irs officials and reviewing available documentation . to determine irs's definition of fairness as it applies to collection activities , we reviewed the acs procedures and process for case prioritization and selection . furthermore , we surveyed relevant industry and institutional sources , and determined that there is no standard definition of fairness in the context of tax collection specifically — or even tax administration more generally — to which irs could appeal in lieu of having its own internally - generated definition of fairness within the collection program . to determine whether there are procedures in place to monitor , evaluate , and review the acs prioritization process periodically , we reviewed similar documentation mentioned above . we also interviewed relevant irs officials concerning their understanding of the mission , objectives , and internal controls of the collection program and acs , and about the extent to which procedures exist to monitor acs case prioritization and selection .