compliance . a description of the projected reporting , recordkeeping and other compliance requirements of the proposed rule , including an estimate of the classes of small entities which will be subject to the requirement and the type of professional skills necessary for preparation of the report or record . c. conflicting rules . an identification of all relevant federal rules which may duplicate , overlap or conflict with the proposed rule . d. alternatives . significant alternatives to the proposed rule that minimize any significant economic impact on small entities and that minimize increases in the cost of credit for small entities . e. cost of credit . any projected increase in the cost of credit for small entities . f. other topics . any additional topics related to the rulemaking . representatives had varying recall about the specific topics of the panel discussions and their views about them ( the panel meetings were held 2 – 4 years before our interviews ) . therefore , their responses should be viewed with caution . more representatives were able to recall discussions about compliance ( question 15b ) and alternatives ( question 15d ) . of the 57 small entity representatives , 38 mentioned that there was not sufficient time for discussion for at least one of the six topics at panel meetings compared to 2 who said there was time to discuss all topics . figure 3 illustrates the small entity representatives' responses . furthermore , 19 stated that at least one topic important to their business or industry was not discussed during the panel meeting ( question 16 ) . for example , one representative noted that they did not discuss how the rule would impact costs for consumers . cfpb officials stated that at the end of each panel meeting representatives were given a final opportunity to bring up any issues they believed were not focused on or given enough attention . when asked how cfpb's conduct of the panel meetings could be improved ( question 17 ) , 19 representatives suggested more time or additional meetings would improve the process . a majority of small entity representatives that we interviewed said that cfpb at least partially reported their views accurately ( question 19 ) and appeared to at least partially take them into consideration during rulemaking ( question 21 ) . of the 57 small entity representatives we interviewed , 25 stated their views were accurately characterized in the panel report . for instance , one said that she thought cfpb represented her views verbatim . another stated she was glad to see her written comments included in the report . twelve representatives stated the characterization of their views in the panel report was partially accurate . b . what outreach did cfpb make to you prior to its sbrefa panel ? did cfpb's outreach efforts prepare you to provide constructive input during the sbrefa panel meeting ? cfpb must consider the sbrefa panel report as it develops its proposed rulemaking . how were cfpb's outreach efforts constructive , or not constructive ? did you submit written comments to the sbrefa panel ? did cfpb consider your voiced and written views , concerns , and suggestions in its rulemaking ?