xii ) . in our 2002 report , we found that sec's enforcement function was strained because of resource challenges and an increased workload ; however , as a result of several high - profile corporate failures , and financial reporting fraud , among other things , the sarbanes - oxley act authorized a 65 percent increase in sec's 2003 appropriations , which directed the additional funding to be used in certain areas . specifically , no fewer than 200 positions were to be used to strengthen existing program areas , including enforcement . we then averaged these impacts for each reason . while restatement announcements involving related - party transactions , which can revolve around revenue issues , appeared to have the largest negative impact , this result was not statistically different from zero . this category accounted for a relatively small number of restatements , and the results were heavily influenced by three announcements that had sizeable market reactions . in contrast to our previous report , in which positive responses to two large restatements attributed to restructuring , asset impairment , and inventory issues led to market gains in that category , restatements made for these reasons in 2002 – 2005 represented about 29 percent of the market - adjusted market capitalization losses . these reasons accounted for about 11 percent of the cases we analyzed , and the median size of a company restating for these reasons was $504 million . the effect of restatements announced for revenue recognition issues on market capitalization initially appeared weaker than in our previous report . restatements involving revenue recognition accounted for almost 20 percent of the cases , but only around 10 percent of the market - adjusted market capitalization losses . the median size of a company restating for this reason was $321 million ; thus it appears that companies announcing restatements for revenue recognition reasons tended to be smaller . however , when adjusted by the size of the restating company , restatement announcements involving revenue recognition issues ( more than many other reasons ) resulted in an average loss that represented a larger percentage of a restating company's market capitalization . cost - or expense - related restatements had a greater effect on market capitalization than in our previous report , and were distinguished from restatements for other reasons in three ways . first by dollars , cost - or expense - related restatement announcements accounted for more of the immediate declines in market capitalization than other reasons over our analysis period . more specifically , cost - or expense - related restatement announcements accounted for $15.2 billion , or about 42 percent , of the $36.5 billion in total losses ( market - adjusted ) over our analysis period . this decline was driven in large part by the january 9 , 2004 , restatement announcements by shell transport and trading company , plc , and royal dutch petroleum company , which represented a decline in estimated market capitalization attributed to the cost - or expense category of over $4 billion . second , when measured by median market capitalization , companies announcing restatements involving cost or expense issues were the largest .