labeling . officials within the division of labeling review are responsible for ensuring that the proposed labeling language in the generic drug application , including the drug's prescribing information , matches the language found in the labeling of the corresponding brand - name drug . pharmaceutical quality . officials within the office of pharmaceutical quality have responsibility for ensuring the quality of drug products and assessing all drug manufacturing facilities , including both domestic and foreign . officials within this office assess the risk of toxic substances or bacterial content in the drug , among other things . all generic drug applications are reviewed by primary reviewers and secondary reviewers . primary reviewers assess the application to ensure that the documentation meets regulatory requirements in their specific disciplines . for example , primary reviewers within the office of pharmaceutical quality evaluate documentation related to the proposed drug manufacturing process to ensure that the process produces quality drugs consistently . secondary reviewers ensure the quality and consistency of primary reviewers' assessments and the clarity of communication to applicants . during the first review cycle , fda communicates with applicants when issues arise during its review that may prevent the agency from approving the generic drug application . this communication is typically made through the issuance of information requests or discipline review letters: information requests . information requests are letters sent to applicants to request clarification or additional information that is needed or would be helpful for fda to complete its review . these letters may be sent by any review discipline and can be sent at any point after the office of generic drugs accepts the generic drug application for review . discipline review letters . discipline review letters are letters issued by each review discipline at about the mid - point of the review cycle to identify possible deficiencies . fda officials said they aim to issue these letters no later than 6 months into the first review cycle . in response to these letters , applicants can submit additional information for fda to consider before the end of the review cycle . after fda's three review disciplines complete their review of an application and any additional information the applicant has submitted in response to information requests and discipline review letters , the agency issues an action letter that informs the applicant of whether the application is approved , marking the end of the first review cycle and the end of fda's review if the application is approved . there are three types of action letters: approval letter . issued when the agency has concluded its review of a generic drug application and the applicant is authorized to commercially market the drug . tentative approval letter . issued when the agency has completed its review of an application and has concluded that the generic drug application is sufficient , but patents or other exclusivities prevent approval . a tentative approval letter does not allow the applicant to market the generic drug . complete response letter . issued at the completion of the review of an application where deficiencies remain at the end of the review cycle . the complete response letter describes any deficiencies that must be corrected in order for the application to be approved .