sec . training range sustainment plan , global status of resources and training system , and training range inventory . ( a ) plan required — — — ( 1 ) the secretary of defense shall develop a comprehensive plan for using existing authorities available to the secretary of defense and the secretaries of the military departments to address training constraints caused by limitations on the use of military lands , marine areas , and airspace that are available in the united states and overseas for training of the armed forces . ( 2 ) as part of the preparation of the plan , the secretary of defense shall conduct the following: ( a ) an assessment of current and future training range requirements of the armed forces . ( b ) an evaluation of the adequacy of current department of defense resources ( including virtual and constructive training assets as well as military lands , marine areas , and airspace available in the united states and overseas ) to meet those current and future training range requirements . ( 3 ) the plan shall include the following: ( a ) proposals to enhance training range capabilities and address any shortfalls in current department of defense resources identified pursuant to the assessment and evaluation conducted under paragraph ( 2 ) . ( b ) goals and milestones for tracking planned actions and measuring progress . ( c ) projected funding requirements for implementing planned actions . ( d ) designation of an office in the office of the secretary of defense and in each of the military departments that will have lead responsibility for overseeing implementation of the plan . ( 4 ) at the same time as the president submits to congress the budget for fiscal year 2004 , the secretary of defense shall submit to congress a report describing the progress made in implementing this subsection , including — — — ( a ) the plan developed under paragraph ( 1 ) ; ( b ) the results of the assessment and evaluation conducted under paragraph ( 2 ) ; and ( c ) any recommendations that the secretary may have for legislative or regulatory changes to address training constraints identified pursuant to this section . ( 5 ) at the same time as the president submits to congress the budget for each of fiscal years 2005 through 2008 , the secretary shall submit to congress a report describing the progress made in implementing the plan and any additional actions taken , or to be taken , to address training constraints caused by limitations on the use of military lands , marine areas , and airspace . ( b ) readiness reporting improvement — — — not later than june 30 , 2003 , the secretary of defense , using existing measures within the authority of the secretary , shall submit to congress a report on the plans of the department of defense to improve the global status of resources and training system to reflect the readiness impact that training constraints caused by limitations on the use of military lands , marine areas , and airspace have on specific units of the armed forces .