( see fig . for nutrition standards , the regulations include minimum and maximum calorie levels for lunches and require that lunches do not include trans fat and contain reduced amounts of sodium and saturated fat . usda has established these new requirements over the last few years . in the 2012-2013 school year , as many of the new nutrition standards for lunches were implemented , both usda and the media reported that states , sfas , school officials , parents , and students raised issues about the lunch changes . in june 2013 and january 2014 , we reported to congress on challenges sfas encountered in implementing the lunch changes and recommended that usda make modifications to some of the new lunch requirements and take steps to improve program oversight . subsequently , additional nutrition requirements for lunches have taken effect , as well as new nutrition requirements for breakfasts and competitive foods . accordingly , you asked us to review the current status of local implementation of the school meals and competitive food nutrition requirements . this report assesses: ( 1 ) recent trends in school meals participation ; ( 2 ) challenges that sfas reported they continued to face in implementing the new requirements for school lunch and school breakfast ; ( 3 ) challenges sfas and schools reported they have faced during their first year implementing the new requirements for competitive foods ; and ( 4 ) usda's efforts to assist with implementation of the new requirements for school lunch , school breakfast , and competitive foods . for this study , we gathered information through several methods . first , we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and guidance ; analyzed national school meals participation data from school years 2000-2001 through 2013-2014 ; and interviewed usda officials . second , we reviewed implementation in eight school districts across the country and talked with their state agency officials who have knowledge of the experiences of multiple school districts across their states . during these interviews , we collected information about lunch and breakfast participation trends ; challenges , if any , implementing the new meal content requirements ; challenges , if any , implementing new nutrition standards for competitive foods ; and usda and state assistance with the changes . to select the schools we visited in each district , we worked with the sfa director to ensure the schools included students of differing grade levels . this allowed us to observe any relevant differences in their reactions to the new meal and competitive food requirements . in each school we visited , we observed breakfast and lunch service , as well as competitive food sales — including students' food selections , consumption , and plate waste — and , when feasible , interviewed students and school staff to obtain their thoughts on the changes . we also interviewed the eight state child nutrition program directors overseeing these districts to gather information on statewide lunch and breakfast participation trends ; sfa challenges , if any ; and usda and state assistance with implementation of the changes . contacting these districts and states a second time provides a short - term longitudinal perspective on challenges related to implementation of the phased - in changes .