some of those steps relate to environmental justice issues . we found that epa's deviations were caused , in part , by pressure from the office of management and budget to reduce industry's tri reporting burden by the end of december 2006 . throughout this process , senior epa management has the authority to depart from the guidelines . nevertheless , we identified several significant differences between the guidelines and the process that epa followed in developing the tri rule . specifically: epa did not follow a key element of its guidelines that is intended to identify and selection the options that best achieve the goal of the rulemaking . specifically , an internal workgroup was charged with identifying and assessing options to reduce tri reporting burden on industry and providing epa management with a set of options from which management makes the final selection . however , in this case epa management selected an altogether different option than the ones identified and assessed by the tri workgroup . the tri workgroup identified three options from a larger list of possible options that had been identified through a public stakeholder process , and the workgroup had scoped out these options' costs , benefits , and feasibility . the first two options allowed facilities to use form a in lieu of form r for pbt chemicals , provided the facility had no releases to the environment . the third option would have created a new form , in lieu of form r , for facilities to report “no significant change” if their releases changed little from the previous year . under this element of epa's guidelines , senior management then selects the option ( s ) that best achieve the rule's goals . however , based on our review of documents from the june 2005 options selection briefing for the administrator and subsequent interviews with senior epa officials , epa deviated from this process . specifically , it appears that the office of management and budget ( omb ) suggested an alternate option — increasing the form a eligibility for non - pbt chemicals from 500 to 5,000 pounds — as a way of providing what omb considered significant burden reduction . yet the tri workgroup had previously dropped this option from further consideration because of its impact on the tri . in addition to reviving this burden reduction option , the administrator directed epa staff to expedite the rule development process after the briefing in order to meet a commitment to omb to reduce the tri reporting burden by the end of december 2006 . second , we found problems with the extent to which the agency sought input from internal stakeholders . epa's rule development guidelines are designed to ensure cross - agency participation until the rule is completed . for example , a key step in the guidelines provides for the draft rule and supporting analyses to be circulated for final agency review , when epa's internal and regional offices should have discussed with senior management whether they concurred with the rule . we expect to publish the final results of our evaluation later this month .