undetermined . in about 28 percent of all perm errors over the 3-year period , reviewers were unable to determine whether or not a beneficiary was eligible for medicaid because the case record lacked or contained insufficient documentation . the perm manual outlines the due diligence a state must take before citing the case as “undetermined.” according to cms , specific corrective action strategies implemented by the states to reduce these types of eligibility errors have included leveraging technology and available databases to obtain eligibility verification information without client contact ; providing additional caseworker training , particularly in areas determined by the perm review to be error prone ; and providing additional eligibility policy resources through a consolidated manual and web - based training . in addition to the state - specific caps that are developed in response to the perm findings , cms has reported on other initiatives to lower error rates in hhs's fiscal year 2011 afr . for example , to help address the insufficient documentation errors found in medical reviews , cms reported that it increased its efforts to reach out to providers and to obtain medical records to help resolve this problem . cms also reported that it gives states more information on the potential impact of these documentation errors and more time for the states to work with providers to resolve them . table 1 outlines cms's reported overall strategies to reduce improper payments and strategies targeted at specific perm error types . although all states developed caps that were generally responsive to the payment errors identified through perm reviews , we were unable to assess the caps' impact on the improper payment error rate because of limited comparative data between perm measurement cycle years . state caps did not always address errors identified during perm reviews that did not have a payment error amount associated with them . specifically , we identified three types of these nonpayment errors through our analysis of the perm process that are not consistently addressed in all state caps — negative case errors , deficiencies , and technical errors . a negative case error occurs when a state incorrectly denies an application or terminates eligibility . a deficiency is generally defined as an action or inaction on the part of the state or the provider that could have resulted in a dollar error but did not . a technical error is an error where the eligibility caseworker did not act in accordance with state or federal policy , but this did not result in an erroneous eligibility determination or result in a difference between the amount that was paid and the amount that should have been paid . cms's perm manual requires that states test negative cases as part of their eligibility reviews . however , it does not clearly require that states address negative case errors in their caps . while a payment error rate is not calculated because there are no payments associated with negative cases , a negative case error rate is calculated to estimate the percentage of the decisions in which eligibility was incorrectly denied or terminated .