federal medical stations . aspr placed federal medical stations in tents in front of hospitals in puerto rico after hurricane maria made landfall to assist with relieving the hospitals' emergency departments . federal medical stations are to have a 3-day supply of medical and pharmaceutical resources to sustain up to 250 stable , primary , or chronic care patients . because the entire island of puerto rico was affected by hurricane maria , aspr implemented a “hub and spoke” strategy for the first time — a system to deliver medical care over affected areas' population centers — according to aspr officials . under this strategy , aspr designated san juan's centro medico hospital as the “hub” of activity with six “spokes” delivering care to the island's population centers , and placed federal medical stations in tents in front of each hospital , including the “hub.” usns comfort deployed to puerto rico to respond to hurricane maria the usns comfort is a seagoing medical treatment facility that had more than 850 medical and support staff embarked as part of the public health and medical services response to hurricane maria in puerto rico , according to department of defense ( dod ) officials . dod officials stated that approximately 2,000 patients in puerto rico were provided care on the usns comfort during the course of its 45-day relief mission that began in early october 2017 . further , fema's esf#8 statement of work for aspr states that hhs should provide appropriate personnel at emergency operations centers near disaster sites to lead an esf#8 response . hhs officials maintained that the department is not required to address all capabilities in the esf#8 statement of work , as the actual response provided by hhs depends on other factors , such as resource availability . emergency operations center an emergency operations center is a physical location where responders , including federal and state / territory responders , as well as nongovernmental responders , can meet to coordinate information and resources to support incident management ( on - scene operations ) during a response . according to department of homeland security documentation , decision makers gather at emergency operations centers to ensure they receive the most current information , which allows for improved communication and decision - making during a response . during the initial weeks after the hurricanes , aspr liaison officers were not always stationed at the emergency operations centers in st. thomas and st. croix . instead , the liaisons rotated between the emergency operations center , hospital , and airport on each island to manage patient evacuations , or stayed at the hospital , according to aspr officials . this led to confusion with regard to the esf#8 response status on the ground , according to fema , dod , and territory health officials . for example , fema officials stated that when they needed information on patients' health needs and evacuation status , they had to spend time trying to locate an aspr liaison officer to obtain it . the fema officials then had to relay this information to dod , territory health officials , and hospital representatives who were making numerous requests for this information to fema in aspr's absence at the centers .