risks here are twofold . first , if a single , monolithic process is used for every service acquisition regardless of size , sensitivity , or type , it could be overkill for some transactions and insufficient for others . second , allowing local buying activities to operate independent of organizational standards and processes would impair or defeat an organization's ability to achieve desired aggregate goals or outcomes . organizations also need basic , reliable data on how service dollars are being spent and the capabilities of the workforce in place to acquire and manage those services . company officials who were successful with improving service acquisition management informed us it was critical to define the relevant types of information that were required and then develop the appropriate data systems to collect and provide reliable spending data . such data enable senior managers to know not only the current state of service acquisition , but how far it is from the desired end state . while the type of information may vary depending on the organization and the types of services acquired , basic spend analysis data should include information and trends related to the type of services being acquired ; the number of suppliers for a specific service the organization is using ; the amount the organization is spending for that service , in total and with each supplier ; and the units in the organization that are acquiring the services . we have previously reported that several civilian agencies have used this approach to leverage their buying power , reduce costs , and better manage suppliers of goods and services . for example , we reported in september 2004 that the departments of agriculture and veterans affairs , among others , had launched or expanded spend analysis efforts and in turn realized savings ranging from $1.8 million to $394 million on related acquisitions . similarly , we noted in 2005 that the department of homeland security identified 15 commodity areas as having the potential to leverage the department's buying power . in fiscal year 2004 , four commodity councils reported approximately $14.1 million in cost savings and avoidances . some councils encountered difficulties due to a shortage of comprehensive data upon which to draw an accurate and detailed picture of what was being spent on certain commodities over time , thereby preventing them from taking full advantage of their strategic sourcing and spend analysis efforts . equally important and necessary is for an organization to have a workforce that is manned at the appropriate levels and equipped with the right skills and abilities . to do this , a comprehensive , data - driven workforce analysis must be performed in conjunction with establishing the corporate vision and goals . an organization cannot fully understand what skills and staffing commitments are necessary at each organizational level to meet service acquisition requirements until it understands where it wants to go and how it plans to get there . once information on spending and workforce capabilities is known and understood , organizations can be more strategic in planning and managing service acquisition .