gao - 12-357 . washington , d.c.: april 6 , 2012 . table 2 lists these agencies . we followed up with these agencies to determine why they did not submit the required information and received one response from the national endowment for the arts as to why it had not conducted an inventory review . an agency official told us the national endowment for the arts did not conduct a fiscal year 2010 inventory review because it did not have any service contracts for special interest functions as defined in omb's guidance . based on the reports submitted to omb by 40 agencies , we observed that thirty - four agencies reported on the number of product and service codes reviewed and the associated obligations for these product and service codes . the number of product and service codes and obligations reviewed varied widely . for example , gsa reviewed 4 product and service codes , while hhs reviewed 31 codes . omb staff expected variance because agencies were directed to select service codes that warranted the agency's increased management attention or posed an increased risk of workforce imbalances . twenty - five agencies reported on the number of contracts they reviewed ; however , omb did not require agencies to provide this information . the number of contracts reviewed ranged from one contract by the federal labor relations authority to more than 2,000 contracts by the department of the interior . as shown in figure 2 , the majority of the agencies reviewed less than 50 contracts . more than a third of the 25 agencies , however , did not provide enough context in their reports for us to determine the percentage of contracts they reviewed , or the percentage of obligations that the selected contracts represented . this information would provide an indication of the extent to which agencies reviewed their inventories and context that would be important for oversight purposes . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . section 743 of the 2010 consolidated appropriations act directed gao to report on the second annual service contract inventory that civilian agencies were required to submit to the office of management and budget ( omb ) by december 31 , 2011 . to satisfy the mandate , we assessed civilian agencies' efforts to ( 1 ) compile their fiscal year 2011 inventories and ( 2 ) review and report on their fiscal year 2010 inventories . to assess civilian agencies' efforts to compile their fiscal year 2011 inventories , we reviewed the act and omb guidance to determine what data elements were required to be included in the service contract inventories . in addition , we obtained and reviewed available civilian agency inventories to determine whether they contained data elements required by omb guidance . we also reviewed the proposed federal acquisition regulation ( far ) rule on service contract inventories and interviewed staff from omb to determine the status of efforts to collect all required inventory data elements .