chp . the u.s. insular areas of american samoa , cnmi , and guam are located in the pacific ocean , between 4,100 and 6,000 miles from the u.s. mainland . usvi is located about 1,000 miles southeast of miami in the caribbean sea , as shown in figure 1 . according to u.s. census bureau data for 2000 , the population of the u.s. insular areas ranges from about 57,000 in american samoa , to about 155,000 in guam . residents born in cnmi , guam , and usvi are citizens of the united states . residents born in american samoa are nationals of the united states , but may become naturalized u.s. citizens . the population of both american samoa and cnmi , which control their own immigration , included significant percentages of people who were foreign nationals . according to u.s. census bureau data for 2000 , median household incomes in the four insular areas ranged from less than half of the u.s. median household income of almost $41,000 for american samoa to nearly equal for guam , as shown in table 1 . the percentage of individuals in poverty ranged from a low in guam of 23 to a high in american samoa of 61 . guam's 23 percent is nearly twice the rate of the continental u.s. rate of 12 percent . while the united states exercises sovereignty over the insular areas , each administers its local government functions through popularly elected governors . as shown in table 2 , american samoa and cnmi are self - governed under locally adopted constitutions . guam and usvi have not adopted local constitutions and remain under organic acts approved by congress . because each of the insular areas is an unincorporated territory , its residents — although they have many of the rights of citizens of the 50 states — cannot vote in national elections and do not have voting representation in the final approval of legislation by the full congress . the insular areas receive substantial amounts in federal grants from a variety of federal agencies , as shown in table 3 . recipients that expend $500,000 or more a year in federal awards under more than one federal program are required by the single audit act to undergo a single audit . single audits are audits of the recipient organization — the government in the case of the insular areas — that focus on the recipient's internal controls and its compliance with laws and regulations governing federal awards . as nonfederal entities expending more than $500,000 a year in federal awards , the insular areas are required to submit single audit reports each year to comply with the single audit act . one of the objectives of the act is to promote sound financial management , including effective internal controls , with respect to federal awards administered by nonfederal entities . single audits also provide key information about the federal grantee's financial management and reporting . recipient organizations are required by the act to submit their single audits reports to the federal audit clearinghouse ( fac ) .