class i gaming is within the exclusive jurisdiction of the tribes . class ii gaming includes bingo , games similar to bingo , and certain card games . class iii gaming includes all other types of games , including slot machines , craps , and roulette . both tribes and the federal government have a role in class ii and class iii gaming . class iii gaming is also subject to state regulation to the extent specified in compacts between tribes and states that allow such gaming to occur . compacts are agreements between a tribe and state that establish the terms for how a tribe's class iii gaming activities will be operated and regulated , among other things . the secretary of the interior ( secretary ) approves compacts and must publish a notice in the federal register before they go into effect . igra also created the national indian gaming commission ( commission ) within the department of the interior ( interior ) to regulate class ii and oversee class iii indian gaming . my testimony today highlights the key findings of our june 2015 report on indian gaming . specifically , i will discuss ( 1 ) the review process that interior uses to help ensure that tribal - state compacts comply with igra ; ( 2 ) how states and selected tribes regulate indian gaming ; ( 3 ) the commission's authority to regulate indian gaming ; and ( 4 ) the commission's efforts to ensure tribes' compliance with igra and commission regulations . for our june 2015 report , we examined igra and relevant federal regulations and policies , including interior regulations and documentation on its compact review process , as well as commission regulations , policies , and guidance on its regulation of indian gaming . we also analyzed tribal - state compacts in effect through fiscal year 2014 and various commission data corresponding to the commission's oversight activities for fiscal years 2005 and 2014 to the extent these data were available and reliable based on their sources . for example , for fiscal years 2011 to 2014 , we analyzed commission data on site visits and reviewed documentation related to a random , nongeneralizable sample of 50 site visits to indian gaming operations ; for fiscal years 2005 to 2014 , we analyzed publicly available information on enforcement actions taken by the commission chair . we also interviewed interior and commission officials about their roles in regulating and overseeing indian gaming . over 17 percent ( 71 of 406 ) of class iii indian gaming operations are located in these seven states , accounting for about 25 percent of gross gaming revenue in fiscal year 2013 . however , commission regulations establishing minimum internal control standards , including standards for class iii gaming , that were issued before the ruling were not struck down by the court or withdrawn by the commission .