rule implementation . fsma authorized and encouraged fda to leverage states , localities , tribes , and territories in conducting examinations , testing , and investigations under fsma rules . for certain rules , fsma mandated that fda coordinate implementation . regulator training . fsma directed fda to administer training and education programs for state , local , tribal , and territorial food safety officials relating to the regulatory responsibilities and policies established by fsma . you asked us to review issues pertaining to fda's coordination with nonfederal agencies on food safety , particularly in relation to fsma . this report examines — for the rules on produce , human food , and animal food — the extent to which fda has ( 1 ) met its regulatory consultation responsibilities in developing the rules ; ( 2 ) developed plans to coordinate implementation of the rules ; and ( 3 ) developed and administered plans for training regulators on the rules . to address our objectives , we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations , including fsma and the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act , that prescribe fda's coordination with nonfederal agencies on the fsma - mandated rules on produce , human food , and animal food . we also reviewed other federal law and policy that prescribe fda's regulatory consultation requirements , including hhs's tribal consultation policy , as well as our past work on key features and issues to consider when implementing collaborative mechanisms . we reviewed relevant documentation , such as transcripts of public meetings regarding the rules ; the text of the proposed , supplemental , and final rules , including the rule preambles and relevant documents referenced in each of the rules ; and fda documents related to rule development , implementation , and training , such as implementation and training plans . to obtain the perspectives of nonfederal officials on fda's rulemaking , implementation , and training efforts , we took three steps . first , we reviewed all public comments from state , local , tribal , and territorial governments , and from associations representing those entities , that were submitted in response to relevant fda rulemaking dockets . we conducted a content analysis of these comments to identify themes related to coordination challenges faced and opportunities for improvement . second , we interviewed representatives of selected associations of state , local , tribal , and territorial food safety officials to obtain their views on the identified challenges and opportunities , as well as their views on steps taken by fda related to rule development , implementation , and training . appendix i presents a more detailed description of our methodology , and appendix ii lists the associations we interviewed . third , we visited california — the state with the nation's largest agricultural and food production sectors — where we met with state and local officials to discuss their programs on produce and human and animal food .