gao - 11-411 . review potential overstay records and collect additional data to improve overstay identification . we analyzed dhs's unmatched arrival records as of november 2012 , the most recent date for which dhs had compiled the records at the time we began our review . we also reviewed statutory requirements and a may 2012 dhs report on the status of efforts to implement biometric exit capabilities at airports . to analyze the reliability of data on previously unreviewed potential overstay records and dhs's current set of unmatched arrival records , we reviewed documentation regarding the databases used to collect these data and interviewed dhs officials familiar with the data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we conducted this work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we provided a draft of this statement to dhs for review and incorporated its comments where appropriate . dhs has taken action to address a backlog of potential overstay records we previously identified in april 2011 . specifically , in april 2011 , we reported that , as of january 2011 , adis contained a backlog of 1.6 million potential overstay records , which included prior nonpriority overstay leads that had not been reviewed , nonpriority leads that continued to accrue on a daily basis , and leads generated in error as a result of cbp system changes . provided them to ctceu for further review and consideration for enforcement action . table 1 describes how ctceu resolved these leads . since completing this review of the backlog of potential overstay records in the summer of 2011 , dhs has continued to review all potential overstay records through national security and law enforcement databases to identify potential threats , regardless of whether the subjects of the records meet ice's priorities for enforcement action . this occurs on an ongoing basis such that dhs may identify threats among individuals who were not previously identified as such when new information becomes available in various national security and law enforcement databases . we will continue to evaluate these data as part of our ongoing work . since april 2011 , dhs has taken various actions to improve its data on potential overstays . in april 2011 , we reported that dhs's efforts to identify and report on overstays were hindered by unreliable data , and we identified various challenges to dhs's efforts to identify potential overstays , including the incomplete collection of departure data from nonimmigrants at ports of entry , particularly land ports of entry , and the lack of mechanisms for assessing the quality of leads sent to ice field offices for investigations .