length of contract . one of the eight manufacturers , who said it plans to submit a proposal for the 2006 contract , told us that the length of the contract , which is restricted by statute to 4 years , makes it difficult to compete for the currency paper contract . this manufacturer said that , to make a profit during this contract , it would need a 5-year contract and at least 40 percent of the contract . according to bep , these five barriers continue to exist because they either are outside of bep's control or are essential components of producing currency paper . for example , the restriction against foreign ownership and the length of the currency paper contract are both legislative provisions that would require congressional action to change . in addition , u.s. secret service officials told us that there are tremendous benefits to producing u.s. currency paper inside the united states because , according to the secret service , it does not have the authority to oversee the security of personnel or plant facilities in a foreign country . the secret service further stated that , although it may be able to make agreements allowing for such oversight , it can be difficult to take quick , decisive action in a foreign country . the secret service also pointed out that the logistics of moving currency paper across great distances and borders would pose additional security risks . however , secret service officials indicated that , in their view , foreign ownership would not pose a security problem as long as the paper was produced in the united states and the employees who produced the paper had undergone background checks . bep officials also believe that providing financial assistance for capital investment is outside of their control because , as previously mentioned , under the far , bep can make advance payments to manufacturers for capital investment only if the manufacturer pays the money back to bep , with interest , during the life of the contract . two of the barriers to competition that paper manufacturers identified are within bep's control , but these barriers — the security requirements for the manufacturing facility and the technology required to insert anticounterfeiting features , such as the security thread — remain because they are essential for currency paper . officials from bep , the federal reserve board , and the secret service noted that currency paper is a valuable asset that must be guarded and protected from counterfeiting . furnishing the security thread . previously , bep expected potential paper manufacturers to obtain the security thread used in currency paper on their own , which some paper manufacturers cited as a barrier because the sole manufacturer of the security thread is a subsidiary of the current supplier . as a result , potential manufacturers would have had to purchase the thread and make royalty payments to that company . bep modified the solicitations for the 1999 and 2003 contracts to indicate that it would provide the security thread that is inserted into most currency paper to other successful bidders as government - furnished property rather than requiring them to obtain the thread themselves .