more timely data . cdc officials stated that the flu vaccine finder data are generally a week old when they become available to users because of the time necessary for cdc to collect the data from manufacturers and medical supply distributors and upload these data into the system . state health officials reported that having real - time data would be helpful to effectively determine which types of providers are in need of vaccine at a given point in time . some state health officials reported that they have utilized other mechanisms , such as surveying individual providers in their jurisdictions , to determine which providers have received a sufficient vaccine supply to vaccinate their high - risk and other target groups and which providers are in need . for example , one state , minnesota , created its own database to monitor vaccine distribution in the state during the 2004 – 05 season . state health officials surveyed the individual providers in each of the state's public health jurisdictions on their vaccine supply , and then entered the information into a database . this database then provided information for state officials to determine the need for and availability of vaccine across the state . health officials from other states have reported administering informal surveys of individual providers on their vaccine supply during times of shortage . state health officials reported using the information on vaccine supply to facilitate voluntary redistribution — that is , providers with excess vaccine supply were identified by health officials and asked to give their left over doses to providers who needed it most , such as occurred during the 2004 – 05 influenza season . according to a representative from a national association representing state and territorial health officials , these informal surveys were very time and resource intensive , however . one state , rhode island , created its own vaccine distribution program to manage the availability and distribution of vaccine in the state . specifically , rhode island is implementing a program for the 2007 – 08 season in which the state health department will manage the purchasing and distribution of vaccine among the state's providers for vaccination of adults . specifically , the state health department plans to purchase and distribute about 250,000 influenza vaccine doses among participating providers free of charge to vaccinate adults who have health insurance or are working for or insured through a rhode island company . cdc and others have produced a variety of public health messages designed to promote influenza vaccination , including messages to encourage preferential vaccination of certain high - risk and other target groups during times of vaccine delay or shortage . cdc has also taken some steps to assess its messages . for example , cdc has tested its messages prior to dissemination and collected some data to give the agency a sense of the impact its messages may be having on the public after dissemination . however , cdc and others have not conducted comprehensive evaluations on the impact of messages after dissemination . although no comprehensive evaluations have been conducted , cdc and other officials we interviewed identified key elements , such as clear and consistent messages , that they believe are important to producing effective public health messages .