we disagree . the model's inclusion of costs that the agency did not incur , such as partners' costs , is inappropriate when comparing estimates to nrcs's actual cost data . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter . we will then send copies to interested congressional committees , the secretary of agriculture , the chief of nrcs , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . our objectives were to ( 1 ) review the technical assistance cost estimates produced by the model and ( 2 ) identify the sources of differences that may occur between the estimates and nrcs's reported costs . to review the estimates , we assessed the differences between the nrcs's model results compared with the actual costs reported by nrcs . we compared nrcs's fiscal years 2002 and 2003 technical assistance cost estimates by program with the actual costs reported by nrcs , the only years for which these two sets of costs were available . to identify sources of difference between these costs , we assessed assumptions and data used in the cost estimates . to assess nrcs's cost model , we analyzed the model and related documentation to determine whether the model appeared to be a reasonable method for estimating program costs . in addition , we checked whether the model formulas , contained in a ms excel file , used the appropriate data , and we reviewed the formulas to ensure that they were logical . in addition , we replicated the model formulas using the proper data and ensured that the resulting figures matched those shown in the model . we interviewed nrcs officials responsible for developing the cost model to gain an understanding of the model and its development . these officials were staffed in nrcs's budget planning and analysis division , operations management and oversight division , and in field offices . we conducted sensitivity analyses to illustrate the possible importance of different variables in the model . these sensitivity analyses were conducted using monte carlo simulation , which uses random numbers to measure the effects of uncertainty on model output — in this case , the technical assistance cost estimates . our analysis was based on general assumptions about the probability distributions characterizing some of the variables in the model . also , we interviewed and requested documentation from 20 officials of state government agencies and conservation district associations to assess whether the nonreimbursed contributions of conservation districts increased or decreased in the past several years . we did so for each of the 10 states with the most crp and wrp contracts . the 10 states are illinois , iowa , kansas , louisiana , minnesota , mississippi , missouri , new york , north dakota , and wisconsin .