ii. ) we received comments from va via email . the department agreed with the facts as they pertain to va. we also sent a draft of this report to dol . dol did not provide comments . representatives from american hospital association ( aha ) , association of american medical colleges ( aamc ) , and the biotechnology industry organization ( bio ) provided oral comments on a draft of this report . they said they agreed with our findings related to the use of external data by cms . with regard to our finding that data from other government agencies have limitations for cms's use in setting drg payments , both aamc and bio said we should have discussed cms's use of data from sources other than the federal government . as we discussed in the draft report , cms has used external data from sources other than the federal government including manufacturer data to inform drg reclassification and evaluate new technology add - on applications . aamc said it was concerned that we only examined how cms used the external data and did not conduct an evaluation of cms's policy for using external data . however , as discussed in the draft report , an examination of cms's policy for accepting external data was not within the scope of the report . in addition , cms , aamc and aha offered technical comments on the draft of this report , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending a copy of this report to the administrator of cms and interested congressional committees . we will also provide copies to others on request . the report is available online at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . the classification of most drgs does not change from year to year . the second step in revising the drgs involves calculating weights across all drgs , so that the drgs reflect the expected relative differences in costliness of inpatient stays for the upcoming fiscal year . prior to fiscal year 2007 , cms annually derived each drg's weight by dividing the average charge per inpatient stay for that drg by the average charge per inpatient stay across all drgs for a fiscal year . effective fiscal year 2007 , cms uses charge data from the medpar file and hospitals' cost - to - charge ratios from medicare cost reports to estimate the costs per inpatient stay . cms then uses these average estimated costs to measure the relative costliness of inpatient stays that will be assigned to each drg . in reclassifying and weighting drgs , cms generally requires that the data meet three criteria: ( 1 ) the data must be representative of the medicare population ; ( 2 ) the data must be timely — that is , they should be the most recent data available ; and ( 3 ) the data must be complete — meaning that cms needs total charges or other measure of costliness for all services provided during an inpatient stay . charge data collected at the inpatient - stay level allow cms to appropriately measure relative costliness across the drgs .