table 4 summarizes these security safeguards . the security rule , which applies only to phi in electronic form , states that covered entities have the flexibility to use any security measures that allow them to reasonably and appropriately implement specified standards . specifically , the rule states that in deciding what security measures are appropriate , the covered entity must take into account elements such as its size , complexity , technical infrastructure , cost of security measures , and the probability and criticality of potential risks to its phi . the hitech act set additional requirements for the secretary of hhs and expanded and strengthened certain privacy and security requirements mandated under hipaa and the hipaa rules . we agree that the existing agency information on the de - identification standards provide a level of assurance that covered entities have the parameters and requirements needed to properly remove identifiers from phi and have clarified this in our report . however , the hitech act requires hhs to issue de - identification implementation guidance that addresses how covered entities should implement the de - identification standards . specifically , to implement provisions of the hitech act , the secretary was required to ( 1 ) issue breach notification regulations to require covered entities and business associates under hipaa to provide notification to affected individuals and the secretary concerning the unauthorized use and disclosure of unsecured phi ; ( 2 ) establish enforcement provisions for imposing an increased tiered structure for civil money penalties for violations of the privacy and security rules ; and ( 3 ) extend certain privacy and security rule requirements to business associates of covered entities . such required activities are intended to strengthen protections for phi , including medicare beneficiaries' prescription drug use information . to implement these provisions of the act , ocr issued two interim final rules — the breach notification for unsecured protected health information rule , known as the “breach notification rule,” and the hitech act enforcement rule — and has developed a draft rule intended to , among other things , extend the applicability of certain requirements of the privacy and security rules to business associates . ocr issued the breach notification for unsecured protected health information rule in august 2009 . this rule contains detailed requirements for hipaa - covered entities and business associates to notify affected individuals and the secretary following the discovery of a breach of unsecured phi . in addition , in october 2009 , ocr issued the hitech enforcement rule , which amends the hipaa rules to incorporate hitech act provisions establishing categories of violations based on increasing levels of culpability and correspondingly increased tier ranges of civil money penalty amounts . in addition , in july 2010 , ocr issued a notice of proposed rulemaking to modify the hipaa privacy , security , and enforcement rules to implement other provisions of the hitech act .