adequate resources . as far back as 1993 we reported that insufficient resources were a primary cause of doe's delays in updating energy efficiency standards . this may still be the case . while the doe plan calls for a sixfold increase in workload , it does not increase program staffing and contractor budgets in the same proportion . program managers told us they generally have had 7 to 14 staff working on energy efficiency rules , with 7 on the job as of fiscal year 2006 . they plan to add 2 full - time staff and 1 from the presidential management fellows ( pmf ) program , a nonpermanent position , for an increase to 10 staff in fiscal year 2007 . similarly , from fiscal years 2000 through 2006 , doe's budget for contractor staff has averaged about $10 million per year . for fiscal year 2007 , doe requested $12 million for contractors , a 20 percent resource increase . doe expects these limited resource increases to cover a 600 percent increase in workload . in the absence of further increasing resources , doe said in its january 2006 report it plans to meet the increased workload by improving productivity . doe's program for energy efficiency standards has been plagued by delays for decades . although many steps in doe's most recent january 2006 plan to address these delays appear to be reasonable , doe does not definitively know whether the plan will address root causes and clear the backlog . furthermore , doe's plan lacks important elements of effective management practices that would help assure success . consequently , it is unclear whether doe can carry out the ambitious schedule it has set for itself to update energy efficiency standards . if doe does not succeed in clearing its backlog , the nation and consumers will continue to forgo the benefits of more energy - efficient consumer products and industrial equipment . the loss of such benefits will make the nation depend even more on imported energy . the continuing commitment of doe's top management to make standards rulemaking a top organizational priority is essential to doe's success in completing all energy efficiency rules . although doe did not provide views on our recommendations , it expressed concerns in two areas . first , regarding our discussion of the causes of delays in setting standards , doe stated that it is incorrect to assign blame for delays to any one office , official , decision , or process — and specifically to the office of the general counsel . doe stated that doing so reflects a simplistic and largely incorrect understanding of the program's complexity . doe noted that the delays in setting standards have spanned administrations of both parties , several secretaries of energy , and various doe offices and personnel ; also , although doe work logs may indicate that a specific office has a document for a certain period of time , during that time multiple individuals from different offices may have been working together on the document . we disagree with doe's characterization of our analysis .