( see fig . 4 for an illustration of these elements. ) rule of law: these projects support constitutional and criminal code reforms to make criminal justice more swift , transparent , and participatory ; establish new institutions and enhance existing ones to improve management of the justice sector and to help safeguard the legal rights of citizens ; provide technical assistance , training , and management information systems for judges , prosecutors , public defenders , and law enforcement agencies to improve their capabilities and increase their efficiency , effectiveness , and fairness ; increase access to justice through mediation , alternative dispute resolution , and other mechanisms ; and reform law school curricula to reflect modern methods and necessary skills for practicing law . governance: these projects seek to improve the administrative , analytical , and outreach capacity of legislatures ; strengthen the administrative capacity and accountability of municipalities and increase citizen participation in local government ; and foster a greater public awareness about corruption and implement strategies to enable government institutions to become more transparent and accountable . human rights: these projects are intended to prevent human rights abuses through greater public awareness , protect citizens against abuses , and respond to past violations through legal action and public reconciliation processes . elections: these projects are designed to improve election administration , enhance voter access , and legitimize election results by supporting domestic and international observers . usaid and the state and justice departments have not traditionally accounted for funding data according to the four elements previously described but have provided this information for fiscal years 2000 through 2002 , as shown in figure 5 . while assistance to civil society appears to be relatively small in figure 5 , important civil society support is also included through the four programmatic areas we focus on in this report . while usaid funds and implements assistance projects in all areas covered by this report , the state department provides funding to the justice department for law enforcement assistance . the state department's bureau of democracy , human rights , and labor also provided a relatively small amount of democracy - related assistance to some of the six countries covered in our review , as did the department's western hemisphere public diplomacy program . to assess the nature , impact , and sustainability of u.s. assistance programs to strengthen democratic institutions in bolivia , colombia , el salvador , guatemala , nicaragua , and peru , we first interviewed headquarters officials in washington , d.c. , at the departments and agencies providing rule of law , governance , human rights , and election assistance , including usaid , the state and justice departments , the national endowment for democracy , and the inter - american foundation . we also interviewed experts at nongovernmental organizations , including the national democratic institute , the international republican institute , the washington office on latin america , and human rights watch . for all six countries , we reviewed mission performance plans , usaid country and regional strategic plans and other planning documents , funding agreements , contracts , and project evaluations .