methods of interaction with dea . of the 14 state agencies that interacted with dea , the most common method reported to us was through law enforcement - related activities such as working together during investigations , or collaborating on joint task forces to reduce prescription drug abuse and diversion ( 11 of 14 ) . ( see app . i for a detailed discussion of our scope and methodology. ) we conducted this performance audit from august 2013 to june 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . prescription opioid pain relievers are safe and effective when used as directed , but these highly addictive substances can pose serious risks of addiction or death if they are abused , misused , or diverted . opportunities for abuse or diversion can occur as drugs flow through the prescription drug supply chain . dea is responsible for ensuring the availability of controlled substances for legitimate uses while preventing their diversion through its administration and enforcement of the csa and its states also play a role in regulating controlled implementing regulations.substances and the practices of medicine and pharmacy within their state boundaries . additionally , national associations representing stakeholders such as distributors , pharmacies , and practitioners work on behalf of their members to support efforts to reduce prescription drug abuse and diversion . when taken as directed for legitimate medical purposes , prescription drugs are safe and effective . pain , which affects millions of americans , is a health problem for which prescription drugs are often used . pain can be characterized in terms of intensity — mild to severe — and duration — acute or chronic . in addition , we interviewed officials in dea field offices in each of the four states in our study , such as supervisors overseeing both diversion investigators and special agents , to obtain their views about engaging with state agencies on efforts related to reducing prescription drug abuse and diversion . we interviewed officials in the following four dea field offices: the miami division , the san francisco division , the kentucky district office , and the new york division . we compared dea's responses regarding its interactions with registrants and nonfederal stakeholders to federal internal control standards related to information and communication and the standards in dea's office of diversion control customer service plan for registrants . to further address our third objective , we reviewed data on dea investigations and enforcement actions from fiscal year 2009 through fiscal year 2013 that were taken against the dea registrant categories that we included in our survey . we examined the data to determine if there were any trends over a recent time period . investigations included regulatory investigations ( i.e. , scheduled investigations or inspections conducted every 2 , 3 , or 5 years ) , complaint investigations , and criminal investigations .