vi. ) in response to our recommendation that epa set measurable goals for the storm water program , epa stated that under the second phase of the program , local governments will establish their own goals . although this is an important activity , epa will have difficulty evaluating the program's effectiveness at a national level without setting goals that reflect the program's mission of improving water quality . the constituents that are typically found in urban runoff in worcester are the same as those normally found in urban runoff in older cities . because virtually all of the paved surfaces in the worcester area are devoted to the city's transportation infrastructure , the constituents generated include automobile - related petroleum products , such as total petroleum hydrocarbons , oil and grease , along with total suspended solids . also , coliform , silt , and sediment have been identified in the city's runoff . like other permittees , the dpw has implemented bmps under the major areas of education outreach , pollution prevention and source controls , storm - drainage system maintenance , regulatory efforts , and storm - drainage system infrastructure . additionally , to reduce storm water pollution , the dpw has retrofitted a number of twin manholes in the city as discussed below . bmps that are specific to worcester include the following: the dpw implemented a demonstration project to determine the effectiveness of an oil and grit separator installed on a street drain . the drain is a major surface sewer main that services approximately 226 acres of heavily urbanized area with a typical mix of residential , commercial , and industrial use . the drain discharges into lake quinsigamond , which is a large lake used for recreational purposes such as swimming and boating . in its april 2000 annual plan submitted to epa , the dpw noted that because of drought conditions , it currently did not have sufficient sampling data to determine the effectiveness of the project . the dpw has embarked on a comprehensive program to minimize the possibility that sewage and storm water will be mixed in its twin invert manholes . since the program began , the dpw has installed hold - down devices on over 1,680 of the approximately 2,580 twin invert manholes in the city . the dpw expects to continue the program until all of the manholes have been retrofitted . the dpw is also working closely with the massachusetts department of environmental protection in its ongoing tracking efforts to ensure that industries in worcester are doing their part to reduce storm water pollution . to improve its storm - drainage infrastructure , the city has established a voluntary plan to reduce the number of unpaved private roads . the dirt from these roads , especially after rain storms , causes sediment to build up in the drainage system . the dpw has developed a plan to pave the streets at a lower grade than would be necessary to meet the legal requirements for a public street . under this plan , residents would not have to pay the additional betterment taxes that are now required to cover the costs of sediment removal and less sediment would be transported in runoff .