hhs had no comments on the draft report . one company declined to participate in our study . we also reviewed data provided by testing companies on the types of accommodations requested and granted . based on their responses to questions about data reliability , we believe the information they provided is sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we reviewed policies and procedures for requesting accommodations found on testing companies' web sites . however , we did not evaluate whether these policies and procedures , or the procedures described to us in interviews , were in compliance with relevant laws or regulations . testing companies that participated in our study reviewed draft statements in this report , and their comments were incorporated where appropriate . we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations ; reviewed selected court cases regarding testing accommodations ; interviewed officials from the departments of justice ( justice ) , education ( education ) , and health and human services ( hhs ) ; and reviewed available information on complaints each agency received from fiscal years 2007 through 2010 regarding the 10 testing companies included in our study . however due to data limitations described in the report , we cannot generalize the results of our file review . a more detailed explanation of our objectives , scope , and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from october 2010 to november 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in determining whether to provide testing accommodations , testing companies are required to adhere to section 309 of the ada and , in some circumstances , section 504 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 , as amended ( the rehabilitation act ) , as well as regulations implementing those laws . section 309 of the ada provides that “ny person that offers examinations or courses related to applications , licensing , certification , or credentialing for secondary or post - secondary education , professional , or trade purposes” must offer them “in a place and manner accessible to persons with disabilities or offer alternative accessible arrangements…” section 504 prohibits discrimination against individuals with disabilities by entities receiving federal financial assistance . since the adaaa and eeoc regulations have broadened the definition of an individual with disabilities , it is possible that the focus for determining eligibility for testing accommodations will shift from determining whether a person requesting testing accommodations is an individual with a disability for purposes of the ada to what accommodations must be provided to meet the requirements of section 309 and its implementing regulations . several recent cases that address the type of accommodations that must be provided under section 309 will likely impact the latter determination .