pt . 158 ; department of defense instruction 3020.41 , operational contract support ( ocs ) ( dec. 20 , 2011 ) . additionally , we reviewed chairman of the joint chiefs of staff instruction 3150.25e , which establishes policy , guidance , and responsibilities for the jllp , to understand the established lessons - learned process . furthermore , to understand how ocs should be integrated into the geographic combatant commands' training systems and plans , we reviewed joint training guidance , such as chairman of the joint chiefs of staff instruction 3500.01h and chairman of the joint chiefs of staff notice 3500.01 . additionally , we reviewed the joint concept for ocs , which is intended to guide ocs capability development for the joint force 2020 . in addition to joint guidance , we reviewed military department and service guidance , such as army regulation 11-33 , air force instruction 90-1601 , office of the chief of naval operations instruction 3500.37c , and marine corps order 3504.1 , to identify any military department - or service - specific policies , guidance , and responsibilities for the collection of issues . we also interviewed ocs and lessons - learned officials from all six geographic combatant commands , all of the associated military service component commands , and the army , the navy , the air force , and the marine corps to discuss their roles and responsibilities regarding the collection of ocs issues . we visited all six geographic combatant commands to conduct our interviews with them . to determine the extent to which dod has a focal point for integrating ocs issues learned from the jllp , we reviewed related gao reports on ocs , as well as related reports issued by the office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics , ocs functional capabilities integration board , and the center for army lessons learned . furthermore , we reviewed the joint contingency acquisition support office's ( jcaso ) ocs issue collection documents — presentation and reports — to understand the scope of its efforts to integrate ocs lessons learned into doctrine , policy , training , and education . we compared guidance , such as relevant provisions in part 158 of title 32 of the code of federal regulations , chairman of the joint chiefs of staff instruction 3150.25e , dod instruction 3020.41 , joint publication 4-10 , and charters for the ocs functional capabilities integration board , with dod's process for the integration of ocs lessons learned . additionally , we interviewed officials from the joint staff and jcaso , which participate in the process of integrating ocs lessons learned in doctrine , policy , training , and education and informing ocs policy and recommending solutions , respectively . we also interviewed officials specifically focused on integrating ocs department - wide , such as officials from the operational contract support functional capabilities integration board , to obtain their perspective on the progress the department has made in integrating ocs . in addition to these officials , we interviewed officials from each of the services — army , navy , air force , and marine corps — to gain an understanding of how each service has integrated ocs lessons learned from the jllp .