washington . d.c.: july 10 , 2001 . nursing workforce: recruitment and retention of nurses and nurse aides is a growing concern . gao - 01-750t . ( see app . i for summaries of select federal pandemic documents. ) we recently reported that hhs has improved its influenza surveillance and diagnostic testing capabilities . prompted by concerns regarding h5n1 , hhs and its international partner organizations have increased efforts to enhance animal and human surveillance systems overseas . additionally , in february 2006 , the food and drug administration ( fda ) — an agency within hhs — approved a diagnostic test developed by the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) — another agency within hhs — that recognizes h5 influenza viruses within 4 hours of testing ; it previously would have taken 2 to 3 days . despite this progress , a severe pandemic would pose formidable challenges to the federal government's efforts to minimize damage to the public's health and the nation's economy . the single most important pharmaceutical intervention during a pandemic — a pandemic vaccine that is well - matched to the pandemic - causing strain — will not be available in large quantities in the initial stages of a pandemic . other pharmaceutical interventions , such as antivirals and pre - pandemic vaccines ( possibly less effective vaccines produced prior to the pandemic and based on strains experts believe may cause a pandemic ) are also expected to be in limited supply and unavailable to the population at large . in addition , although the ability to quickly increase the number of health care providers , called surge capacity , will be vital for treating the potentially large numbers of infected individuals , efforts to do so must overcome existing shortages of health care workers in the united states . similarly , because they are rarely used on a large scale , the effectiveness of large - scale implementation of nonpharmaceutical interventions , including closing schools and voluntary home quarantine , is uncertain . in addition , throughout the initial stages of a pandemic , crucial information — such as when and where to access medical care , and how to reduce the chances of infection — will need to be communicated to the public in a way that does not incite panic . given these obstacles and the possible risk that the best - made plans may still be ineffective in a severe pandemic , the federal government is taking steps to prepare the nation for a potential pandemic in hopes of lessening its overall impact . the national response framework charges the secretary of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) with responsibility for overall management and federal coordination of domestic incidents when needed , the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) administrator with responsibility as principal advisor to the president regarding emergency management , and the secretary of hhs with responsibility for public health and medical response . on november 2 , 2005 , the secretary of hhs released the hhs pandemic influenza plan , which provides hhs's plans for responding to a pandemic . the document also provides pandemic response guidance to officials in state and local jurisdictions and to health care facility officials .