the system is mission critical . the program must not have been included in a recent gao or inspector general review that examined the program's effectiveness . using the above criteria , we selected the following four systems: 1 . aspen: a non - major desktop application that collects commercial driver / vehicle inspection details , performs some immediate data analysis , creates and prints a vehicle inspection report , and transfers inspection data into the fmcsa information systems . motor carrier management information system ( mcmis ) : a non - major information system that captures fmcsa inspection , crash , compliance review , safety audit , and registration data . it is fmcsa's authoritative source for the safety performance records for all commercial motor carriers and hazardous materials shippers . safety enforcement tracking and investigation system ( sentri ) : a non - major application used to facilitate safety audits and interventions by fmcsa and state users . it is intended to combine roadside inspection , investigative , and enforcement functions into a single interface . unified registration system ( urs ) : a major system that is intended to replace the existing registration systems with a single comprehensive , online system and provide fmcsa - regulated entities a more efficient means of submission and management of data pertaining to registration applications . we then assessed the agency's efforts to determine the effectiveness of these systems in meeting the needs of the agency by reviewing documentation from the four selected systems and compared it to key factors identified in omb's guidance on conducting annual operational analysis , which are a key method for examining the performance of investments with o&m funding . the acting cio did not attend any of the four meetings . further , neither the executive management team nor the technical review board discussed with its members the transition of fmcsa's investments into the cloud environment , to include identifying any key risks . for example , in november 2016 , over 70 issues regarding the migration effort were identified by the contractor and a fmcsa official , but none were discussed at the technical review board or executive management team board meetings . as a result , program officials stated that there were delays to program's transition to the cloud environment because additional time was needed to securely migrate data from multiple legacy platforms into a new central database and conduct further testing . action items have been noted in meeting minutes , but have not been fully addressed or updated to closure . for example , in august 2016 , the capital planning and investment control coordinator , within the office of information technology , provided an overview of the fiscal year 2017 budget to the technical review board members . as part of this discussion , the director of the office of information technology stated that , during the next board meeting , additional details would be provided on the planned budget for fiscal year 2018 . however , the meeting minutes from november 2016 did not include any evidence that this subject was discussed at the next meeting .