: may 2010 ) . nist , managing information security risk: organization , mission , and information system view , sp 800-39 ( gaithersburg , md . : march 2011 ) . nist , information security handbook: a guide for managers , sp 800-100 ( gaithersburg , md . : october 2006 ) . provides guidance for facilitating a more consistent approach to information security programs across the federal government . although faa has taken steps to safeguard its air traffic control systems , significant security control weaknesses remain in nas systems and networks , threatening the agency's ability to adequately fulfill its mission . faa established policies and procedures for controlling access to nas systems and for configuring its systems securely , and it implemented firewalls and other boundary protection controls to protect the operational nas environment . however , a significant number of weaknesses remain in the technical controls — including access controls , change controls , and patch management — that protect the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of its air traffic control systems . additionally , significant interconnectivity exists between non - nas systems and the nas operational environment , increasing the risk from these weaknesses . further , the agency had not yet fully implemented an agency - wide information security program to ensure that controls are appropriately designed and operating effectively . a key reason for both the technical control weaknesses and the security management weaknesses is that faa had not fully established an integrated , organization - wide approach to managing information security risk that is aligned with its mission . these shortcomings put nas systems at increased and unnecessary risk of unauthorized access , use , or modification that could disrupt air traffic control operations . a basic management objective for any agency is to protect the resources that support its critical operations and assets from unauthorized access . an agency can accomplish this by designing and implementing controls that are intended to prevent , limit , and detect unauthorized access to computer resources ( eg , data , programs , equipment , and facilities ) , thereby protecting them from unauthorized disclosure , modification , and loss . these facilities handle sequencing and separation of aircraft as they approach major metropolitan areas . twenty - two air route traffic control centers ( artcc ) control and monitor airplanes over the continental united states and between airports . controlling traffic usually at or above 17,000 feet , the typical center has responsibility for more than 100,000 square miles of airspace generally extending over a number of states . three of the centers also control air traffic over the oceans . controllers at these facilities work with pilots to ensure the flight path is smooth and free of other traffic . the air traffic control system command center manages the flow of air traffic within the united states . this facility regulates air traffic when weather , equipment , runway closures , or other conditions place stress on the national airspace system . in these instances , traffic management specialists at the command center take action to modify traffic demands in order to keep traffic within system capacity .