following are examples of such restrictions . in germany , for decades army unit - level personnel have had difficulty in conducting live fire training at home station except for small arms because of the prohibitions on live fire in those areas . army units have historically gone to the grafenwoehr training area — the army in europe's principal live - fire training area — to conduct live fire training on their major weapons such as tanks and artillery . regarding grafenwoehr's sufficiency for future advance munitions , army officials told us that they plan to upgrade the training area to accommodate all munitions that will be used by army in europe units . both the army and the air force in italy have restrictions on live fire training . there are such restrictions at nine of the army's ten local training areas and firing ranges . the air force's fighter wing in italy does not have a local air - to - ground range for bombing training although bombing is one of its primary missions . the lack of an air - to - ground range is a long - standing problem and prevents the wing from conducting surface attack training in italy . the two f - 15e squadrons in the united kingdom cannot employ laser - guided bombs on any of their local ranges . laser - guided bombs are the primary munitions used for air - to - ground attacks by these squadrons . although these squadrons have regular access to air - to - ground ranges for non - laser - guided bombing , the ranges are not considered quality tactical training ranges that allow pilots to train for identifying and engaging targets . figure 9 in appendix ii is a map showing the locations of the fighter wing and training facilities in the united kingdom . when in europe , navy units have limited access to training for live fire combined arms , supporting - arms coordination , and naval gunfire support — all of which are capabilities that the navy tries to maintain at a certain level while deployed in theater . as a result , they rely on bilateral exercises , use of other country's ranges or north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) exercises to attain training . both the air force and the army in korea face restrictions on live fire training . the capabilities at koon - ni , the air force's only exclusive - use range , have steadily diminished over time . prior to 1978 , live bombs were dropped on the target island , practice bombs were dropped on the mainland , and strafing was conducted on a scored land target . in 1978 , live bombing was discontinued . over the years , commercial development has moved within the range's safety easement zone . by 1989 , practice bombing was restricted to the target island and in 2000 the scored strafing pits were closed . figure 1 is a photo of a steel mill constructed within the zone during the time that strafing was still allowed . as of april 2002 only training ordnance is allowed and can only be used over water .