workload increases . e - file act requires usda to continue providing services in the traditional way to customers who choose not to use the internet . cbas must therefore support dual service delivery functions - - one electronic and one paper - based . identified how much funding and staff resources will be needed to fully implement the act . the e - file act provides that the secretary is to reserve , from applicable accounts of the cbas , not more than $3 million for fiscal year 2001 and $2 million for each subsequent fiscal year . decisions on use of these accounts and funding are still pending . planning on how usda will carry out the tasks needed to meet the june 20 , 2002 , deadline for implementing full electronic filing capabilities will not begin until january 2001 . in response to the e - file act , rma is working on a december 1 , 2000 , plan for allowing agricultural producers the option of obtaining , over the internet from approved insurance providers , all forms and other information and filing all paperwork required for participation electronically . *these were issued in final on november 1 , 2000 . the location and type of data made available where paperwork can be filed and responsibilities of the applicable parties . rma said it approved plans from two participating insurance providers on september 26 , 2000 , enabling them to market and service federal crop insurance programs over the internet . file act , and the cbas' and rma's october 17 report , done in response to the secretary's request for a shared e - file plan , generally discusses their actions . however , several steps essential to the overall success of usda's e - file initiative remain to be done . specifically , usda has not assigned a senior - level official with overall responsibility , authority , and accountability for managing and implementing all the separate activities to ensure that critical tasks are completed on time and within budget and that all federal mandates are met . usda has also not yet developed and documented a comprehensive e - file implementation plan . having such a plan is important to define the milestones for all major activities , dependencies and critical tasks among these activities , and resources required to complete them ; help identify priorities as to which activities must be completed first and where milestone and resource shifts may be made to ensure that the most critical activities are completed on time , within budget , and , more important , are successful ; and address omb and gpea requirements by coordinating actions across mission areas and applying a more consistent approach during usda's e - government transformation .