gao - 06-205sp . we conducted our work in washington , d.c. ; miami and st. petersburg , florida ; homestead , new castle , and pittsburgh , pennsylvania ; evansville , indiana ; st. louis , missouri ; seattle , washington ; and oakland and san francisco , california , between november 2004 and october 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . under the united states housing act of 1937 , as amended , congress created the federal public housing program to provide decent and safe rental housing for eligible low - income families , the elderly , and persons with disabilities . hud administers federal aid to local public housing agencies that manage housing for low - income residents at rents they can afford . more specifically , 3,150 public housing agencies manage approximately 1.2 million public housing units throughout the nation , of which approximately 1 million are occupied . the survey and the aggregated results can be viewed at www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? public housing comes in all sizes and types , from scattered single - family houses to high - rise apartments . funding for public housing construction , renovation , or operation can come from a number of hud programs , as well as other government and private sources . hud's public housing capital fund ( capital fund ) provides funds ( distributed by formula ) for activities such as redesign , reconstruction , improvement of accessibility , and replacement of obsolete utility systems . the fiscal year 2005 appropriation for the capital fund was about $2.4 billion . hud's public housing operating fund ( operating fund ) provides operating subsidies to housing agencies to help them meet operating and management expenses . the fiscal year 2005 appropriation for the operating fund was about $2.4 billion . in addition , between fiscal years 1993 and 2005 , congress appropriated $6.8 billion for the hope vi program , which hud awarded to public housing agencies for planning , technical assistance , construction , rehabilitation , demolition , and housing choice voucher assistance . while most of the funds are intended for capital costs , a portion of the revitalization grants may be used for community and supportive services . in addition , public housing agencies use the hope vi revitalization grant to leverage additional funds from sources such as other hud funds , state or local contributions , or public and private loans . in 2002 , we reported that housing agencies expected to leverage — for every dollar received in hope vi revitalization grants awarded through fiscal year 2001 — an additional $1.85 in funds from other sources . we also found that housing agencies that had received revitalization grants expected to leverage $295 million in additional funds for community and supportive services . in addition to leveraging funds from a variety of sources , housing agencies may use low - income housing tax credits — which are federal tax credits for the acquisition , rehabilitation , or new construction of affordable rental housing — as well as medicaid home and community - based services waivers , which allow flexibility in providing healthcare or long - term care services to medicaid - eligible individuals outside of an institutional setting .