( see fig . after devoting this time to the task , 5 states said the title ii data were “very useful,” 19 said they were “moderately useful,” and 25 states said they were “neither useful nor not useful,” “slightly useful,” or “not useful.” states most frequently reported using the title ii data to inform the approval process or inform state agency discussions about proposed tpp requirements . see 20 u.s.c . §§ 1022d - 1022f for state and institutional reporting requirements . for the purposes of this report , we refer to these requirements collectively as higher education act title ii reporting requirements . candidates attending many of these programs , you and representative george miller , in his role as ranking member of the house committee on education and the workforce , asked us to review oversight and support provided to tpps . this report examines: 1. how states oversee tpps ; 2. what states and select tpps are doing to prepare new teachers for new k - 12 standards ; and , 3. the extent to which education's data reporting and other information - sharing support and encourage high quality tpps . to obtain information about all three objectives , we conducted a survey of all 50 states and the district of columbia , obtaining a 100 percent response rate . the surveys and a more complete tabulation of the results can be viewed at gao - 15-599sp . to obtain more detailed examples about states' and tpps' actions and experiences , we conducted case studies of five states: arizona , california , maine , tennessee and virginia . we selected these states because they represent a variety of sizes ( i.e. , numbers of tpps operating in the state ) and approaches to overseeing tpps ( including how they use data about graduate effectiveness to evaluate tpp performance ) , and to reflect different types of college - and career - ready k - 12 standards . for each case study state , we reviewed documents and interviewed officials from the state agency or agencies that oversee tpps , two to three tpps , and at least one k - 12 school district . in total , we interviewed 14 tpps in our 5 case study states . we ensured that this non - generalizable sample varied in a number of ways , including whether they were located within or outside colleges and universities ; were alternative route or traditional ; and offered in - person or online coursework . we also interviewed u.s. department of education officials and contractors , teacher preparation researchers , organizations that represent tpps , companies that test teaching candidates for state licensure , and other stakeholders . in addition , we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and other documents ; analyzed data collected pursuant to the higher education act title ii reporting requirements ; and compared education's actions to federal standards for internal controls and leading practices for data - driven program management .