training . under the 2009 program , participants have additional training opportunities beyond those that were available under the 2002 program . the 2009 legislation authorized training for workers threatened with a layoff that has not yet occurred in addition to workers who have been laid off . pub . what challenges did labor face implementing the 2009 legislation ? what effect do selected state government officials say the 2009 legislative changes had on participants and on state and local administrators ? to what extent have participants received taa benefits and services as established by the 2009 legislation and what is known about their employment outcomes ? to answer the first question , we interviewed officials at labor to learn how the agency was affected by the legislative changes , such as the expanded eligibility criteria . we analyzed available data on taa petitions , which are submitted to labor on behalf of a group of workers for labor's determination of the workers' eligibility to potentially receive taa benefits . we also compared determination data for a nongeneralizable number of taa petitions with determination letters published by labor . in addition , we reviewed the internal controls for the petition investigation process . we also conducted an on - site review of seven case files . for the second question , we interviewed state government officials from six states: massachusetts , michigan , north carolina , oregon , pennsylvania , and texas . these states were selected because they had a high fiscal year 2010 training fund allocation , a high volume of taa certifications , and geographic diversity . we also spoke with select local government officials in three of these states ( michigan , north carolina , and oregon ) . through these interviews , we learned how selected state and local officials viewed key amendments' effects on participants and on their administration of the program . for the third question , we analyzed labor's data on workers' participation in specific activities as well as on their outcomes , as for all research questions , we also reviewed relevant federal available.laws , regulations , guidance and pertinent labor reports and procedures . we assessed the reliability of both petition data and participant data by ( 1 ) performing manual and / or electronic testing of required data elements , ( 2 ) reviewing existing information about the data and the system that produced them , and ( 3 ) interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data . we determined that the data reported were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report , with the exception of data on the eligibility categories for certified petitions . at the time of our review , we had some reliability concerns about the data and , as a result , did not include it in our report . see appendix i for additional details on our objectives , scope , and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from may 2011 to september 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .