iv. ) doc emphasized in its comments that the independent reviewer acts at the request and on behalf of the agency . we noted in the draft report that doc's hiring of the independent reviewer was an important step toward ensuring the quality of cchps's services and described the independent reviewer's role in doc's oversight of cchps . doc expressed concern that the issues discussed in the independent reviewer's reports are intended to identify opportunities for cchps to improve , but that the draft report portrayed them as problems or deficiencies . while some issues raised by the independent reviewer could be characterized as opportunities for service improvement , we found that others indicated performance shortfalls related to specific contract requirements . in its comments , doc discussed our finding that cchps has not regularly submitted the quarterly and annual reports required by the contract ; these reports are to provide doc with information on problems identified by cchps's performance monitoring or by the independent reviewer and on cchps's corrective actions . doc stated that instead of the quarterly reports , it relies on certain monthly reports and regular verbal communication . doc's comments describe two types of monthly reports , one providing various data on off - site services and the other relating to two performance measures reported to the office of the mayor . however , undocumented verbal communications and these narrowly focused monthly reports are not a substitute for the quarterly progress reports called for in the contract and do not enable doc to ensure that cchps is addressing identified problems . doc's comments acknowledge that cchps has not submitted all required annual reports . we do not agree that the information provided in the december 2002 report on the reconciliation of cchps's expected and actual costs , which doc cites in its comments , provided doc with the type of information required in the annual progress reports . for example , this report contains no information about how cchps planned to improve its performance in screening and treating female inmates for chlamydia and gonorrhea . doc highlighted its role in reducing the cost of medical services provided to inmates by cchps . in the final report we provided additional information on doc's role . doc also noted that the average daily cost of services decreased from about $19 to about $13 , which we stated in our draft report , and that this will result in savings over the remaining life of the contract . however , while the average daily cost per inmate in 2003 was $13.32 , under the current rate schedule , daily per inmate costs may range from $13.00 when the combined jail and ctf population exceeds 3,200 to $14.75 when the inmate population is below 2,200 . therefore , costs over the remaining life of the contract will depend largely on the inmate population . in response to doc's comments , we replaced the term “financial penalties” with “monetary damages.” while the comments state that doc has other remedies for contract nonperformance , we believe that the authority to impose monetary damages is also a useful means of ensuring cchps's compliance with the contract .