activities . for failure to file the community benefits report: civil penalty of $100 per day unless an extension is granted . the health services cost review commission may refuse to grant a rate increase to any hospital that does not file a required report . any substantially incomplete or inaccurate report may not be considered timely filed . institutions may request reasonable extensions of time to file required reports . health education , screening , and ( md . code ann. , health - gen. § 19- 303 ) prevention services . ( md . regs . code tit . 10 , § 37.01.03 ) ( md . code ann. , health - gen. § 19- 303 ) must maintain one or more charity wards for charity patients . charity . none specified . ( miss . code ann . § 27-31-1 ) ( miss . code ann . § 27-31-1 ( f ) ) charity care . none specified . benefits plan , which includes a mission statement , community needs assessment , community benefit activities expected to be undertaken or supported , community benefit activities undertaken in the previous year and a description of results or outcomes , means used to solicit community views , an evaluation of the plan's effectiveness , an estimate of the cost of each activity expected , and a report on the unreimbursed cost of activities undertaken in the previous year . financial or in - kind support of public health programs , including support of recommendations in any state health plan . promote or support a healthier community , enhanced access to health care or related services , health education and prevention activities , or services to a vulnerable population . and training of health care practitioners , including the pooling of funds with other providers . 1304-2 ) charity care . none specified . organized as a nonprofit corporation in idaho or another state and has received an exemption from taxation from irs pursuant to § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) of the internal revenue code . bad debt . through government programs . below actual cost . exempt hospitals with at least 150 patient beds must prepare and file an annual community benefits report that itemizes the community benefits provided and indicates the process the hospital used to determine general community needs . donated time , funds , subsidies , and in - kind services . additions to capital . ( idaho code § 63-602d ) charity care . language assistant services . health care . donations . the attorney general may assess a late filing fee against a nonprofit hospital that fails to file the annual report . the fee must not exceed $100 ; the attorney general may grant extensions for good cause . report is public information . volunteer services . ( 210 ill. comp . stat . 76 / 25 ) education . community information . other rights and remedies available to the state are retained . § 39-11-105 ; wyo . r. & regs . rev gen ch .