cade . delivery of cade release 1 will require aggressive focus and attention , and a business rules engine solution requires additional evaluation . these 46 issue action plans were assigned completion dates and an irs or prime owner was assigned to take the lead in implementing each plan . irs and prime each also assigned a senior - level executive to drive the execution of the issue action plans , identify and help mitigate implementation hindrances or roadblocks , and ensure successful completion of all planned actions . to assess the efficacy of the bsm action plan , mitre was tasked with conducting an independent analysis and provided feedback to irs on the effectiveness of the specific issue action plans to address the associated findings / recommendations and correct any problems found . irs has reported making steady progress with implementing the bsm action plan . according to the irs bsm program office , as of late january 2004 , 27 of the 46 issue action plans have been completed . examples of completed actions include ( 1 ) making business owners and program directors accountable for project success ; ( 2 ) assigning teams to investigate and resolve problem areas on key projects such as cade , the integrated financial system , and e - services ; ( 3 ) aligning critical engineering talent to the most critical projects ; ( 4 ) increasing the frequency of cade program reviews ; and ( 5 ) issuing a firm fixed - price contracting policy . significant further work remains to complete implementation of the remaining 19 open issue action tasks . bain & company — which conducted the independent review of prime — has been hired to facilitate the implementation of various issue action plans within the organization and roles challenge area , while irs has also contracted with sei to conduct further periodic reviews of the cade project . additionally , the irs oversight board recently issued a report on its own independent analysis of the bsm program , which made several observations and recommendations that are consistent with those discussed here . irs has conducted an analysis of this report to reconcile the board's recommendations with those that are currently being addressed in the bsm action plan . as a result , irs plans to open two additional issues and action plans to address ( 1 ) rationalizing and streamlining oversight of the bsm program , and ( 2 ) determining and maintaining a manageable portfolio of projects . irs expects to complete the majority of the bsm action plan by end of april of this year , and fully implement any remaining open actions by the end of the calendar year . further , during 2003 , the treasury inspector general for tax administration performed several reviews related to management of the bsm program and for specific bsm projects . these reviews identified several issues , including those related to compliance with the defined management and project development processes , full implementation of disciplined project testing processes and procedures , irs's cost and schedule estimation process , and contract management . irs management reaffirmed their commitment to fully implement key management and project development processes .