( see fig . 3 for more information on alignment of faa requirements with international and government - wide requirements and guidance on sms. ) although faa has made progress , completion of sms implementation across faa is likely to take many years . faa's agency - wide sms implementation plan includes tasks with estimated completion dates through 2015 , and some implementation tasks may take even longer to complete . the officials stated that since ang will provide the systems and components that will be used by ato to manage air traffic , it made sense for ang to develop its sms based on policies , processes , and systems established by ato . i for a discussion of our assessment ) . ( 3 ) what challenges does faa face in implementing sms ? to determine the status of faa's implementation of sms , we reviewed faa's sms orders and pilot project guidance , implementation plans , and notices of proposed rulemaking for part 121 air carriers and part 139 airports . we interviewed faa sms program managers across faa business lines and offices . we also reviewed international and faa guidance and sms and ntsb recommendations to faa related to sms . ( 2 ) to what extent have faa's sms efforts been consistent with key practices for successful planning and implementation of a new program ? to assess the extent to which faa's efforts have been consistent with key practices , we reviewed our reports and other literature on successful project planning and implementation , particularly for large - scale transformative projects , and identified key practices applicable to faa's sms implementation . we determined whether each key practice was addressed , partially addressed , or not addressed by using criteria developed from prior gao reports . for example , we considered a practice partially addressed if faa had partially implemented , taken steps toward , or started but not completed implementing it ( see app . to identify challenges faa faces in implementing sms , we reviewed our prior work on long - standing faa challenges , such as those related to training and data , and interviewed aviation industry experts and faa officials . we also reviewed our prior work on performance measurement and workforce analysis , and ntsb recommendations related to sms . to obtain industry views on challenges , we interviewed representatives from airports and air carriers selected for size and geographic dispersion . we also interviewed representatives of aviation industry associations and reviewed written comments submitted by aviation stakeholders on two faa - issued notices of proposed rulemaking that would require sms for some airports and air carriers . see appendix i for a more detailed description of our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from september 2011 to september 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . sms consists of four key components: ( 1 ) safety policy , ( 2 ) safety risk management , ( 3 ) safety assurance , and ( 4 ) safety promotion ( see fig.1 ) . together , these four components are intended to provide a systematic approach to achieving acceptable levels of risk .