one respondent was undecided . as part of ongoing agency efforts to monitor progress in people measures , gao conducted employee feedback surveys in 1999 and 2002 — before and after the act's passage . this survey asked employees for their agreement or disagreement with a variety of statements relating to their work life but was not designed to measure the impact of the act's flexibilities on employee satisfaction . the 2000 survey elicited an 89 percent response rate , which was even better than the outstanding 87 percent achieved in 1999 . on the basis of a comparison of responses to key questions in 2002 and 1999 , employee satisfaction ( as measured by the number of “strongly agree” / “agree” responses ) was up in 50 of the 52 categories . negative responses ( as measured by the number of “strongly disagree” / “disagree” responses ) also declined in 50 of 52 categories . gao believes that the impact of the legislation on its employees has been positive . clearly , the employees who requested and were approved for early retirement benefited from the act . furthermore , the realignment of resources resulting from these retirements has had a positive impact on the remaining employees , as well . ultimately , gao's efforts to improve the strategic management of gao's human capital , of which the legislation is a part , benefit all of gao . having the right people in the right places makes it easier for all gao employees to be successful in accomplishing their part of the agency's mission . in the final analysis , the agency's efforts to maximize its value allow us to better serve the congress and the american people . we do not have any recommendations for modifying section 3 at this time . to the extent possible , we have provided our assessment of the effectiveness of the flexibilities in addressing the challenges we faced when we requested the legislation . we have also included information about our use of the law's senior - level provision . lastly , we have included a summary of the responses provided by the personnel appeals board , gao's employee advisory council and gao's senior executives with regard to this report and our recommendations . if you or members of your staff have any questions or comments about matters discussed in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-5500 or walkerd@gao.gov or gene l. dodaro , chief operating officer , at ( 202 ) 512- 5600 or dodarog@gao.gov . the u.s. general accounting office exists to support the congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and assure the accountability of the federal government for the benefit of the american people . given gao's role as a key provider of information and analyses to the congress , maintaining the right mix of technical knowledge and subject matter expertise as well as general analytical skills is vital to achieving the agency's mission . gao spends about 80 percent of its resources on its people .