cost changes . under corps guidance , the project partnership agreement between the corps and the nonfederal sponsor is to require the corps to provide a quarterly cost report to the sponsor . the report is to include such items as updated projections of project costs , the amount of the sponsor's required contribution for the next fiscal year , and the total financial obligations of the corps and the sponsor for any additional work incurred . however , sponsors for two projects told us the corps was less timely in providing updated cost information . a sponsor told us the corps should respond when sponsors provide input or ask for information . for example , the sponsor told us the corps sent a letter asking the sponsor to pay its share of a cost but did not provide a description of the cost . however , the sponsor said it cannot just pay what the corps asks . instead , it needs documentation of how local money is spent . corps guidance on communications plans includes many of the suggestions made by corps officials and sponsors . for example , the guidance directs corps officials to talk with sponsors to understand their information needs and expectations when developing the project's communications plan . the corps recognizes the importance of having good communication with nonfederal sponsors of civil works projects . guidance calling for project delivery teams to develop a communications plan as part of their project management plan , and then updating it as needed , provides an opportunity for the corps and the sponsors to assess communication needs throughout the project . continuing contracts . corps officials said that the policy change limiting the use of continuing contracts increased costs on one project . corps officials on the roanoke river project said that , as a result of breaking the one contract into smaller contracts , costs increased due to the loss of economies of scale . however , corps officials said they could not indicate by how much costs increased because costs were not calculated for contracting scenarios that did not occur . additional analysis . the assistant secretary of the army for civil works required corps officials on the monarch - chesterfield project to analyze the probability of the project causing measurable flood damages outside the protected area . the additional analysis delayed the start of construction for almost 7 years , and the measures to address flooding caused by the project added $13 million to the cost of the project . in a memorandum dated february 20 , 2013 , the assistant secretary of the army for civil works expressed concerns that civil works projects , once authorized , did not appear to be managed for completion within approved cost estimates and also identified a need for a systematic approach to monitor and manage project cost increases , given continued fiscal constraints . the memorandum stated that , without controls to closely track and minimize cost increases on a year - to - year basis , more projects would be in jeopardy of needing statutory increases in their 902 limits .