( see app . iii for information on the key features of the state and local programs we reviewed. ) the five programs we reviewed address some public health risks that epa's program does not . for example , the programs regulate smaller sources than epa , set more stringent technology standards to control emissions , and include some large stationary sources that epa does not address . in wisconsin , any facility that emits one of 535 air toxics in amounts that exceed certain thresholds may be subject to the state's air toxics program . in some cases , annual emissions of less than 1 pound per year from a facility could trigger the state rule , depending upon the toxicity of the chemical . wisconsin officials said that they use lower thresholds than the clean air act's 10- or 25-ton thresholds because even small emissions of very toxic chemicals can present risks to the public . similarly , new jersey officials said that their state program addresses smaller facilities than epa because most of the numerous chemical facilities in the state are not subject to mact standards since they do not emit air toxics at levels that exceed federal thresholds . in contrast , in accordance with the clean air act , mact standards for major sources and the corresponding residual risk reviews apply to facilities in 158 industries with emissions of 10 tons or more of a single air toxic or 25 tons or more of a mixture of the 187 federal air toxics . in terms of the stringency of the technology standards used to limit emissions of air toxics , california and new jersey officials said that the technology standards in their states were often more stringent than epa's mact standards . for example , california officials said that petroleum refineries in their state use more stringent control technologies , and they noted that epa chose not to include these technologies as part of its survey of controls already in use when it developed the mact standard for this industry . regarding the types of facilities that are regulated by epa , some state officials expressed concern that epa did not develop mact standards for some major stationary sources of air toxics in their states . for example , oregon officials said that they requested epa to issue mact standards for several categories of sources , including ceiling tile manufacturing and titanium smelting if it found that they were major sources of air toxics . oregon officials expressed concern with epa's apparent lack of response to their request because these significant emitters of air toxics in oregon do not fall into one of the 158 major source categories that epa identified and regulates . further , the state and territorial air pollution program administrators and the association of local air pollution control officials ( stappa / alapco ) has compiled a list of over 40 major emission source categories of air toxics that were not regulated by epa mact standards . while the five programs we reviewed would generally address such sources , similar sources would be unregulated in the states whose programs are based entirely on the federal program .