completed . completed . completed . completed . actions to amend contracts and finalize order are in progress . contracts are expected to be amended once the draft order is signed by the secretary of energy , anticipated in early 2002 . completed . ensure that laboratory counterintelligence personnel have direct access to laboratory directors and concurrently report to doe's counterintelligence director . transfer doe counterintelligence oversight from operations and field offices to headquarters . prepare , within 90 days of the director's arrival , a report to the secretary to include a strategic plan for achieving long - term goals and recommendations on strengthening the counterintelligence program.initiate an internal inspection process to review annually the counterintelligence program and provide results to the secretary . integrate counterintelligence and foreign intelligence operational and analytic efforts throughout doe and the laboratories . completed . completed . completed . completed . actions related to identification and protection of sensitive unclassified information are in progress . completion is expected in early 2002 . completed . advise the assistant to the president for national security affairs , within 120 days , on the actions taken and specific remedies designed to implement presidential decision directive 61.may 1998 appoint departmental officials to be responsible for internal critical infrastructure protection.march 1999 develop counterintelligence inquiry management and analysis capability pilot program.monitor implementation of counterintelligence plan . completed . completed . completed . review counterintelligence investigative files . report annually to the congress on counterintelligence program . actions to update order are still in progress . completion is expected in march 2002 . actions to complete outstanding recommendations are in progress . completion is expected in early 2002 . actions to review additional files are in progress . completion is expected in 2002 . completed . completed . initiative hire additional security personnel and security maintenance technicians . improve and test plans to recover special nuclear materials in the unlikely event they are diverted . finalize efforts to ensure that materials accounting systems are accurate . status doe headquarters officials state that this is a field initiative . however , field sites we visited had not been tasked with actions related to it . initiative is currently on hold pending receipt of additional budget authority . doe / nnsa did not provide an expected completion date for this initiative . doe / nnsa did not provide information on the status or the expected completion of this initiative . actions to expand and upgrade materials accounting systems are in progress . completion is expected by fiscal year 2002 . completed . completed . eliminate the backlog of reinvestigations of existing security clearances . establish a counterintelligence and security team to make inspection visits to the five national security laboratories ( los alamos , lawrence livermore , sandia , oak ridge , and pacific northwest national laboratories ) .order an interim security review in july of the three operations rated marginal.may 1999 establish office of security and emergency operations . completed . completed . establish zero tolerance security policy . accelerate upgrades to physical safeguards and security . completed . actions to bring staffing up to approved levels are in progress . completion is expected by fiscal year 2002 . completed .