gao - 11-737r . washington , d.c.: july 27 , 2011 . financial education and counseling program . mortgage reform: potential impacts of provisions in the dodd - frank act on homebuyers and the mortgage market . gao - 11-656 . washington , d.c.: july 19 , 2011 . troubled asset relief program: treasury actions needed to make the home affordable modification program more transparent and accountable . gao - 09-837 . washington , d.c.: july 23 , 2009 . reverse mortgages: product complexity and consumer protection issues underscore need for improved controls over counseling for borrowers . gao - 09-606 . washington , d.c.: june 29 , 2009 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . hud supports housing counseling through the division in two ways . first , it approves and monitors housing counseling agencies that meet hud criteria and makes information about these agencies available to consumers on hud's website . according to hud officials , as of august 2011 , about 2,700 counseling agencies were hud - approved . second , hud annually awards competitive grants to approved agencies to help them carry out their counseling efforts . hud's housing counseling program provides funding for the full spectrum of housing counseling , including prepurchase counseling , foreclosure mitigation counseling , rental housing counseling , reverse mortgage counseling for seniors , and homeless assistance counseling . hud - approved agencies report to hud on the number and type of service interactions ( eg , counseling sessions ) they have with clients . congress has also provided targeted support for foreclosure mitigation counseling . recent research on foreclosure mitigation counseling suggests that it can help struggling mortgage borrowers avoid foreclosure and prevent them from lapsing back into default , especially if the counseling occurs early in the foreclosure process . treasury officials told us that they had discussed the specific impact measures with each grantee in the pilot program but had not provided guidance on how to calculate the results . we recommended that treasury provide additional guidance or technical assistance to the grantees on how to accurately and meaningfully calculate the results of the impact measures . treasury stated that it concurred with the observations in our report and plans to provide grantees with supplemental guidance on impact measures before the next reporting deadline . in prior work , we found shortcomings in hud's and treasury's implementation of homeownership counseling requirements for the hecm and hamp programs . we believe that the evidence we obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we performed our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .