clarify roles and responsibilities . while usda and usaid have designated some roles and responsibilities between themselves , they do not agree on the role and responsibilities that the freight forwarders should have in entering and updating information in wbscm . our prior work found that a key factor of effective collaboration is that agencies clarify the roles and responsibilities of those participating in the collaborative effort . during the design phase of wbscm , the agencies assigned the freight forwarders responsibility for entering information about individual shipments and updating the information whenever there were changes . however , freight forwarders we interviewed have said they were not consulted by either agency and , after wbscm was rolled out , they expressed concerns about the amount of information they needed to update , according to agency documents and officials . they noted that entering such information into wbscm was redundant with their own systems , cumbersome , and time consuming given the system problems wbscm was experiencing . as we previously noted , usaid informed usda in june 2012 that they would no longer require the freight forwarders to update shipment information in wbscm for usaid's international food aid shipments . the lack of updated information has created challenges for usda in processing claims and ensuring that they have accurate inventory information . agree on common goals . usda and usaid established some joint action items for wbscm , but they do not agree on a common goal for its further development and use of wbscm . our prior work has found that most experts we interviewed in collaborative resource management emphasize the importance of collaborative groups having clear goals . experts noted that participants may not have the same interests , but establishing common goals provides them a reason to participate in the process . after the rollout , as problems arose , usda and usaid agreed that usaid would suspend using the system for bulk freight procurement , and then for tracking prepositioned food aid inventory . they also agreed that freight forwarders would not be required to update freight information as changes in the shipments occurred . while the agencies collaborated to resolve some problems , such as creating a role for the stevedores in wbscm , they have not resolved whether usaid would resume trying to use wbscm fully for bulk freight procurement , tracking and updating information on shipments , and recording prepositioned food aid inventory . as we noted above , as of february 2014 , usaid had not agreed to test the changes that usda made to the system since march 2012 to improve its performance and functionality to procure emergency food aid . in its response to this report , usaid stated that it would test the international procurement functions of wbscm . written collaborative agreements . usda and usaid have not documented how they would further develop and use wbscm , or how they would resolve their outstanding issues . our prior work found that agencies that articulate their agreements in formal documents can strengthen their commitment to working collaboratively . as we have previously reported , having a clear and compelling rationale to work together is a key factor in successful collaborations .