nasa . similar to dla , five of the six nasa contracts we reviewed did not have all of the required isr or ssr submissions . for example , for a $4.6 million contract with an individual subcontracting plan awarded in fiscal year 2016 , the contractor submitted isrs for 2016 and 2017 and the ssr for 2016 . however , according to information we reviewed in esrs and a nasa official , the contractor did not submit any isrs for 2018 and 2019 , and did not submit any ssrs for 2017 or 2018 . the official stated that there was contracting officer turnover during this contract , and the contracting officer monitoring the contract at the time of our review could not find any documented explanation for the reports not being submitted . the same agency official explained that for another contract , the contractor experienced issues submitting documents in the electronic system initially and that there were personnel changes around the time the missing report was due . additionally , for another contract awarded in 2017 for $3.8 million , the contractor did not submit any ssrs . we discuss the two remaining nasa contracts in our discussion of contracts with subcontracting report submissions that were submitted well past their due dates . navy . four of the eight navy contracts we reviewed did not have all the required report submissions . for example , for one contract awarded for $16.6 million , the contractor submitted the first two required isrs and an ssr for fiscal year 2016 , the year in which the contract was awarded . however , we did not locate any other required submissions in esrs for subcontracting activity in fiscal year 2017 , the year in which the contract ended . a navy official told us it is not unusual for information related to monitoring and compliance of subcontracting plans to be missing from the contract files . three remaining contracts with individual subcontracting plans also had missing ssrs . however , the agency did not explain why these submissions were missing . gsa . the six gsa contracts all had the required report submissions . additionally , contractors submitted isrs or ssrs well past their required due dates for at least four contracts . for example , for one navy contract and one dla contract , we found that the contractors submitted an isr more than 125 days late , and almost 50 days late , respectively . for two nasa contracts , contractors submitted reports after they were due . for one of these nasa contracts , we found that the march 2016 and september 2016 isrs were submitted well past their due dates — more than 400 days and more than 150 days , respectively . for the second nasa contract , the contractor did not submit any of the required reports during the life of the contract and only submitted one final isr when the contract ended . this contract was awarded in fiscal year 2016 and ended in august 2018 . according to a nasa official , failure to submit the required subcontract report was an error by the contractor and insufficient contracting officer oversight .