new issue - based measure . the star review has two major components . the benefit entitlement review assesses whether the correct steps were followed in addressing all issues in the claim , collecting appropriate evidence , and whether the resulting decision was correct , including effective dates and payment rates . accuracy performance measures are calculated based on the results of the benefit entitlement review . the star review also assesses whether claims processors appropriately documented the decision and notified claimants . by comparison , under the existing claim - based measure , the claim would be counted as 0 percent accurate unless the error did not affect benefits when considered in the context of the whole claim . in march 2014 , vba reported a national estimate of issue - based accuracy in its fiscal year 2015 annual budget submission and plans to update this estimate in va's next performance and accountability report . vba also produces issue - based estimates by regional office , and reports them in the aspire dashboard . for fiscal year 2013 , the regional office claim - based accuracy rates ranged from an estimated 78.4 to 96.8 percent , and the issue - based accuracy rates ranged from an estimated 87.0 to 98.7 percent . beyond star , vba has programs for conducting regional office quality reviews and for measuring the consistency of decisions . in march 2012 , vba established quality review teams ( qrt ) with one at each regional office . a qrt conducts individual quality reviews of claims processors' work for performance assessment purposes . the qrt also conducts in - process reviews before claims are finalized to help prevent inaccurate decisions by identifying specific types of common errors . such reviews also serve as learning experiences for staff members . since fiscal year 2008 , vba has also conducted studies to assess the consistency of disability claims decisions across regional offices . initially , this initiative used inter - rater reliability ( irr ) studies to assess the extent to which a cross - section of claims processors from all regional offices agree on an eligibility determination when reviewing the entire body of evidence from the same claim . in 2013 , vba revised its approach and began using questionnaires as its primary means for assessing consistency . to further determine what and how information is shared among quality assurance components and how this coordination helps to identify problem areas , we interviewed vba regional office officials to gather their perspectives on how information is shared from star , qrt , consistency studies , and regional office compliance visits and how that information - sharing could be improved . we interviewed officials at the regional level to gain their perspectives on coordination and effectiveness of all of vba's quality assurance activities . at each office , we spoke with service center managers and quality assurance staff , as well as representatives of local veteran service organizations .