i for the complete list ) . to obtain information on the key r&d challenges that these entities face , we analyzed documentation , such as agencies' research plans and cybersecurity reports , and interviewed federal and industry experts . we then aggregated the identified challenges and validated the top challenges by asking the experts to rank the challenges in order of importance . appendix i contains further details of our objective , scope , and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from june 2009 to june 2010 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objective . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objective . the speed , functionality , and accessibility that create the enormous benefits of the computer age can , if not properly controlled , allow individuals and organizations to easily eavesdrop on or interfere with computer operations from remote locations for mischievous or malicious purposes , including fraud or sabotage . as public and private organizations use computer systems to transfer more and greater amounts of money , sensitive economic and commercial information , and critical defense and intelligence information , the likelihood increases that malicious individuals will attempt to penetrate current security technologies , disrupt or disable our nation's critical infrastructures , and use sensitive and critical information for malicious purposes . because the threats have persisted and grown , in january 2008 , the president began implementing a series of initiatives — commonly referred to as the comprehensive national cybersecurity initiative ( cnci ) — aimed primarily at improving dhs and other federal agencies' efforts to protect against intrusion attempts and anticipate future threats . two of these initiatives are related to improving cybersecurity r&d — one is aimed at improving the coordination of federal cybersecurity r&d , and the other is aimed at developing a plan for advancing the united states' r&d in high - risk , high - return areas . we recently reported that cnci faces significant challenges , including defining roles and responsibilities and coordinating efforts . several federal entities oversee and aim to coordinate federal cybersecurity research ; private entities have structures in place aimed at coordinating research ; and numerous federal agencies and private companies fund or conduct this research . ostp and omb , both in the executive office of the president , are responsible for providing high - level oversight of federal r&d , including cybersecurity . however , without a mechanism to track all active and completed cybersecurity r&d initiatives , federal researchers and developers as well as private companies lack essential information about ongoing and completed r&d , thus increasing the likelihood of duplicative efforts , inefficient use of government funding , and lost collaboration opportunities . additionally , without a complete understanding of how much each federal agency is spending on cybersecurity r&d , it may be difficult to make the appropriate resource allocation decisions . ostp and nitrd have recently taken steps to try to improve the coordination and oversight of cybersecurity r&d .