pcsc agreements . to examine vwp countries' information sharing through pcsc agreements , as well as the mechanisms that vwp countries have established for sharing information through the agreements , we reviewed information and data that dhs and doj provided . we discussed the data with doj officials but did not interview vwp country officials regarding the data . doj officials described their uses and checks of the data they received but stated that they did not formally study the data's accuracy . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable to place countries into broad categories that indicate the relative frequency with which they shared information . we did not independently verify the legal status of each vwp country's pcsc agreement . in addition , to determine the extent to which u.s. agencies have been able to use the shared information to address u.s. law enforcement and security interests , we reviewed u.s. agency data and documents reporting the agencies' use of information shared through the agreements . we also discussed the value and utility of information obtained through the agreements with u.s. law enforcement and counterterrorism officials in the united states and in the countries where we conducted our fieldwork . we determined that the information and data provided were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to determine the extent to which dhs has evaluated vwp countries' effect on u.s. security and law enforcement interests , including immigration enforcement , we selected and analyzed a nongeneralizable sample of 12 internal dhs reports evaluating vwp countries . we selected these reports on the basis of a number of factors chosen to identify countries where concerns might exist regarding foreign terrorist fighters traveling to the united states — for example , high estimated numbers of foreign terrorist fighters ; border security and counterterrorism capacity concerns ; a high number of esta denials ; number of travelers to the united states , including the percentage that traveled under the vwp ; relative population size ( eg , large or small ) ; date of entry into the vwp ( i.e. , pre - 2000 , 2001-2010 , 2010-the present ) ; geographic variation ( eg , western europe , eastern europe , the asia pacific region ) ; and status of vwp information - sharing agreements as characterized by u.s. agencies ( i.e. , whether agreements had been signed , were ratified , and were in force and whether sharing had occurred ) . we used a data collection instrument developed in consultation with a methodological expert to analyze the nongeneralizable sample of 12 internal dhs reports . we also reviewed relevant u.s. agency documents and guidance , such as vwpo's january 2015 “visa waiver program continuing designation country reviews standard operating procedures.” in addition , we interviewed u.s. agency and vwp country officials regarding the processes for conducting the evaluations and communicating results of the evaluations to vwp countries . to determine the extent to which dhs has submitted required reports about vwp countries to congress , we collected and analyzed information from dhs that documented the due dates and actual delivery dates to congress for dhs's most recent vwp congressional reports .