doe manages the spr . as of march 2018 , the spr held 665.5 million barrels of crude oil , worth about $42 billion . in the decades since its creation , the structure of the spr generally has not changed — it has always held crude oil in salt caverns along the gulf coast — though markets for crude oil and petroleum products — products such as gasoline and diesel that are refined from crude oil for final consumption — have changed in important ways . throughout most of the spr's history , domestic crude oil production was generally in decline , while consumption of petroleum products was generally increasing , causing the united states to rely increasingly on imported crude oil and petroleum products . however , the spr now operates in a context of increasing u.s. crude oil production ( the united states is now one of the world's largest crude oil producers ) , relatively stable consumption , and shrinking net crude oil and petroleum product imports . moreover , whereas the arab oil embargo of 1973 to1974 led to shortages and long lines at gas pumps around the country , prices now change to accommodate supply and demand , so that physical crude oil shortages are less of a concern than they were in the 1970s when the spr was created . the spr also helps the united states meet its obligations as a member of the international energy agency ( iea ) — an international energy forum of 30 member countries established in 1974 to help members respond collectively to major energy supply disruptions . to become a member of the iea , a country must have , among other things , crude oil or petroleum product reserves equivalent to 90 days of the previous year's net imports , and measures in place to ensure that it is able to contribute its share of a collective action initiated in response to a significant global oil supply disruption . as of march 2018 , according to iea data , the spr held the equivalent of 138 days of net imports . in may 2018 , we suggested that congress may wish to consider setting a long - range target for the size and configuration of the spr that takes into account projections for future oil production , oil consumption , the efficacy of the existing spr to respond to domestic supply disruptions , and u.s. iea obligations . in conclusion , we found that given the constrained budget environment and the evolving nature of energy markets and their vulnerabilities , it is important that doe endeavor to ensure that the spr is an efficient and effective use of federal resources . chairman upton , ranking member rush , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have at this time . if you or your staff members have any questions about this testimony , please contact frank rusco , director , natural resources and environment , at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .