milestone definitions . em headquarters officials said that they are primarily concerned with milestones related to on - the - ground cleanup ; that is , cleanup activities that actually result in waste being removed , treated , or disposed of . em officials said they consider these to be major milestones . however , not all sites make the same distinction between major and non - major milestones and , as a result , are not consistently reporting the same types of milestones to em headquarters . for example , officials at the savannah river site track milestones in a federal facility agreement that lists 79 milestones due in fiscal years 2018 through 2020 . this agreement makes no distinction between major and non - major milestones and includes administrative activities , such as revisions to cleanup reports , in its milestone totals . em headquarters officials , on the other hand , do not include these activities as major milestones and list only 43 milestones due in the same time frame . similarly , hanford officials do not distinguish between major or other milestones in their internal tracking . as a result , hanford officials are tracking 178 milestones due in fiscal years 2018 through 2020 , whereas em headquarters officials are tracking 57 for the same time frame at hanford . requirements for updating milestones . sites do not consistently provide em headquarters with the most up - to - date information on the status of milestones at each site . this is because em requirements governing the submission of milestone information do not specify when or how often sites are to update this information , so sites have the discretion to choose when to send updated milestone data to headquarters . as a result , the information on the list of milestones used to track cleanup performance by em headquarters may differ from the more up - to - date information kept by the sites . for example , officials at each of the four sites we examined stated that they try to send updated information on the status of milestones to headquarters on an annual basis , though they sometimes send it less frequently . officials at em headquarters acknowledged that their list of milestones is not always up - to - date because of the lag between when a milestone changes at the site and when sites update that information in the em headquarters' database . in addition to inconsistencies in tracking and defining milestones , lists of milestones maintained by em headquarters and the four selected sites may not include all cleanup milestones governing the cleanup work at the site . we found two cases in which permits at two sites included milestones that neither em headquarters nor site officials included in their list of sites' cleanup milestones . for example , milestones related to a major construction project at one of the selected sites we reviewed — savannah river — are not listed in either em headquarters' or the savannah river site's list of enforceable milestones . according to south carolina state environmental officials , milestones associated with this project are part of a separate permit and dispute resolution agreement not connected to the federal facility agreement or one of the sites' compliance agreements .