pakistan . according to the fiscal year 2005 ata annual report , ata delivered 17 courses to 335 participants in pakistan . supporting tables in the same report listed 13 courses provided to 283 participants , and a summary report provided to us by ds / t / ata reported 13 courses provided to 250 course participants . ds / t / ata officials acknowledged the discrepancies and noted that similar inaccuracies could be presumed for prior years and for other partner nations . the officials indicated that inaccuracies and omissions in reports of the training participants and events were due to a lack of internal policies and procedures for recording and reporting program data . in the absence of documented policies and procedures , staff developed various individual processes for collecting the information that resulted in flawed data reporting . additionally , ds / t / ata officials told us that its inadequate information management system and a lack of consistent data collection procedures also contributed to inaccurate reporting . we reviewed ata annual reports for fiscal years 1997 through 2005 , and found that the reports varied widely in terms of content , scope , and format . moreover , the annual reports did not contain systematic assessments of program performance or consistent information on program activity , such as number and type of courses delivered , types of equipment provided , and budget activity associated with program operations . in general , the reports contained varying levels of detail on program activity , and provided only anecdotal examples of program successes , from a variety of sources , including u.s. embassy officials , ata instructors , and partner nation officials . ds / t / ata program officials charged with compiling the annual reports for the past 3 fiscal years noted that ds / t / ata did not have guidance on the scope , content , or format for the reports . although ata plays a central role in state's broader effort to fight international terrorism , deficiencies in how the program is guided , managed , implemented , and assessed could limit the program's effectiveness . specifically , minimal guidance from s / ct makes it difficult to determine the extent to which program assistance directly supports broader u.s. counterterrorism policy goals . additionally , deficiencies with ds / t / ata's needs assessments and program reviews may limit their utility as a tool for planning assistance and prioritizing among several partner nations' counterterrorism needs . as a result , the assessments and reviews are not systematically linked to resource allocation decisions , which may limit the program's ability to improve partner nation's counterterrorism capabilities . although state has made some progress in attempting to evaluate and quantitatively measure program performance , ata still lacks a clearly defined , systematic assessment and reporting of outcomes , which makes it difficult to determine the overall effectiveness of the program . this deficiency , along with state's noncompliance with mandated reporting requirements , has resulted in congress having limited and incomplete information on u.s. international counterterrorism assistance and ata efforts .