mexico is such a country . a lack of transparency in ssa's processes , and the limited nature of its review of mexico's program , cause us to question the extent to which ssa will be positioned to respond to potential program risks should a totalization agreement with mexico take place . ssa officials told us that the process used to develop the proposed totalization agreement with mexico was the same as for prior agreements with other countries . the process — which is not specified by law or outlined in written policies and procedures — is informal , and the steps ssa takes when entering into agreements are neither transparent nor well - documented . current law does not prescribe how ssa should select potential agreement countries . according to ssa , interest in a mexican agreement dates back more than 20 years . ssa officials noted that increased business interaction between the two countries due to the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) was a factor in the renewed negotiations . in addition , because there is a totalization agreement with canada , our other nafta partner , ssa believed that equity concerns required consideration of an agreement with mexico . in february 2002 , ssa sought clearance from the department of state to begin such negotiations . the law also does not specify which elements of other countries' social security systems must be evaluated during totalization agreement negotiations . ssa officials met with mexican officials to exchange narrative information on their respective programs . senior ssa officials also visited mexico for 2 days in august 2002 . during their visit , these officials told us that they toured social security facilities , observed how mexico's automated social security systems functioned , and identified the type of data maintained on mexican workers . others still may not accumulate sufficient credits under the mexican social security system to totalize with their u.s. social security coverage . the cost of a totalization agreement with mexico is highly uncertain . ssa took no technical staff on this visit to assess system controls or data integrity processes . ocact also noted that regularly examining the differences between original projections and actual experience for future totalization agreements made sense and was consistent with current practice . although we could find no evidence during our review that such analyses had occurred on a systematic basis , we are pleased to hear that such analyses are now being done and are hopeful that ocact will both complete them in the future and document and make available the results . both ssa and ocact disagreed with our analysis and conclusions regarding the estimates of the potential cost of a totalization agreement with mexico , as well as our statement that any difference between estimated and actual costs will be on the high side . ocact noted that , given the relative uncertainty of the data , this outcome is possible , but that our statement inaccurately implied that there was evidence that ocact estimates are more likely to be understated than overstated . ocact went on to note that a number of factors suggest that ocact's estimate of 50,000 new beneficiaries , which will increase sixfold to 300,000 by 2050 , could indeed be too high .