( see app . § 253i limit the total period of performance for a&as task order contracts to 5 years , with the possibility of an extension of no longer than 6 months for continuation of services when extenuating circumstances exist . for any contract actions identified as exceeding or having the potential to exceed the 5-year period of performance limitation , we requested and received agencies' explanations for exceeding 5 years and incorporated their responses into our final results . to evaluate what contract types and vehicles are used by agencies to acquire a&as , we analyzed our contract file review data and information from our interviews with agency officials . in particular , our contract file review findings enabled us to analyze the contract types used by agencies to procure a&as , the degree of interagency contracting for a&as , and the level of competition for a&as contract actions . to determine whether or not the action was issued or awarded using competition , we assessed whether the agency contracting officials had prepared a justification and approval for a sole - source action or whether documentation supporting a competitive process was in the contract file . our interviews with agency officials provided additional information concerning agency - specific a&as contracting practices that affect the contract type , interagency use , and extent of competition . we conducted this performance audit from january 2007 to february 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . fiscal year obligations ( dollars in millions ) . the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , office of management and budget ( omb ) circular no . a - 11 , and the department of defense's ( dod ) financial management regulation provide exclusions to the definition of advisory and assistance services ( a&as ) , shown below . for example , the definitions cover functions ranging from contracts for consultants to provide very specific “expert opinions” to more generic contracts for “assistance” in areas such as management and professional support and engineering and technical services . we found misidentified contracts in seven of the 10 agencies where we performed contract file reviews . overall , agencies erroneously identified about 18 percent ( 59 ) of the 334 contract actions we reviewed as a&as and inappropriately included them in their fiscal year 2006 reported obligations . as shown in table 3 , examples of misidentified contract actions included services for fitness center operation and maintenance , food and maintenance services at a federal detention center , and the installation of telecommunications cabling . in addition to the contract actions that were clearly not a&as , we also found examples where the determination of whether the contracted service constituted a&as was highly subjective because of its broad definition . examples of such contracts included arbitration services and speakers at training events . as such , we could not definitively determine whether the agency misidentified the contract actions .