( fig . 1 illustrates call routing within irs' toll - free network. ) in measuring site adherence to its prescribed staffing requirements , the operations center considers variances of more than 10 percent ( of the total number required to be ready for each half - hour period ) as overstaffing or understaffing . while the guide also recommended benchmarking , formally or informally , with competitors or similar organizations , it stated each organization should determine an appropriate service level for its call centers , considering its unique circumstances . these considerations should include the labor and telephone equipment costs of answering the call , the value of the call to the organization , and how long callers are willing to hold for service . irs recognizes the need to establish long - term goals and is considering adopting some of the measures used by other organizations and establishing goals for those measures . for fiscal year 2001 , for example , irs plans to measure the percentage of callers who reach irs within 30 seconds . while irs has not established a long - term goal for this measure , it has set an interim goal of 49 percent for fiscal year 2001 . in commenting on a draft of this report , the commissioner stated that irs had instituted an agencywide strategic planning process in march 2000 that links the budget and available resources to its strategies and improvement projects . according to the commissioner , irs' fiscal year 2002 strategic plan and budget will include a 74 percent level - of - service goal , with a goal of reaching 85 to 90 percent by fiscal year 2003 . also , irs had an initiative under way to improve workload planning to ensure that customer needs are considered during the planning and budgeting process . the six call sites we visited faced challenges in successfully recruiting , training , retaining , and scheduling customer service representatives . according to site officials , these challenges included difficulties recruiting representatives due to job characteristics , training representatives and keeping them proficient , retaining skilled representatives , and scheduling representatives to meet forecasted staffing requirements . officials at five sites said they experienced some degree of difficulty in recruiting representatives because of job characteristics such as the seasonal nature of the positions , undesirable work hours , or the stressfulness of the work . nevertheless , five of the sites were able to fill their vacant positions . one site was unable to fill its needs and had concerns about the suitability of the persons hired . according to officials at this latter site , due to the limited time between the date they were provided the number of positions to fill and the time that the new employees had to report for work , the officials did not have sufficient time to interview all applicants before hiring them . officials at each irs call site were responsible for hiring representatives for their location , including deciding what recruiting methods and applicant screening tools to use . all six sites used some combination of conventional recruiting methods , such as newspaper advertisements and college campus recruiting .