, implementing partners ) in afghanistan . dod has taken some actions to address or partially address some of our previous recommendations regarding operational contract support , such as establishing a focal point to lead the department's effort to improve contingency contractor management and oversight at deployed locations , issuing new guidance , incorporating operational contract support into professional military education , and beginning to assess its reliance on contractors . for instance , based on our work , in october 2006 , the deputy under secretary of defense for logistics and materiel readiness established the office of the assistant deputy under secretary of defense ( program support ) to act as a focal point for leading dod's efforts to improve contingency contractor management and oversight at deployed locations . among the office's accomplishments is the establishment of a community of practice for operational contract support comprising of subject matter experts from the office of the secretary of defense , the joint staff , and the services . in march 2010 , the office issued an operational contract support concept of operations , and it has provided the geographic combatant commanders with operational contract support planners to assist them in meeting contract planning requirements . to provide additional assistance to deployed forces , the department and the army introduced several handbooks and other guidance to improve contracting and contract management in deployed locations . for example in october 2008 , the department issued joint publication 4-10 , operational contract support , which establishes doctrine and provides standardized guidance for , and information on , planning , conducting , and assessing operational contract support integration , contractor management functions , and contracting command and control organizational options in support of joint operations . additionally , in 2003 we recommended that dod develop training for commanders and other senior leaders who are deploying to contingencies and we recommended that cors be trained prior to assuming their duties . dod has partially implemented this recommendation ; training is available for commanders and other senior leaders however these courses are not required prior to deployment . in 2006 , we recommended that operational contract support training be included in professional military education to ensure that military commanders and other senior leaders who may deploy to locations with contractor support have the knowledge and skills needed to effectively manage contractors . according to a senior military officer with u.s . forces afghanistan's private security contractor taskforce , because of gaps in training , cors do not always understand the full scope of their responsibilities and so do not always ensure that a contractor is meeting all contract requirements . he noted that cors do not always understand that they have the responsibility to ensure that the terms of the contract are met and therefore do not bring contractors' performance issues to the contracting officer's attention for resolution . as a result , dod may pay contractors for poor performance and installations may not receive the level of security contracted . further , we found that the training programs do not provide enough information on preparing statements of work or preparing documentation for acquisition review boards — two responsibilities that cors are routinely tasked with .