we support such flexibilities in these situations . however , it is not clear from our review of the administration's proposal exactly what flexibilities are being requested . moreover , depending on how far - reaching such flexibilities go , we are concerned about whether the department will have an acquisition workforce with the skills and capabilities to execute the acquisition function outside of the normal procurement structure . is it the primary mission of the agency or program ? what is the proper federal role , if any ? who are the other key players ( eg , state and local government , non - government organizations , private sector ) ? how should we define success ( eg , desired outcomes ) ? similar goals and objectives: does the agency or program being considered for the new department share primary goals and objectives with the other agencies or programs being consolidated ? leverage effectiveness: does the agency or program being considered for the new department create synergy and help to leverage the effectiveness of other agencies and programs or the new department as a whole ? in other words , is the whole greater than the sum of the parts ? gains through consolidation: does the agency or program being considered for the new department improve the efficiency and effectiveness of homeland security missions through eliminating duplications and overlaps , closing gaps and aligning or merging common roles and responsibilities ? integrated information sharing / coordination: does the agency or program being considered for the new department contribute to or leverage the ability of the new department to enhance the sharing of critical information or otherwise improve the coordination of missions and activities related to homeland security ? compatible cultures: can the organizational culture of the agency or program being considered for the new department effectively meld with the other entities that will be consolidated ? field structures and approaches to achieving missions vary considerably between agencies . impact on excluded agencies: what is the impact on departments losing components to dhs ? what is the impact on agencies with homeland security missions left out of dhs ? in addition to the criteria that congress should consider when evaluating what to include and exclude from the proposed dhs , there are certain critical success factors the new department should emphasis in its initial implementation phase . gao over the years has made observations and recommendations about many of these success factors , based on effective management of people , technology , financial and other issues , especially in its biannual performance and accountability series on major government departments . these factors include the following: strategic planning: leading results - oriented organizations focus on the process of strategic planning that includes involvement of stakeholders , assessment of internal and external environments , and an alignment of activities , cores processes and resources to support mission - related outcomes . organizational alignment: the organization of the new department should be aligned to be consistent with the goals and objectives established in the strategic plan . communication: effective communication strategies are key to any major consolidation or transformation effort .