( see app . 1 for a description of the 10 issues. ) my testimony today updates information presented in our march 2005 report on the status of secure flight's development and implementation , including 9 of the 10 areas of congressional interest . in march 2005 , we reported that tsa had made progress in developing and testing secure flight , but had not completed key system testing , had not finalized system requirements or determined how certain aspects of the program would operate ( such as the basis on which passengers would be selected for preflight scrutiny ) , and had not clearly defined the privacy impacts of the program . at the time , we recommended that tsa take several actions to manage the risks associated with developing and implementing secure flight , including finalizing system requirements and test plans , privacy and redress requirements , and program cost estimates . tsa officials stated that information about its plans for future testing will be included in its rebaselined program plan . until this testing is complete , it will not be possible to determine whether secure flight will function as intended in an operational environment . key policy decisions that will influence the effectiveness of secure flight in identifying passengers who should undergo additional security scrutiny have not yet been made . these policy decisions include ( 1 ) determining the passenger information that air carriers will be required to collect and provide for vetting , ( 2 ) the name - matching technologies that will be used to vet passenger data against data contained in the tsdb , and ( 3 ) the thresholds that will be set to determine when a passenger will be identified as a potential match against the tsdb . these three decisions , discussed below , are all critical to ensuring that secure flight identifies potential terrorist threats as effectively as possible while minimizing the number of potential matches that will require further review by tsa and tsc analysts . ( 1 ) determining the passenger information that air carriers will be required to collect and provide for vetting: tsa needs to decide which data attributes air carriers will be required to provide in passenger data to be used to match against data contained in the tsdb , such as full first , middle , and last name plus other discrete identifiers , such as date of birth . using too many data attributes can increase the difficulty of matching , since the risk of errors or mismatches increases . using too few attributes can create an unnecessarily high number of incorrect matches due to , among other things , the difficulty of differentiating among similar common names without using further information . initial tsa test results have shown that the use of name and date of birth alone might not be sufficient for decreasing the number of false positives — that is , passengers inappropriately matched against data contained in the tsdb . ( 2 ) selecting name - matching technologies used to vet passenger names against the tsdb: tsa must determine what type or combination of name - matching technologies to acquire and implement for secure flight , as these different technologies have different capabilities .