dod did not have any comments on the report . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate house and senate committees ; the secretary of energy ; and the director of the office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others upon request . the report is also available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . the failure to do so was attributed to a lack of resources . we believe that transitioning these monitoring and risk assessment procedures to a management level that will still exist after site closure would better position doe to address future challenges . systematic monitoring reviews and risk assessments will be necessary for post - closure benefits since doe officials contend that ( 1 ) current contractor pension and postretirement health plan provisions allow for changes in postretirement benefits subsequent to the site closure and ( 2 ) post - closure benefit payments remain subject to compliance with doe's guidance for comparison studies and applicable regulations , such as the cost reasonableness provisions of the far . although the agency resources required to monitor dod's contractor benefits program are significantly greater than those needed at doe , the organizational structure at dod provides an example of an oversight group used to assist in compliance reviews and risk assessment at all contractor locations . dod provides contracting officers significant operational support from the defense contract audit agency ( dcaa ) and the defense contract management agency ( dcma ) . the two agencies provide a consistent source of routine review and analysis of detailed benefit and cost information outside of individual contractor locations . this group is thus able to gain broad knowledge of contractor issues and decisions to apply a more consistent definition of reasonableness to the evaluation of contractor benefit costs . dod also has formal guidance within the agency's supplement to the far , which lists occurrences in postretirement health or pension programs that indicate heightened risk and should lead a contracting officer to request a separate in - depth evaluation of the policies , practices , and costs of a contractor benefit component that is performed jointly by dcaa and dcma staff . doe's evaluation of total benefits in the benefit value study rather than a review of the individual benefit components does not fully address the differences in costs between deferred benefit programs , such as pension and postretirement health benefits , and other benefit components . a management focus on the long - term impacts of contractor benefit program decisions may provide improved information for decision makers in doe and congress . this information is important because decisions on changes to pension and postretirement health benefits can have a significant impact on doe's long - term budgetary needs . for example , a 1 percent increase in a contractor employee's current year vacation benefits has less impact on doe's long - term costs and budgetary needs than a 1 percent increase in postretirement pension or health benefits , which have a continuous and compounding effect as they are paid out in each year of retirement .