systems software . the development and enforcement of systems software policies and procedures over usage and modifications to operating system upgrades and utilities were inadequate . change controls . configuration change management control procedures were not consistently enforced across all major fms applications reviewed . service continuity . although fms has completed its business impact assessment , the results of this assessment had not been incorporated into detailed disaster recovery plans . although the independent external auditor reported that fms had made improvements in its information security control environment during fiscal year 2002 , the external auditor was critical of the overall effectiveness of fms's information security management program . fms management was still in the process of implementing its new entitywide security plan — authorized in september 2002 — for most of the year under audit . while fms has corrected vulnerabilities in some areas , subsequent reviews have found that previously identified weaknesses continue to exist on other systems . significant information security weaknesses also existed at the u.s. mint . the independent external auditor responsible for auditing the mint's fiscal year 2001 financial statements identified numerous general and application control weaknesses . due to the magnitude of these weaknesses , the external auditor reported two separate material weaknesses — one for general controls and one for application controls . fisma and other federal guidance require federal agencies to develop comprehensive information security programs based on assessing and managing risks . omb requires agencies to report performance measure data related to required aspects of their information security programs . these data include the number and percentage of systems that have been assessed for risk and assigned a level of risk , been certified and accredited , security controls that have been tested / evaluated within the last year , tested contingency plans . treasury also requires that its bureaus use these same performance measures when reporting to it on the status of bureau information security programs . performance data reported by the bureaus indicate that the bureaus have not consistently performed these required information security activities and that certain bureaus performed them better than others . for example , bureaus reported that the percentage of systems that they performed these required activities ranged from 0 to 100 percent of their systems . risk management is a process that allows information technology managers to balance the operational and economic costs of protective measures to achieve gains in mission capability by protecting the information technology systems and data that support organizational missions . agencies , including treasury , are required to perform periodic threat - based risk assessments for systems and data . risk assessments are an essential element of risk management and overall security program management and , as our best practice work has shown , are an integral part of the management processes of leading organizations . risk assessments help ensure that the greatest risks have been identified and addressed , increase the understanding of risk , and provide support for needed controls . treasury bureaus have not consistently assessed their systems for risk . according to treasury's fisma report for 2003 and as illustrated in figure 1 , four bureaus reported that they had assessed risk for 90 to 100 percent of their systems .