( see fig . further , the timeliness of certain training was identified as a concern by both principal inspectors we spoke with and inspectors responding to our survey . specifically , some principal inspectors we spoke with indicated a lack of timeliness for sep training . since faa's introduction of the sep training for non - legacy inspectors in 2001 , a total of 700 inspectors have received the training — - just over 300 inspectors between 2001 and 2002 and almost 400 inspectors between 2003 and 2004 . this means that less than 40 percent of the approximately 1,800 inspectors of both atos and non - legacy airlines ( as of fiscal year 2004 ) could have received sep training . faa requires all principal inspectors and other inspectors who are part of certificate management teams to receive sep training . geographic inspectors are not part of those teams and may not receive that training . while all of the principal inspectors who were on staff when sep was implemented in 2002 received initial sep training , according to faa , since that time , newly assigned inspectors may not have received the training before beginning their responsibilities . four principal inspectors who were assigned relatively recently to non - legacy airlines and were not provided the initial sep training told us they had received subsequent training given to all inspectors to explain revisions to the sep program . and ( 2 ) what issues hinder the effectiveness of faa's inspection approach ? to address these questions , we obtained and analyzed information from a variety of sources . we examined faa documents about sep , npg , and atos . we also reviewed prior reports prepared by us and others on sep and npg to determine significant issues involving those programs and how they were resolved . in addition , we surveyed a statistical sample of faa safety inspectors to obtain their views about the training they receive . we had no practical way to assess information on the amount of training necessary for inspector proficiency or the timeliness of the training provided . we conducted semistructured interviews and analyzed relevant documents from faa headquarters officials , and from field managers and inspectors in 7 regional and 13 field offices , which were selected because they oversee the top 25 non - legacy airlines ranked by the number of enplanements in 2004 . at these locations , we collected information on the inspection process and inspector staffing levels , workload , and training . in addition , we conducted semistructured interviews with safety officials at 16 of those top 25 non - legacy airlines , and with officials at seven industry organizations that represent airlines , inspectors , pilots , mechanics , and maintenance facilities . we analyzed data on required npg and sep inspections for fiscal years 2002 through 2004 from faa's nationwide inspection database — the program tracking and reporting subsystem ( ptrs ) . we assessed the reliability of the database and found the data sufficiently reliable for the types of analyses that we conducted for this report .