gao - 09-472r . washington , d.c.: march 6 , 2009 . i will describe each in greater detail . floors on matching rates: some grant programs employ floors in order to mitigate the outcome that would result if a particular grant allocation were determined by the funding formula alone . for example , the medicaid statute provides for a 50 percent floor . in our 2003 report on federal formula grant funding , we found that for certain states the medicaid matching provisions mitigated the effect of the medicaid funding formula , which has a population component . in 2002 , under the statutory formula , which is based on personal income relative to state's population , connecticut — a state with a high per - capita income — would have received a 15 percent federal matching rate . because of the statutory floor , connecticut instead received a 50 percent federal match . floors for small states: to ensure at least a minimum level of funding for all states , program formula allocations with formulas that rely on population data can include floors for small states . the vr formula employs a floor allocation that overrides the population - based allocations . the least - populated states receive a higher allocation than they would have otherwise received under the formula . hold - harmless provisions: in order to prevent funding losses from a formula change , programs can include hold - harmless provisions guaranteeing a level of funding that is based on a prior year's funding . for example , one part of the care act contains hold - harmless provisions whereby some recipients are guaranteed they will receive at least as much funding as in the previous year . complex formula structures: many formulas include measures other than population to distribute funds . vr allocations depend upon three factors: the state's 1978 allocation , population , and per capita income . as a result , the effect of increases in population may be mitigated by their 1978 allocations and changes to the state's per capita income . cdbg allocations are based on a complex dual formula structure using statistical factors reflecting several broad dimensions of need . each metropolitan city and urban county is entitled to receive an amount equaling the greater of the amounts calculated under two formulas . the factors involved in the first formula are population , extent of poverty , and extent of overcrowded housing , weighted 0.25 , 0.50 , and 0.25 , respectively . the factors involved in the second formula are population growth lag , poverty , and age of housing , weighted 0.20 , 0.30 , and 0.50 , respectively . in these formulas , the inclusion of population moderates the targeting impact of the other formula factors . we previously reported that complex approaches such as this can result in widely different payments to communities with similar needs . lags in data used to allocate funds: statutes that require formulas to use specific sources of data can introduce lags in the data being used when those data are not immediately available .