we are not making any recommendations in this report . we provided dod with a draft of this report for review . dod provided technical comments on our findings , which we have incorporated where appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees and to the secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the army , navy , and air force ; and the director of the office of management and budget . in addition , this report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 4523 or leporeb@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi . to identify the in - kind payment projects that dod reported it initiated during fiscal year 2013 , we requested information and compiled data on in - kind construction and renovation projects for fiscal year 2013 , their estimated value in u.s. dollars , the source of the in - kind payment project , the agreement or statutory authority , and their purpose and need from dod components — u.s . pacific command ; u.s. european command ; the departments of the army , navy ( including the marine corps ) , and air force . to determine whether a project was an in - kind payment project , we defined “in - kind construction and renovation projects” in this report as those resulting from certain host - nation support programs or from transactions ( whether domestic or overseas ) in which dod provides goods , services , real property , or an interest in real property ( including , but not limited to , a leasehold or easement ) in exchange for compensation , and in which any part of that compensation is provided in the form of construction or renovation services . further details on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from august 2014 to september 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . for example , installation personnel work to properly monitor construction and renovation progress to ensure that the developer is adequately providing any agreed - upon services over the terms of the agreement . additional work and oversight to ensure that in - kind payment projects are properly valued over time . some transactions involving in - kind payment projects , such as enhanced - use leases , can last as long as 50 years and the in - kind payment projects may continue over these 50 years . as a result , installation personnel will be responsible for the extra work to value in - kind payment projects during the 50-year lease . by contrast , cash value is known and requires no extra work to value .