we do not believe these concerns have merit . we believe that irs's current process for manually blocking tax debt from the fplp would provide a sufficient safeguard against duplicate levies while at the same time preserving adequate flexibility for other collection actions . as we discuss in our report , irs has the ability to block , and , on a case by case basis , does block individual tax debt accounts from levy through the fplp . irs could apply this same approach to these two acs subcategories . to manually block tax debt from the fplp , irs can place a transaction code in the tax debtor's account that blocks the fplp from automatically levying the tax debt . the same transaction code can be placed in the tax record if irs wants to levy more than the 15 percent allowable under the fplp . this process would allow irs to increase the effectiveness of the fplp while preserving its ability to use paper levies when appropriate and minimizing the risk of duplicate levies . with respect to the six recommendations we made to help ensure that irs's financial hardship fplp exclusions are appropriate , irs agreed with four recommendations , partially agreed with one recommendation , and disagreed with the remaining recommendation . specifically , irs agreed with our recommendations to ( 1 ) reevaluate whether the dollar ranges for existing financial hardship income thresholds are appropriate and reasonable ; ( 2 ) establish a policy that when future financial hardship thresholds are changed , tax debtors' hardship closing codes are changed to ones that maintain the tax debtor's original income ceiling ; ( 3 ) evaluate the ongoing validity of financial hardship designations whenever tax debtors fail to file their annual tax returns ; and ( 4 ) refer tax debtors with a financial hardship designation to irs's withholding compliance program for special attention if those tax debtors do not pay their current income tax obligations . although irs agreed to reevaluate whether the dollar ranges for existing financial hardship income thresholds are appropriate and reasonable , it raised concerns that imposing a rigid national median amount would disregard circumstances such as family size , medical needs , and geographic variations in average income . it is important to note that our recommendation does not advocate imposing the national median amount as a rigid maximum threshold limit . we recognize that irs attempts to accommodate the needs of tax debtors with varying family sizes , geographical locations , and various other circumstances . however , as our report discusses , between 1992 and 2004 , irs raised its top financial hardship income threshold ceiling from an amount equal to the median national household income to an amount almost twice the median income without any detailed analysis supporting either the large increases or the deviation in the relationship of these thresholds from the national median income . while irs disagreed with our recommendation that it establish a policy to review tax debtors' financial condition every 3 years to verify the continued validity of the financial hardship designation , irs did agree to consider including a time factor .