( app . ii contains a more detailed discussion of our methodology. ) of all the corelogic lp records that we matched to hmda records , we used those for which the associated property was located in an area covered by the federal housing finance agency's ( fhfa ) house price indexes ( hpi ) for metropolitan areas , approximately 92 percent of loans . based on each associated property's state and census tract , we also incorporated employment data from the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) and data from the 2000 census to control for various economic conditions and neighborhood characteristics . for each loan , we determined the performance status 24 months after the month of the first payment . we defined a loan as being in default if it was delinquent by at least 90 days , in the foreclosure process ( including loans identified as in real - estate - owned status ) , paid off after being 90-days delinquent or in foreclosure , or already terminated with evidence of a loss . we separately analyzed the three most prevalent types of nonprime loans: short - term hybrid adjustable - rate mortgages ( arm ) ( arms with initial 2- or 3-year fixed - rate periods followed by frequent interest rate adjustments ) ; fixed - rate mortgages ; and other longer - term arms ( arms with initial 5- , 7- , or 10-year fixed - rate periods ) . for each product type , we estimated default probabilities for purchase money loans separately from loans for refinance , and for each product type and loan purpose , we examined separately loans made to owner - occupants and investors . our primary reason for examining performance by product type , loan purpose , and occupancy status is that borrower incentives and motivations may vary for loans with different characteristics and purposes . for example , because of their early , frequent , and upward interest rate adjustments , short - term hybrid arms provide a stronger incentive for a borrower to exit earlier from a mortgage as compared with fixed - rate mortgages or longer - term arms . also , an investor may not react the same way as an owner - occupant may react when facing similar economic circumstances . we estimated separate default models for each mortgage product type , although the general underlying structure of the models was similar . however , we believe that the corelogic lp records that we were unable to match to hmda records were similar in important respects to corelogic lp records that we could match . for example , loans in subprime pools represented 61.5 percent of the overall corelogic lp sample , and 62.3 percent of matched loans . purchase loans represented 44.8 percent of the overall corelogic lp data set , and 46.0 percent of matched loans . in terms of geography , state shares of unmatched and matched loans were similar . loans in california represented 23.1 percent of the full corelogic lp data set and 22.5 percent of matched records . furthermore , nonprime borrowers with matched and unmatched records had similar fico scores .