strengthening agency information security . dramatic increases in computer interconnectivity , especially in the use of the internet , continue to revolutionize the way our government , our nation , and much of the world communicate and conduct business . however , this widespread connectivity also poses significant risks to our computer systems and , more important , to the critical operations and infrastructure they support , such as telecommunications , public heath , and national defense . legislative foundations transcend presidential administrations , fluctuating policy agendas , and the frequent turnover of senior appointees in the executive branch . having congressional consensus and support for the council helps ensure continuity of purpose over time and allows constructive dialogue between the two branches of government on rapidly changing management and it issue . moreover , as a prime user of performance and financial information , the congress can benefit from having the council statutorily based , thus providing it with an effective oversight tool in gauging the progress and impact of the council on advancing effective involvement of agency cios in governmentwide it initiatives . to oversee governmentwide implementation of the bill's provisions and other e - government initiatives , s. 803 would establish an office of electronic government within omb headed by an administrator appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the senate . moreover , less than a year ago , we reported that , notwithstanding the recent economic slowdown , employers from every sector , including the federal government , are still finding it difficult to meet their needs for highly skilled it workers . without fully developing staff capabilities , agencies stand to miss out on the potential customer service benefits presented by technology and the expansion of e - government . employees must have the training and tools they need to do their jobs . 3844 and supported continued authorization of information security legislation to ( 1 ) sustain agency efforts to identify and correct significant weaknesses , ( 2 ) reinforce the federal government's commitment to establishing information security as an integral part of its operations , and ( 3 ) help ensure that the administration and the congress continue to receive the information they need to effectively manage and oversee federal information security . in addition , on the basis of our review of first - year gisra implementation , we noted a number of additional changes proposed by h.r . 3844 that could further strengthen the implementation and oversight of information security in the federal government , such as requiring the development and promulgation of , and agency compliance with , minimum mandatory management controls for security information and information systems . s. 803 also includes a provision to further interoperability of electronic signatures for use in securing electronic business transactions with the government . the term “electronic signature” refers to the full range of methods for attaching personal identifiers to electronic documents , including pki technology . we agree with the bill's support for digital signatures .