gao - 11-207 . washington , d.c.: dec. 3 , 2010 . 185 ( ilo 185 ) . one goal of the convention was to establish an international framework for harmonizing seafarers' identity document ( sid ) issuance to strengthen the reliability of the documents and reduce their potential vulnerability to fraud and exploitation . to support this goal , among other things , ilo 185 requires ratifying countries to adopt certain credential features including fingerprint biometrics and issuance processes , establishes database requirements to support validation of sids at ports of entry , and establishes an oversight mechanism for assessing country compliance . you requested that we review the security procedures federal agencies take to identify and screen foreign seafarers arriving in u.s. seaports and to analyze ilo 185 and its potential impact on u.s. maritime security . we also visited or held teleconferences with cbp seaport field unit officials and coast guard sector officials responsible for security at a non - probability sample of eight domestic seaport areas . this report answers three questions: what measures do federal agencies take to address risks posed by foreign seafarers transiting u.s. seaports , and what challenges , if any , does dhs face in addressing these risks ? we selected these eight seaports based on the variety of foreign seafarer arrival activity ( collectively , cbp reported these ports received approximately 35 percent of fiscal year 2009 foreign seafarer arrivals ) and commercial vessel activity at the port — i.e. , cargo and / or cruise vessel . during these visits , we interviewed cbp field unit and coast guard sector officials responsible for advance - screening and seafarer inspections , and observed port operations , including seafarer inspection activities . while the information we obtained from personnel at these locations cannot be generalized across all u.s. seaports , it provided us with a perspective on the potential risks posed by foreign seafarers transiting to u.s. seaports and actions taken by federal agencies to address those risks . to answer the second question , we reviewed and compared fiscal year 2005 through 2009 data of seafarer illegal immigration incidents at seaports reported by ( 1 ) cbp headquarters and the eight cbp seaport field units we contacted , and ( 2 ) coast guard headquarters and the eight sectors we contacted , as well as coast guard's two regional intelligence centers that track maritime - security related events that occur in the pacific area and the atlantic and gulf coast area . we then reviewed guidance and memoranda issued by cbp and coast guard that detail reporting and collection methods for the data , and challenges faced in doing both . we interviewed headquarters and field officials about their data collection and reporting methods and compared them with criteria in standards for internal control in the federal government , dhs policy guidance for internal agency coordination and information sharing , and the cbp and coast guard instructions for collecting and tracking data on illegal seafarer entries . we assessed the reliability of these data by reviewing cbp and coast guard data management practices for the data , but found the data to be of undetermined reliability as discussed later in this report .