( see fig . investigators identified potential security vulnerabilities on federally managed land adjacent to the u.s. – mexico border . these areas did not appear to be monitored or have a manned cbp presence during the time our investigators visited the sites . investigators learned that a memorandum of understanding exists between dhs ( of which cbp is a component ) , interior , and usda regarding the protection of federal lands adjacent to u.s. borders . although cbp is ultimately responsible for protecting these areas , officials told us that certain legal , environmental , and cultural considerations limit options for enforcement — for example , environmental restrictions and tribal sovereignty rights . on january 9 , 2007 , our investigators entered federally managed land adjacent to the u.s. – mexico border . the investigators had identified a road running parallel to the border in this area . our investigators were informed by an employee of a visitor center that because the u.s. government was building a fence , the road was closed to the public . however , our investigators proceeded to the road and found that it was not physically closed . while driving west along this road , our investigators did not observe any surveillance cameras or law enforcement vehicles . a 4-foot - high fence ( appropriate to prevent the movement of a vehicle rather than a person ) stood at the location of the border . our investigators pulled over to the side of the road at one location . to determine whether he would activate any intrusion alarm systems , one investigator stepped over the fence , entered mexico , and returned to the united states . the investigators remained in the location for approximately 15 minutes but there was no observed law enforcement response to their activities . on january 23 , 2007 , our investigators arrived on federally managed lands adjacent to the u.s. – mexico border . in this area , the rio grande river forms the southern border between the united states and mexico . after driving off - road in a 4x4 vehicle to the banks of the rio grande , our investigators observed , in two locations , evidence that frequent border crossings took place . in one location , the investigators observed well - worn footpaths and tire tracks on the mexican side of the river . at another location , a boat ramp on the u.s. side of the rio grande was mirrored by a boat ramp on the mexican side . access to the boat ramp on the mexican side of the border had well - worn footpaths and vehicle tracks ( see fig . an individual who worked in this area told our investigators that at several times during the year , the water is so low that the river can easily be crossed on foot . our investigators were in this area for 1 hour and 30 minutes and observed no surveillance equipment , intrusion alarm systems , or law enforcement presence . our investigators were not challenged regarding their activities . according to cbp officials , in some locations on federally managed lands , social and cultural issues lead the u.s. border patrol to defer to local police in providing protection .