comparability . state and local funds must be used to provide services in title i schools that are “at least comparable” to services provided by state and local funds in non - title i schools within the same lea . each fiscal requirement is enforced at a different level . for example , the moe requirement applies only to the lea not to individual title i schools . the comparability requirement is evaluated at the school level because it seeks to weigh the services provided in title i schools with those provided in non - title i schools . in contrast , the sns provision is applied differently depending on how title i services are applied . it is applied to the program or the student in targeted assistance programs to ensure that those targeted programs are providing more services for a title i student than non - title i students receive , or it is applied to the school if it operates a schoolwide program . ( see fig . there are a variety of approaches that officials at the federal , state , and local levels take to oversee state and local education agency compliance with the fiscal accountability provisions associated with title i , including formal monitoring systems , such as the use of the single audit , and more informal monitoring systems , such as monitoring provided by interest groups . education distributes title i funds to the individual states and has primary responsibility for overseeing federal education programs and providing guidance and technical assistance to seas . monitoring efforts focus on state compliance with both programmatic and fiscal requirements . any issues of noncompliance reported at the state level are to be communicated to education and are typically resolved through the development of an sea corrective action plan , the implementation of which will be monitored by federal agency officials . states are considered the primary recipient , or grantee , of federal awards like title i and are responsible for ensuring that their subrecipients comply with all federal laws and regulations governing the grant . since seas pass through most of the federal funds to the leas , states must have the appropriate subrecipient monitoring systems in place to track title i spending . program monitoring systems typically include a review of funding applications , local budgets , self - assessment documents , scheduled on - site visits to schools , and technical assistance . the single audit act replaced multiple audits of separate grant awards with one organizationwide audit . a single audit includes an audit of the federal grant recipient's financial statements as well as an examination of its internal controls and its compliance with laws and regulations governing federal awards . it does not , however , cover every federal grant received by the organization . the objectives of the single audit act are as follows: promote sound financial management , including effective internal controls , with respect to federal awards administered by nonfederal entities . establish uniform requirements for audits of federal awards administered by nonfederal entities . promote the efficient and effective use of audit resources . reduce burdens on state and local governments , indian tribes , and nonprofit organizations .