we have work under way to evaluate these changes . the space segment includes the sensors and the spacecraft . four sensors are of critical importance — viirs , cris , omps , and atms — because they are to be launched on the npp satellite in september 2009 . initiating work on another sensor , the microwave imager / sounder , is also important because this new sensor — replacing the cancelled cmis sensor — will need to be developed in time for the second npoess satellite launch . over the past year , the program made progress on each of the sensors and the spacecraft . however , two sensors , viirs and cris , have experienced major problems . the status of each of the components of the space segment is described in table 5 . managing the risks associated with the development of viirs and cris is of particular importance because these components are to be demonstrated on the npp satellite , currently scheduled for launch in september 2009 . any delay in the npp launch date could affect the overall npoess program , because the success of the program depends on the lessons learned in data processing and system integration from the npp satellite . additionally , continued sensor problems could lead to higher final program costs . development of the ground segment — which includes the interface data processing system , the ground stations that are to receive satellite data , and the ground - based command , control , and communications system — is under way and on track . however , important work pertaining to developing the algorithms that translate satellite data into weather products within the integrated data processing segment remains to be completed . table 6 describes each of the components of the ground segment and identifies the status of each . managing the risks associated with the development of the idps system is of particular importance because this system will be needed to process npp data . because of the importance of effectively managing the npoess program to ensure that there are no gaps in the continuity of critical weather and environmental observations , in our april 2007 report , we made recommendations to the secretaries of defense and commerce and to the administrator of nasa to ensure that the responsible executives within their respective organizations approve key acquisition documents , including the memorandum of agreement among the three agencies , the system engineering plan , the test and evaluation master plan , and the acquisition strategy , as quickly as possible but no later than april 30 , 2007 . we also recommended that the secretary of defense direct the air force to delay reassigning the recently appointed program executive officer until all sensors have been delivered to the npoess preparatory program ; these deliveries are currently scheduled to occur by july 2008 . we also made two additional recommendations to the secretary of commerce to ( 1 ) develop and implement a written process for identifying and addressing human capital needs and for streamlining how the program handles the three different agencies' administrative procedures and ( 2 ) establish a plan for immediately filling needed positions .