we disagree . first , we used reliable evidence from a variety of sources , including the central intelligence agency ; the anser institute of homeland security ; the joint inquiry into the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ; reports of the rand institute and the markle task force on national security in the information age ; testimony before congressional committees by federal , state , and local officials ; interviews that we conducted with federal , state , and local agency officials and associations representing the international association of chiefs of police , the u.s. conference of mayors , the national league of cities , and the national sheriffs association ; and our survey results . moreover , over 100 cities with populations in excess of 100,000 , over 120 cities with populations of under 100,000 , and 40 states responded to our survey , representing a substantial number of governmental entities providing us with evidence of information - sharing shortcomings . these organizations are involved in information collection and analysis , have conducted well respected studies on information - sharing issues , or have significant experience in providing for homeland security through law enforcement or emergency management at the state and the local level , and are recognized as authorities in their fields of endeavor . our conclusions are based on this body of evidence . our complete scope and methodology is shown in appendix i . second , the department of justice stated that “our review of intelligence activities is an arena that is beyond gao's purview” and that providing gao with information on intelligence sharing “would represent a departure from the long - standing practice of congress and the executive branch regarding the oversight of intelligence activities.” the department of justice's impression that our review was a review of intelligence activities is incorrect . as our report clearly indicates , the oversight of intelligence activities was not an objective or focus of our review , which did not require our access to intelligence information or involve our evaluation of the conduct of actual intelligence activities . rather , our review considered the use of intelligence information in general in the context of the broader information - sharing roles and responsibilities of various homeland security stakeholders ( including the intelligence community ) . however , even if our review could be construed as involving intelligence activities , we disagree that such a review is outside gao's purview . we have broad statutory authority to evaluate agency programs and activities and to investigate matters related to the receipt , disbursement , and use of public money . to carry out our audit responsibilities , we have a statutory right of access to agency records applicable to all federal agencies . although our reviews in the intelligence area are subject to certain limited restrictions , we regard such reviews as fundamentally within the scope of our authority . third , as to the department's assertion that providing gao with information on intelligence sharing practices would represent “a departure from long - standing practice,” we believe our review in this area furthers congressional oversight but does not require reviewing intelligence sharing practices .