app . ii ) applies to advocacy's roundtables , we reviewed relevant statutes , case law , regulations , and guidance . we also considered advocacy's views on the issue . lastly , we interviewed officials from the entities that interact with advocacy in rulemaking — the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) , bureau of consumer financial protection , also known as the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) , and omb's office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) . also , we interviewed officials from six industry associations that represent small and large businesses ; one large corporation ; and two nonprofit organizations whose missions relate to policies or rules under consideration , to understand their perspectives on advocacy's roundtables and other work . we made our selections to include representatives from a variety of sources , and while the results from our interviews cannot be projected to all entities that interact with advocacy , the information we gathered provides insights into how the selected groups view advocacy and its work in representing small businesses to federal policymakers . to assess advocacy's workforce planning efforts , we interviewed senior management to discuss any workforce planning efforts that were in place . we evaluated those efforts and any related documents against applicable federal standards for internal control and the office of personnel management's human capital assessment and accountability framework ( hcaaf ) . we conducted this performance audit from august 2013 to july 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . under legislation that established advocacy in its current form in 1976 , advocacy' duties are to serve as a focal point for small businesses' concerns about the federal government's policies and activities ; advise small businesses on how to interact with the federal develop proposals for federal agencies on behalf of small businesses ; represent the views and interests of small businesses before federal agencies ; enlist the cooperation and assistance of public and private agencies , businesses , and other organizations in disseminating information about the federal government's programs and services that benefit small businesses . since its establishment , a series of laws and executive orders has increased advocacy's roles and responsibilities . first , in 1980 the white house conference on small business made recommendations that led directly to the passage of the rfa , which requires government agencies to consider the effects of their regulatory actions on small entities and , where possible , mitigate them . under the rfa , agencies provide a small business impact analysis , known as an initial regulatory flexibility analysis , with every proposed rule published for notice and comment and a final regulatory flexibility analysis with every final rule . the chief counsel for advocacy was charged with monitoring federal agencies' compliance with the act and with submitting an annual report to congress .