pub . 110-181 , § 223 ( g ) , repealed by pub . 112-81 , § 231 ( b ) ( 2011 ) . operations and support , and disposal costs.key milestones and tasks , such as important decision points , significant increases in performance knowledge , modeling and simulation events , and development efforts . some also show time frames for flight and ground tests , fielding , and events to support fielding . in its 2012 bar , mda made several useful changes to its reported resource and schedule baselines in response to our concerns and congressional direction . for example , mda reported the full range of life cycle costs borne by mda ; defined and explained more clearly what costs are in the resource baselines or were excluded from the estimates ; included costs already incurred in the unit cost for targets and countermeasures so they were more complete ; added a separate delivery table that provided more detailed information on deliveries and inventories ; and added a list of significant decisions made or events that occurred in the past year — either internal or external to the program — that affected program progress or baseline reporting . although the mda has made some progress , the new mda director faces considerable challenges in executing acquisition programs ; strengthening accountability ; assessing alternatives before making new investment commitments ; developing and deploying u.s. missile defense in europe and using modeling and simulations to understand capabilities and limitations of the bmds . in april 2013 we reported that though mda has gained important insights through testing and taken some steps to reduce acquisition risk and increase transparency , it still faces challenges stemming from high - risk acquisition strategies . as noted earlier , mda has undertaken and continues to undertake highly concurrent acquisitions . while some concurrency is understandable , committing to product development before requirements are understood and technologies are mature or committing to production and fielding before development is complete is a high - risk strategy that often results in performance shortfalls , unexpected cost increases , schedule delays , and test problems . it can also create pressure to keep producing to avoid work stoppages . our april 2012 report detailed how the aegis bmd sm - 3 block ib , gmd , and thaad programs undertook highly concurrent acquisition strategies . for example , to meet the presidential directive to deploy an initial set of missile defense capabilities by 2004 , the gmd program concurrently matured technology , designed the system , tested the design , and produced and deployed an initial set of missile defense capabilities . ce - i interceptors were rapidly delivered to the warfighter but they required an expensive retrofit and refurbishment program that is still ongoing . similarly , mda proceeded to concurrently develop , manufacture , and deliver 12 of the next generation of interceptors , the ce - iis . they were also delivered prematurely to the warfighter and will require an extensive and expensive retrofit . in april 2012 , we also reported that the aegis ashore and ptss programs were adopting acquisition strategies with high levels of concurrency .