law enforcement . forum participants identified four law enforcement strategies for preventing illicit drug use: ( 1 ) enforcing laws prohibiting underage consumption of alcohol and tobacco , ( 2 ) building trust between law enforcement and local communities , ( 3 ) using peers to promote drug - free lifestyles , and ( 4 ) closing prescription drug “pill mills” — medical practices that prescribe controlled substances without a legitimate medical purpose — and other efforts to reduce the supply of illicit drugs . forum participants also identified several high priority areas for future action to help prevent illicit drug use , including the misuse of prescription drugs . some examples include: supporting community coalitions comprising the health care , education , and law enforcement sectors that work in concert to prevent illicit drug use at the local level ; consolidating federal funding streams for multiple prevention programs into a single fund used to address the risk factors for a range of unhealthy behaviors , including illicit drug use ; increasing the use of prevention programs that research has shown to be effective , such as those that are well - designed and deliver persuasive drug prevention messages on a regular basis ; identifying and pursuing ways to change perceptions of substance abuse disorders and illicit drug use , such as emphasizing that a substance abuse disorder is a disease of the brain and can be treated like other diseases ; supporting drug prevention efforts in primary care settings , such as exploring ways to reimburse providers for conducting preventative drug screenings ; and reducing the number of prescriptions issued for opioids . in february 2017 , we issued a report on the drug - free communities support program ( dfc ) — a program that ondcp and samhsa jointly manage . this program aims to support drug abuse prevention efforts that engage schools , law enforcement , and other sectors of a community to target reductions in the use of alcohol , tobacco , marijuana , and the illicit use of prescription drugs . we examined the extent to which the two agencies ( 1 ) use leading processes to coordinate program administration and the types of activities funded , and ( 2 ) have operating procedures that ensure dfc grantee compliance and provide a basis for performance monitoring . in 2008 we had previously reported that ondcp and samhsa needed to establish stronger internal controls and had not fully defined each agency's roles and responsibilities for the management of the dfc program . in our february 2017 report , we found that ondcp and samhsa had improved their joint management of the program . specifically , we found that ondcp and samhsa employed leading collaboration practices to administer the dfc program and fund a range of drug prevention activities . for example , ondcp and samhsa had defined and agreed upon common outcomes , such as prioritizing efforts to increase participation from under - represented communities . the two agencies also had funded a range of dfc grantees' activities and report on these activities in their annual evaluation reports . for example , ondcp reported that from february through july 2014 , grantees educated more than 156,000 youth on topics related to the consequences of substance abuse .