we provided a copy of the draft report to the agencies in our review . with the exception of usaid , which stated that it already had an ombudsman to assist its civilians , all of the agencies generally concurred with these recommendations . usaid officials , however , at the time of our testimony , had not provided any documentation to support the existence of the ombudsman position . in the absence of such documentation , we continue to believe our recommendation has merit . in comments on our final report , opm officials stated that an interagency group was in the process of developing proposals for needed legislation . however , at the time of this testimony , these officials stated that no formal legislative proposals have been submitted . in addition , some of the agencies have taken action to create ombudsman programs . we determined that the information was sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review . we conducted our performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . although policies concerning compensation for deployed civilians are generally comparable across agencies , we found some issues that affect the amount of compensation these civilians receive — depending on such things as the agency's pay system or the civilian's grade / band level — and the accuracy , timeliness , and completeness of this compensation . specifically , the six agencies included in our 2009 review provided similar types of deployment - related compensation to civilians deployed to iraq or afghanistan . agency policies regarding compensation for federal employees — including deployed civilians — are subject to regulations and guidance issued by either opm or other executive agencies , in accordance with underlying statutory personnel authorities . in some cases , the statutes and implementing regulations provide agency heads with flexibility in how they administer their compensation policies . for example , agency heads are currently authorized by statute to provide their civilians deployed to combat zones with certain benefits — such as death gratuities and leave benefits — comparable to those provided the foreign service , regardless of the underlying pay system of the employee's agency . however , some variations in compensation available to deployed civilians result directly from the employing agency's pay system and the employee's pay grade / band level . for example , deployed civilians , who are often subject to extended work hours , may expect to work 10-hour days , 5 days a week , resulting in 20 hours of overtime per pay period . a nonsupervisory gs - 12 step 1 employee receives a different amount of compensation for overtime hours than a nonsupervisory employee who earns an equivalent salary under nsps . specifically , the nsps nonsupervisory employee is compensated for overtime at a rate equivalent to 1.5 times the normal hourly rate while the gs nonsupervisory employee is compensated for overtime at a rate equivalent to 1.14 times the normal hourly rate .