i for details on the selected cases ) . for each case study , we reviewed contract documentation from state , the servicing agency , or both and interviewed relevant officials such as contracting officers , individuals performing contract oversight , and program officials . a detailed description of our scope and methodology is included in appendix i of this report . we conducted this performance audit from june 2007 through may 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . interagency contracting is designed to leverage the government's aggregate buying power and simplify procurement of commonly used goods and services . this contracting method has allowed agencies to meet the demands for goods and services at a time when they face growing workloads , declines in the acquisition workforce , and the need for new skill sets . interagency contracts are awarded under various authorities and can take many forms . they typically are used to provide agencies with common goods and services , such as office supplies or information technology services . in other cases , they may be used to fill specialized requirements , particularly if the other agency providing the contract support services has unique expertise in a particular type of procurement . agencies that award and administer interagency contracts usually charge a fee to support their operations . there are two main methods of interagency contracting: direct and assisted . for direct acquisitions , rather than going through the process to award a new contract — soliciting offers , evaluating proposals , and awarding the contract — contracting officers at agencies can place orders directly on contracts already established by other agencies . with assisted acquisitions , customer agencies can obtain contracting services from other agencies , whose contracting officers place and administer orders on the customer agencies' behalf . assisted acquisitions can use interagency acquisition agreements ( iaa ) to document and establish general terms and conditions governing relationships between the customer agencies , which need the goods or services , and the servicing agencies , which provide the contracting services . responsibility for acquisition policy and management at state is shared by two offices within the bureau of administration — the office of the procurement executive ( ope ) and the office of acquisitions management ( aqm ) , as shown in figure 1 . ope is responsible for establishing acquisition policy at state . this responsibility includes prescribing and implementing acquisition policies , regulations , and procedures ; managing state's procurement reporting system ; appointing contracting officers ; and establishing a system for measuring the performance of state contracting offices . aqm is responsible for providing a full range of contracting services to support activities across state , including acquisition planning , contract negotiations , cost and price analysis , and contract administration . acquisition officials in ope and aqm stated that they work closely on many acquisition activities , but there is no direct reporting relationship between the two .