ii and iii ) . dhs stated it was taking actions to implement performance measurements and a strategic plan for the visa security program , as described in our recommendations . dhs indicated that it is expanding the tracking and measurement of performance data to better reflect program results . in addition , dhs stated it is developing a strategic plan that will integrate the key elements described in our recommendation ; however , dhs stated that it was unlikely that such a plan would have aided in the approval of the nsdd - 38 requests at the five expansion posts . we believe that a strategic plan would allow dhs to better address questions about the program and would be useful in guiding visa security operations in saudi arabia and other consular posts . regarding the matter for congressional consideration to provide dhs with the flexibility to determine the review of visa applications in saudi arabia , dhs agreed that it needed to expand some of the vsos' activities in saudi arabia , such as providing additional training , which we found were not being provided because of the volume of work that resulted from fulfilling the legislative requirement . dhs noted that a legislative change should maintain dhs's authority and discretion in determining the scope of the vsos' review . dhs also provided additional details on the visa security program , its plans to improve operations , and its interaction with state regarding program expansion . these comments are reprinted in appendix ii , along with our analysis . dhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated into the report , as appropriate . state agreed with our conclusions , stating that the report is an accurate description of the implementation of the visa security program . in addition , state agreed with our matter for congressional consideration . state noted that the ability of the vsos in saudi arabia to access law enforcement and other databases not available to consular officers highlights the importance of shared , interoperable databases worldwide . with regard to the program's expansion outside saudi arabia , state also noted that chiefs of mission and its rightsizing office are obligated to ensure that staffing overseas for all agencies is at the proper level and consistent with available space and resources . state's comments are reprinted in appendix iii . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of state and homeland security , and to other interested members of congress . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 4128 or fordj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . to assess the visa security officers' activities in saudi arabia , we reviewed the homeland security act of 2002 , which authorized dhs to create the visa security program .