the systems are costly and difficult to support . the survey found , for example , that over two - thirds of states face growing costs for mainframe hardware and software support of their legacy systems . most states' systems cannot efficiently handle current workload demands , including experiencing difficulties implementing new federal or state laws due to constraints imposed by the systems . states have realized an increasing need to transition to web - based online access for ui data and services . states also cited specific issues with their legacy systems , including the fact that they cannot be reprogrammed quickly enough to respond to changes resulting from legislative mandates . in addition , states have developed one or more stand - alone ancillary systems to fulfill specific needs , but these systems are not integrated with their legacy mainframe systems , decreasing efficiency . finally , according to the states , existing legacy systems cannot keep up with advances in technology , such as the move to place more ui services online . in addition to providing general oversight of the ui program , the department of labor plays a role in facilitating the modernization of states' ui it systems . this role consists primarily of providing funding and technical support to the state agencies . in this regard , labor distributes federal funds to each state for the purpose of administering its ui program , including funds that can be used for it modernization . through supplemental budget funds , labor has supported the establishment of state consortiums , in which three or four states work together to develop and share a common system . these efforts are intended to allow multiple states to pool their resources and reduce risk in the pursuit of a single common system that they can each use after applying state - specific programming and configuration settings . labor also helps to provide technical assistance to the states by supporting and participating in two key groups — naswa and the information technology support center ( itsc ) . naswa provides a forum for states to exchange information and ideas about how to improve program operations ; serves as a liaison between state workforce agencies and federal government agencies , congress , businesses , and intergovernmental groups ; and is the collective voice of state agencies on workforce policies and issues . itsc is funded by labor and the states to provide technical services , core projects , and a central capacity for exploring the latest technology for all states . itsc's core services to states include application development , standards development , and ui modernization services , among others . our september 2012 report noted that selected states had made varying progress in modernizing the it systems supporting their ui programs .