● chat tool . hsin's chat tool , known as jabber , is similar to other instant message and chat tools — with the addition of security . users can customize lists of their coworkers and send messages individually or set up chat rooms for more users . other features include chat logs ( which allow users to review conversations ) , timestamps , and user profiles . state and local governments have similar it initiatives to carry out their homeland security missions , including sharing information . a key state and local - based initiative is the regional information sharing systems ( riss ) program . the riss program helps state and local jurisdictions to , among other things , share information in support of their homeland security missions . this nationwide program , operated and managed by state and local officials , was established in 1974 to address crime that operates across jurisdictional lines . the program consists of six regional information analysis centers that serve as regional hubs across the country . these centers offer services to riss members in their regions , including information sharing and research , analytical products , case investigation support , funding , equipment loans , and training . funding for the riss program is administered through a grant from the department of justice . as part of its information - sharing efforts , the riss program operates two key initiatives ( among others ) : the riss secure intranet ( rissnet ) and the automated trusted information exchange ( riss atix ) : ● created in 1996 , rissnet is intended as a secure network serving member law enforcement agencies throughout the united states and other countries . through this network , riss offers services such as secure e - mail , document libraries , intelligence databases , web pages , bulletin boards , and a chat tool . ● riss atix offers services similar to those offered by rissnet to agencies beyond the law enforcement community , including executives and officials from governmental and nongovernmental agencies and organizations that have public safety responsibilities . riss atix is partitioned into 39 communities of interest , such as critical infrastructure , emergency management , public health , and government officials . members of each community of interest contribute information to be made available within each community . according to riss officials , the riss atix application was developed in response to the events of september 11 , 2001 ; it was initiated in 2002 as an application to provide tools for information sharing and collaboration among public safety stakeholders , such as first responders and schools . as of july 2006 , riss atix supported 1,922 users beyond the traditional users of rissnet . riss atix uses the technology of rissnet to offer services through its web pages . the pages are tailored for each community of interest and contain community - specific news articles , links , and contact information . the pages also provide access to the following features: ● document library . participants can store and search relevant documents within their community of interest . ● bulletin board .