gao - 09-274r . washington , d.c.: april 30 , 2009 . ( see fig . 3 for examples of fencing. ) to what extent has cbp deployed the sbi tactical infrastructure program and assessed its results ? in addition , we are providing information , in appendix i , on the status of sbi program office staffing and the progress the office reports in achieving its human capital goals . to address these questions , we analyzed dhs documents , including program schedules and status reports . we reviewed criteria in the government performance and results act of 1993 , our prior work on results - oriented government and federal government best practices in human capital management , as well as dhs office of inspector general reports . we also interviewed dhs and cbp headquarters and field officials , including representatives of the sbi program office , the tactical infrastructure program office , border patrol ( a component of cbp ) ; and department of interior ( doi ) , including representatives of the office of the deputy secretary and office of law enforcement security and emergency management . we visited the border patrol's tucson , yuma , and san diego sectors — sites where sbinet technology ( project 28 ) and / or fencing had been deployed at the time of our review . we determined that funding , staffing , and fencing mileage data provide d by cbp were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we based our decision on an assessment of each respective area by questioning cognizant dhs officials about the source of the data and policies and procedures used to maintain the integrity of these data . we conducted this performance audit from september 2008 through september 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . t standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . within cbp , the sbi program executive office , referred to in this report as the sbi program office , has overall responsibility for overseeing all sbi activities for acquisition and implementation , including establishing and meeting program goals , objectives , and schedules for overseeing contractor performance ; and for coordinating among dhs agencies . however , the tactical infrastructure portion of the program is managed on a day - to - day basis by cbp's office of finance facilities management and engineering division . among other things , cbp's border patrol has responsibility for detecting and preventing the illegal entry of aliens into the united states between designated ports of entry . dhs began funding the sbi program in fiscal year 2005 at a level of $38 million , which it increased to $325 million in fiscal year 2006 . starting in fiscal year 2007 , dhs's annual appropriations acts have included specific sbi appropriations . since fiscal year 2005 , sbi's funding has amounted to over $3.7 billion ( see table 1 ) . dhs has requested $779 million in sbi funding for fiscal year 2010 .