( see fig . by 2018 , social security's cash income ( tax revenue ) is projected to fall below benefit payments . at that time , social security will join medicare's hospital insurance trust fund , whose outlays exceeded cash income in 2004 , as a net claimant on the rest of the federal budget . the combined oasdi trust funds will begin drawing on the treasury to cover the cash shortfall , first relying on interest income and eventually drawing down accumulated trust fund assets . congress faces a challenge many would find daunting: the need to bring government and its programs in line with 21st century realities . this challenge has many related pieces: narrowing the long - term fiscal gap ; adapting social security to meet the new demographic reality ; tackling the challenge of health care access , cost and quality ; deciding on the appropriate role and size of the federal government — and how to finance that government — and bringing the panoply of federal activities into line with today's world . we believe that we at gao have an obligation to assist and support the congress in this effort . the reexamination questions discussed today and the forthcoming report of which they are a part are offered in that spirit: they are drawn primarily from the work gao has done for the congress over the years . we have attempted to structure questions that we hope you will find useful as you examine and act on problems that may not constitute an urgent crisis but pose important longer term threats to the nation's fiscal , economic , security and societal future . although it is not easy , the periodic reexamination of existing portfolios of federal programs can weed out ineffective or outdated programs while also strengthening and updating those programs that are retained . such a process not only could address fiscal imbalances , but also improve the responsiveness , effectiveness , and credibility of government in addressing 21st century needs and challenges . given the unsustainability of our current fiscal outlook , the real question is not whether we will deal with the fiscal imbalance , but how and when . given the size of the long - term fiscal imbalances , all major spending and revenue programs in the budget should be subject to periodic reviews and reexamination . while it is important to consider the role and size of government , how we finance government , and the major programs driving the long - term spending path — medicare , medicaid , and social security — our recent fiscal history suggests that exempting major areas from reexamination and review can undermine the credibility and political support for the entire process . we recognize that this will not be a simple or easy process — there are no “quick fixes.” such a process reverses the focus of traditional incremental reviews , where disproportionate scrutiny is given to proposals for new programs or activities , but not to those that are already in the base . what can or should the federal government do to promote uniform standards of practice for selected procedures and illnesses ?