( see fig . originally , only the second unit was designed to include a selective catalytic reduction system , but as of april 7 , 2005 , all four of the combustion turbines within the two units have been equipped with these systems to control nox emissions. ) to produce ordinary nitrogen and water vapor . an oxidizing catalyst is similar in concept to catalytic converters used in automobiles . the catalyst , normally coated with a metal , such as platinum , is used to promote a chemical reaction with the oxygen present to convert carbon monoxide into carbon dioxide and water vapor . although no u.s. emissions requirements apply to these plants , sempra and intergen required a presidential permit to construct and connect the new transmission lines needed at the u.s. - mexican border to export electricity into the united states . because of the similarities of the proposals submitted by the companies , doe decided to consider them together in a single environmental assessment , required as part of the permitting process . in december 2001 , doe completed the environmental assessment and issued a finding of no significant impact and presidential permits for both of the proposed projects . following these decisions , sempra and intergen constructed the transmission lines and began commercial operations . however , as a result of subsequent litigation , on july 8 , 2003 , the u.s. district court for the southern district of california instructed doe to prepare a more comprehensive environmental review , which included an assessment of the health impacts from the power plants as part of its analysis . doe's environmental impact statement was issued in final form in december 2004 . doe found that the proposed power plants presented a low potential for environmental impacts and published a record of decision in the federal register on april 25 , 2005 , authorizing presidential permits to be granted for both transmission lines to the respective power plants as presently designed . use of natural gas at the sempra and intergen facilities greatly reduces sulfur dioxide emissions compared with other fuels such as coal or oil . for example , u.s. coal contains an average of 1.6 percent sulfur , and oil burned at electric utility power plants ranges from 0.5 percent to 1.4 percent sulfur ; comparatively , natural gas has less than 0.0005 percent sulfur . the emissions from the sempra and intergen power plants in mexicali are comparable to emissions from similar plants recently permitted in california and are low relative to emissions from the primary sources of pollution in imperial county , which are various forms of dust and motor vehicles . however , if the plants were located in imperial county , they would be required , among other things , to offset their emissions by reducing emissions from other pollution sources in the region . power plants in mexico are not required to report to federal agencies in the united states on actual emissions of key pollutants generated during plant operations . therefore , we believe that the best data available to estimate emissions from the sempra and intergen power plants comes from emission performance tests conducted by independent third - party contractors hired by the power plants .