gao - 07-638t . washington , d.c.: march 20 , 2007 . the agencies have observed effects of their management actions . most agency officials with whom we spoke noted that they are not testing specific hypotheses or assumptions on which the plan is based , but are instead observing the effects of their management actions and then making changes they believe are necessary . yet , without desired outcomes expressed in clearly defined , measurable objectives , it is unclear how the agencies assess whether and how to change their management . for example , when revising their operating procedures for 2007 – 2008 in november 2007 , agency officials reconsidered the hazing approach they applied in spring 2007 that was outlined in the november 2006 memorandum to the record because of the unusual number of bison — several hundred — that remained outside the park beyond the may 15 deadline . yet this statement leaves much to interpretation . for example , to describe how the partner agencies intend to “address” the risk of brucellosis transmission , the plan interchangeably uses the terms “minimize” and “reduce,” despite the different meanings of these words , and the plan does not define either of these terms . the terms also imply that there is a recognized baseline risk from which to measure , but despite a general agreement among resource managers and scientists that the risk brucellosis - infected bison pose to domestic cattle is low , but greater than zero , the agencies have not conducted a risk assessment to better quantify the risk of brucellosis transmission and establish a baseline . some agency officials noted that any risk of brucellosis transmission to cattle greater than zero is unacceptable , and that a better measure for assessing the plan's effectiveness is the extent to which the disease is becoming less prevalent . disagreement remains , however , among professionals in wildlife science , disease , and management and in livestock disease and management on some central issues relating to brucellosis in yellowstone bison , including brucellosis prevalence . the disagreement persists because , as agency officials noted , the method currently used to determine prevalence — a blood test indicating exposure to the bacterium , rather than the presence of the bacterium itself , which is the best diagnostic tool available at present — is a poor indicator of the actual percentage of infectious animals in the population . long - term averages of opportunistically , rather than systematically , collected data from yellowstone bison indicate that the fraction of bison that have been exposed to the bacterium falls between 40 and 50 percent , and limited testing of bison captured during management actions from 2001 to 2006 showed an exposure rate generally between 35 and 55 percent . within a herd , however , the number of animals capable of transmitting the bacterium is generally fewer than the number of animals with positive blood tests . data suggest that the percentage of infected animals — those capable of transmitting the bacterium — may be as low as 2 percent or as high as 46 percent of animals testing positive for exposure .