february 2007 . coast guard: observations on the preparation , response , and recovery missions related to hurricane katrina . gao - 06-903 . july 31 , 2006 . child welfare: federal action needed to ensure states have plans to safeguard children in the child welfare system displaced by disasters . ( 2 ) how well equipped is nvoad to fulfill its role in esf - 6 of the nrf ? ( 3 ) to what extent has fema addressed issues that arose after hurricanes katrina and rita with the provision of mass care services to the disabled and elderly ? ( 4 ) to what extent have major national voluntary organizations made preparations since hurricanes katrina and rita to better meet the mass care needs of the disabled and elderly ? and ( 5 ) what difficulties did local voluntary organizations providing mass care after katrina and rita face in being reimbursed under fema's public assistance program , and to what extent has fema addressed these issues ? to obtain information on changes in the roles of fema and the red cross under the nrf , we reviewed key fema and red cross documents , such as the new nrf , and interviewed officials from fema , the red cross , other major national voluntary organizations , including the salvation army and southern baptists , and emergency management officials from a selection of states that included louisiana , mississippi , and nine other states throughout the country to help us identify potential implementation issues with the shift in roles in the new esf - 6 . we gathered information about nvoad's capability to perform its nrf role by reviewing nvoad documents about its member services , internal governance , funding and plans for the future . to gather information about the efforts made by fema and voluntary organizations to improve services for individuals with disabilities and the elderly , we interviewed fema officials , officials from five major national voluntary organizations – the red cross , salvation army , catholic charities , southern baptists , and united way – local - and state - level emergency managers from mississippi , louisiana , and texas , and officials from advocacy groups for elderly and disabled populations . we also interviewed officials from nvoad , eight of nvoad's member organizations , and fema to obtain additional information . we also reviewed fema and red cross documents that pertained to the elderly and disabled . we also reviewed fema's website and interviewed officials within fema's public assistance program , fema's voluntary agency liaisons , local voluntary organizations providing mass care that sought reimbursement , and state and local governments in the gulf coast region . finally , we reviewed reports on the response to the gulf coast hurricanes . for a list of the reports that we reviewed , see our bibliography . we conducted this performance audit between january 2007 and february 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .