( see app . cms noted the importance of monitoring the impact of medicare payment changes and improving payment systems over time . but there are some high - priced items . for example , medicare pays over $40 per item for certain tracheostomy , wound - care , and ostomy supplies when provided to patients not receiving home health care . the clinical experts suggested , however , that including nonroutine medical supplies in the payment has disrupted care for some patients , which could justify excluding these supplies from the episode payment . the experts noted that the use of nonroutine medical supplies for patients who were self - managing a chronic condition prior to their entering home health care could be disrupted by the cost containment strategies adopted by some hhas . hha representatives and wound - care nurses told us that under the pps some hhas have limited their inventories of particular types of nonroutine medical supplies or reduced the number of supplies they provide to patients . such changes required some patients who had been self - managing chronic conditions to either change the type of supply ( for example , the type of ostomy appliance ) or number of supplies used while receiving home health care . such actions are most likely to have affected patients with chronic medical conditions ( such as bowel ostomies and tracheotomies ) that they self - manage , where switching products may have impaired their sense of security and their ability to function as normally as possible . as part of its assessment of the effects of the home health pps , cms plans to examine changes in home health utilization , including the number , type , and duration of home health visits and the number of patients served . this could include an examination of whether certain types of patients , such as those requiring nonroutine medical supplies , have the same utilization now as they did prior to the pps . but , due to the lack of information about individual supply items , these analyses cannot evaluate whether patterns of self - care have been disrupted . the adequacy of medicare's home health payment groups and adjustments to reflect the variation in episode costs across patients is critical to ensuring that patients and hhas are not disadvantaged under the pps . cms is working on refinements that might include additional payment groups , different payment adjustments , or the exclusion of particular supplies from the episode payment . while there are sound reasons to retain most nonroutine medical supplies in the episode payment , excluding certain supplies may be warranted if the payment groups will not adequately account for their costs or if it has been demonstrated that patient access to care or continuity of care has been disrupted . yet , cms continues to lack patient - specific cost and utilization data on individual nonroutine medical supplies needed to evaluate if the payment groups could be improved or if certain supplies warrant consideration for exclusion from the pps . because cms's efforts to gather these data on a voluntary basis from hhas have not been successful , the agency needs an alternative data collection method .