however , we found that requirements under the mou were not being met . school voucher programs are gaining in popularity across the country . in addition to dc's federally funded osp , 10 states currently operate state - funded school voucher programs . further , congress has considered creating a national school voucher program in recent years . given these developments , this statement discusses the importance of proper management and oversight of these programs to ensure they are implemented effectively and provide accountability over public funds . this statement is based on a gao report released in 2013 , titled district of columbia opportunity scholarship program: actions needed to address weaknesses in administration and oversight . this report responded to a request from the chairman of the subcommittee on financial services and general government , committee on appropriations , u.s. senate for gao to assess the extent to which the osp administrator was meeting its stated goals and properly managing federal funds . in the report , we examined ( 1 ) the extent to which the osp administrator provides information that enables families to make informed school choices , ( 2 ) whether osp's internal controls ensure accountability , and ( 3 ) how education and district agencies responsible for overseeing osp have performed their stated roles and responsibilities . to address these objectives , we analyzed key documents regarding participating schools and osp that were available to parents . we visited 10 of the 53 participating private schools and interviewed key officials . we selected the schools based on the highest number and concentration of osp students given the total enrollment at the school in the 2011-2012 school year . five internal control standards — control environment , risk assessment , control activities , information and communication , and monitoring — apply to all aspects of an organization's operations and should be an integral part of a system that managers use to regulate and guide an organization or program's operations . families of osp scholarship award recipients , as consumers , need complete and timely information about participating schools to make informed decisions about what school is best for the student . further , federal internal control standards state that organizations must have relevant , reliable , and timely communications , and adequate means of communicating with external parties who may have an impact on the organization achieving its goals . during our 2013 review , we found that osp provided information to prospective and current osp families through a variety of outreach activities . however , families lacked key information necessary to make informed decisions about school choice because the directory of participating schools — a key communication tool — was not published in a timely fashion and did not contain key information about tuition , fees , and accreditation . additionally , scholarships to students were awarded several months after many schools had completed their admissions and enrollment processes , limiting the amount of time and choice in selecting schools . to address these issues , we recommended that education take steps to ensure that the osp administrator improve the timing of key aspects of program administration and program information for prospective and participating families .