vi ) . over the same years , as table 2 shows , taxpayers' ability to gain access to csrs , irs's live telephone assistors , deteriorated . in 2011 , 72 percent of taxpayers seeking live telephone assistance got through to a csr , compared to 81 percent in 2007 . the deterioration in access is also reflected in the length of time taxpayers must wait before speaking to a csr . in 2011 , average wait time was almost 12 minutes ; in 2007 it was less than 5 minutes . irs officials attribute the higher call volume over the years to a number of factors including tax law changes made very late in the year that generated a lot of taxpayer questions table 2 also shows that , as performance declined , irs reduced its goals for access to csrs and increased its goal for telephone wait time . data limitations are discussed where appropriate . we consider we conducted this performance audit from february 2011 through december 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . primarily through its telephone , website , and , to a much lesser extent , face - to - face operations , irs provides tax law and account assistance , limited tax return preparation assistance , tax forms and publications , and outreach and education . taxpayers can call irs to speak directly with a customer service representative ( csr ) , or use automated telephone lines to obtain information quickly . irs has 10 automated telephone lines , which allow , for example , taxpayers to interactively inquire about the status of a refund , order a transcript of their return or account information , and request a personal identification number ( pin ) to file electronically . irs's 149 teletax lines provide prerecorded messages on tax law topics ranging from alternative filing methods to what a taxpayer can itemize . csrs are also responsible for responding to paper correspondence . irs tries to minimize the percent of overage paper correspondence ( generally correspondence that is more than 45 days old ) . irs staff provides face - to - face assistance at 401 walk - in sites or taxpayer assistance centers ( tac ) where taxpayers can get basic tax law questions answered , review their accounts , and have returns prepared if their annual income is $49,000 or less . irs also has volunteer partners that staff over 12,000 volunteer sites . volunteers at these volunteer income tax assistance ( vita ) and tax counseling for the elderly ( tce ) sites prepare tax returns for traditionally underserved taxpayers , including the elderly , low - income , disabled , and those with limited english proficiency . these sites also provide other services such as helping taxpayers without a bank account get into the banking system and financial literacy education .