drug . plan sponsors may require beneficiaries to pay a higher coinsurance or co - pay amount , for example , for certain high - cost drugs , such as specialty - tier eligible drugs that treat conditions such as cancer , multiple sclerosis , and rheumatoid arthritis . plan sponsors also select whether any utilization management practices apply for each listed drug , such as limits on the amount of drug that can be provided . the discount program began in january 2011 after being established in 2010 by ppaca to reduce beneficiaries' out - of - pocket drug costs when they reach the coverage gap . non - lis beneficiaries are eligible for the discount if they are enrolled in a pdp or ma - pdp , are not enrolled in a qualified retiree prescription drug plan , and have reached or exceeded beneficiaries that are enrolled the initial coverage limit during the year.in enhanced plans providing some coverage for brand - name drugs when they reach the coverage gap may also receive the discount after supplemental benefits are applied . ppaca required that manufacturers wishing to have their brand - name drugs covered under the medicare part d program participate in the discount program . ( see app . i for a detailed discussion of our methodology for examining brand - name drug price changes and app . ii for a listing of the brand - name drugs in each basket. ) our findings are limited to those sponsors , pbms , and manufacturers we spoke with and are not representative of the effects observed across all of these types of entities . additionally , any price changes we observed may not be directly related to the discount program since multiple factors can affect drug prices over time . we reviewed data we received from cms for reasonableness and consistency , including screening for outliers . we also reviewed documentation and spoke with cms officials about steps taken to ensure data reliability . based on this review , we determined that the data used in this report were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we conducted this performance audit from august 2011 through september 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . approximately 49 million elderly and disabled individuals were enrolled in medicare in 2011 , of which about 29 million were enrolled in part d. medicare beneficiaries obtain part d coverage by choosing from multiple , competing plans offered by plan sponsors — often private insurers — that contract with cms to offer the prescription drug benefit .