i for more information on the measures. ) according to irs officials , the access measures are similar to those commonly used by world - class customer service organizations . considering that irs devotes significant resources ( about 10,000 assistors ) to telephone assistance , the benefits of analysis — identifying ways to more effectively use resources and improve service — could be substantial . irs missed opportunities to plan evaluations to determine the effectiveness of actions it took to improve the access and accuracy of its telephone assistance . irs guidance presents a seven - step process designed to guide data collection and analysis to identify ways to improve performance . the last step states that managers should establish a plan that tracks the effectiveness of actions taken to improve performance . without such a plan , irs may not collect the data needed to judge the action's effectiveness . additionally , planning to collect the data before the improvement action is implemented may be less costly than developing the data and evaluating the action later . irs field directors cited several different actions they took to address factors that negatively affected access and accuracy in the prior filing season: assistor skill gaps ( the difference between the skills assistors had and the skills needed by irs ) . to address skill gaps , field directors most frequently cited training as the action taken , with all 10 directors referring to training as the primary , and most often only , action taken . although training was designed at the division level , field directors and managers were responsible for implementing it in the field , such as selecting the trainers and determining which assistors need to be trained . errors caused by flaws in the guidance assistors used to respond to taxpayers' account questions . to address the flaws in assistors' guidance for answering taxpayer calls , 5 of the 10 field directors cited the implementation and use of computer - based tools to improve guidance , including the accounts resolution guide . declining assistor productivity . all 10 field directors said that the primary actions taken to address assistor productivity declines were nationwide managers' training and employee briefings . although field directors said all three of these actions were key to improving telephone assistance performance this year , none of the field directors cited specific evaluations or plans for assessing the effectiveness of these actions . instead , field directors based their assessment of actions on performance trends , not taking into account the multiple factors or the interrelatedness of factors that can affect a performance measure . one example of a missed opportunity to plan an evaluation of an improvement action on the national level is the lack of a systematic plan to assess the impact the accounts resolution guide had on access and accuracy . to speed progress toward its long - term goal , irs managers need to identify the causes for performance , plan strategies to improve performance , and evaluate how well those strategies worked . unfortunately , irs sometimes missed opportunities to conduct analysis to help managers understand the reasons for performance and to evaluate actions taken to improve performance .