dod concurred with the recommendations . the challenges dcma is experiencing in rebuilding its capacity is illustrative of those faced by dod . dcma performs a critical role in helping to manage and oversee contractor performance . specifically , it has responsibilities for providing contract administration services for dod's buying activities and working directly with defense contractors to help ensure that goods and services are delivered on time , at projected cost , and meet performance requirements . in addition , as a designated combat support agency , dcma is tasked with providing contract administration and support to combatant commanders during contingency operations . the preponderance of dcma's workforce is included in the defined acquisition workforce . in november 2011 , we reported on how dcma is positioning itself to meet its missions . we noted that dcma has undergone an evolution to become the agency it is today . for example , dcma's workforce decreased from an estimate of about 24,000 in 1990 to a low of about 9,300 in 2008 . while senior dcma officials said the workforce's downsizing made sense for much of the 1990s , because there were efficiencies to be gained and its workload was generally decreasing , this changed in the early 2000s , when dcma's workload started to increase , but its workforce numbers continued to decline . as the workforce declined , however , the agency experienced significant erosion of expertise , such that it could not fulfill all of its oversight functions . as a result , dcma reported that dod's acquisitions were subjected to unacceptable levels of cost risks . in one recent example , a dcma official told us about a case where an administrative contracting officer , lacking support from contract cost / price analysts had , for simplicity , incorrectly blended a contractor's overhead rates rather than deriving separate rates for different areas ( eg , general and administrative , and manufacturing ) . over the last 2 years , dcma reports it has hired 279 new contract cost / price analysts and cost monitors ( bringing the agency's total number to about 400 ) , extensively using the defense acquisition workforce development fund to do so . further , in 2009 , dcma created the cost and pricing center , with a mission of developing and sustaining the agency's expertise in pricing . dcma officials said the center has helped to hire contract cost / price analysts for its contract management offices . it also develops and conducts training for the growing dcma contract cost / price analyst workforce . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . dod has made some progress in rebuilding the capacity of the civilian acquisition workforce and in completing competency assessments , which identify the current skills and capabilities of the workforce and help identify areas that needed further management attention . included among the workforce issues facing dod are ( 1 ) determining the right size of the acquisition workforce , ( 2 ) updating acquisition training based on ongoing competency assessments and measuring the effect of training on acquisition outcomes , and ( 3 ) identifying personnel outside the acquisition workforce who have a role in acquisition .