consequently , applications were rejected and soldiers had to start the process all over again . but clearly , the hardships they have endured are unacceptable given the substantial sacrifices they have made and the injuries they have sustained . while the army's new streamlined medical retention application process has improved the front - end approval process , it also has many of the same limitations as adme . to its credit , in response to the recommendations included in our companion report , dod has outlined some actions already taken , others that are underway , and further planned actions to address the weaknesses we identified . for further information about this testimony please contact gregory d. kutz at ( 202 ) 512-9095 or kutzg@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony were gary bianchi , francine delvecchio , carmen harris , diane handley , jamie haynes , kristen plungas , john ryan , maria storts , and truc vo . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . this would more accurately allocate the total cost of these wartime operations . as we have reported in the past , the army's visibility over mobilized reserve component soldiers is jeopardized by stovepiped systems serving active and reserve component personnel . therefore , the army has had difficulty determining which soldiers are mobilized and / or deployed , where they are physically located , and when their active duty orders expire . in the absence of an integrated personnel system that provides visibility when a soldier is transferred from one location to another , the army has general personnel regulations that are intended to provide some limited visibility over the movement of soldiers . however , when a soldier is on adme orders , the army does not follow these or any other written procedures to document the transfer of soldiers from one location to another — thereby losing even the limited visibility that might otherwise be achievable . further , although the army has a medical tracking system , the medical operational data system ( mods ) , that could be used to track the whereabouts and status of injured and ill reserve component soldiers , we found that , for the most part , the installations we visited did not use or update that system . instead , each of the installations we visited had developed its own stovepiped tracking system and databases . although mods , if used and updated appropriately , could provide some visibility over injured and ill active and reserve component soldiers — including soldiers who are on adme orders — 8 of the 10 installations we visited did not routinely use mods . mods is an army medical department ( amedd ) system that consolidates data from over 15 different major army and dod databases .