requirements . fcc - defined information collection instruments for requirements span a wide variety of industries , including wireless and wireline telephone , broadcasting , cable , equipment , and public safety . fcc regulations require companies to provide a variety of information . for example , the wireline competition bureau has 58 collection instruments of this type , including employment reports and local number portability for wireline telephone companies . the wireless telecommunications bureau has 59 collection instruments of this type , such as reports on interference . applications . osppa officials said that the current effort will likely identify areas for greater investigation for the bureaus and offices , and that the current effort is the beginning of a multiyear review and transition process . additionally , the chairman initiated an assessment of fcc's database and communications infrastructure . the chairman also stated that an upgrade will permit the commission and its staff to function much more efficiently and facilitate public use of its web site . fcc also launched an internal online forum where employees can submit ideas for improvement and reform , and fcc plans to launch a section on its web site allowing the public to offer ideas for reform as well . we provided fcc with a draft of this report for its review and comment . fcc provided written comments , which appear in appendix ii . in its written comments , fcc discussed the various efforts under way at the commission to improve its data management processes . fcc also provided technical comments that we incorporated where appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of the report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from the date of this report . at that time we will send a copy of this report to the chairman of the federal communications commission . the report also is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 2834 or wised@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . this report examines ( 1 ) the information the federal communication commission ( fcc ) collects ; ( 2 ) how fcc collects and manages information ; ( 3 ) the strengths and weaknesses , if any , in fcc's information collection and management practices ; and ( 4 ) the status of fcc's internal review of its information collection and management practices . to describe the information fcc collects , we obtained and reviewed fcc's list of information collection instruments approved under the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) ; we reviewed collection instruments that were approved as of april 22 , 2009 . the list included fcc's description of the information collection , the pra number , the name of the bureau or office responsible for managing the collection , and the estimated annual burden hours associated with the collection .