disadvantages assessments . omhar cautioned that once owners become aware that a change in tax relief is seriously being considered , some owners will delay restructuring decisions in hopes of getting the benefit of any tax change . tenant representatives told us that some participating administrative entities have not provided information to tenants as required by program regulations . proponents believe this action would ensure that participating administrative entities facilitate tenant participation in the mark - to - market process . it is unclear what actions would be taken if purchasers do not fulfill their commitments to preserve properties as affordable housing . would require additional efforts by omhar to ensure that participating administrative entities are aware of and comply with tenant participation requirements . this action could yield additional section 8 savings by reducing rents on properties eligible for the mark - to - market program . there are two types of restructurings . full mortgage restructurings generally involve resetting rents to market levels and reducing mortgage debt to permit a positive cash flow . for this type of restructuring , the participating administrative entities develop restructuring plans that address both rents and debt and submit the plans to omhar for review and approval . the restructuring plans require the owner to maintain restrictions aimed at preserving the property as affordable housing for at least 30 years , and section 8 contracts are typically being renewed for 20 years . for the second type of restructurings , which omhar refers to as rent restructurings , the participating administrative entities also develop restructuring plans that must be approved by omhar ; but , the plans only reduce the rents , not the mortgage debt , since the property should be physically and financially sound enough to continue with reduced rental income . there are no affordability and use restrictions on properties that receive a rent restructuring , and the section 8 contracts are usually renewed for 5 years . appendix i describes the mark - to - market process in more detail . the participating administrative entities are required to use their best efforts to seek the cooperation of section 8 property owners in the development of the restructuring plan . owners must agree with the final plan and , among other requirements , contribute 20 percent of the total cost of the property's rehabilitation . participating administrative entities are also required to ensure that tenants affected by the restructuring of a project are kept informed and given the opportunity to provide comments at crucial stages of the process . as of june 15 , 2001 , approximately 3 ½ years after the mark - to - market legislation was enacted , omhar had completed restructurings for about 41 percent of the 1,558 properties that had entered the mark - to - market program . while omhar had completed restructurings for only 138 of the properties requiring full mortgage restructuring , it had completed restructurings for 500 of the properties requiring only a reduction in rents . omhar estimated that the federal government would realize about $563 million in savings over a 20-year period from these completed restructurings .