rec . h906 ( daily ed . jan. 15 , 2014 ) ( division e , title v – independent agencies , consumer product safety commission , salaries and expenses ) . specifically , the mandate asks us to conduct a study of the ability of the cpsc to respond quickly to emerging consumer product safety hazards using authorities under sections 7 , 8 , and 9 of the consumer product safety act ( 15 u.s.c . §§ 2056-2058 ) ; section 3 of the federal hazardous substances act ( 15 u.s.c . § 1262 ) ; and section 4 of the flammable fabrics act ( 15 u.s.c . and other relevant studies in this area.available to address cpsc's ability to respond to new and emerging risks , we reviewed our prior reports and conducted a literature review to identify published studies and reports that discussed possible options . to address both objectives , we interviewed staff at cpsc , representatives from various consumer and industry organizations , and consumer safety experts . we also interviewed former and current cpsc commissioners individually . to identify options that may be we conducted this performance audit from march 2014 to october 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . cpsa created cpsc to regulate consumer products and address those that pose an unreasonable risk of injury ; assist consumers in evaluating the comparative safety of consumer products ; and promote research and investigation into the causes and prevention of product - related deaths , injuries , and illnesses . cpsc's jurisdiction is broad , covering thousands of types of consumer products used in and around the home and in sports , recreation , and schools.regulated — that is , subject to mandatory standards governing performance or labeling requirements established by cpsc through regulations . in contrast , many consumer products that are under cpsc's some consumer products are jurisdiction are subject to voluntary standards , which are generally determined by standard - setting organizations , with input from government representatives and industry groups . unregulated products are those products not subject to mandatory standards and may include those covered by voluntary standards . the 1981 amendments to cpsa required cpsc to defer to a voluntary standard rather than promulgating a mandatory standard through rulemaking if cpsc determines that ( 1 ) the voluntary standard adequately addresses the hazard and ( 2 ) there is likely to be substantial compliance with the voluntary standard . to address product hazards , cpsc may attend the meetings of standard - setting organizations and contribute relevant hazard data to assist in the development of voluntary standards , but staff are not permitted to vote on the standards or hold leadership positions .