ii. ) eighty - two of the 92 proposed modifications were considered under this process . if tsa officials determined , based on their professional judgment , that the recommended sop modifications — whether from headquarters or the field — merited further consideration , or if a specific modification was proposed by tsa senior leadership , the following chain of events occurred: first , the procedures branch of the office of security operations drafted sop language for each of the proposed modifications . second , the draft language for each proposed modification was disseminated to representatives of various tsa divisions for review , and the language was revised as needed . third , tsa officials tested proposed modifications in the airport operating environment if they found it necessary to: assess the security impact of the proposed modification , evaluate the impact of the modification on the amount of time taken for passengers to clear the checkpoint , measure the impact of the proposed modification on passengers and industry partners , or determine training needs created by the proposed modification . ( 2 ) how does tsa determine whether tsos are complying with the standard procedures for screening passengers and their carry - on items ? in march 2007 , we issued a report that contained sensitive security information regarding tsa's passenger checkpoint screening procedures , including the factors tsa considered when modifying passenger screening procedures and tsa's efforts to monitor tso compliance with standard passenger screening procedures . this report provides the results of our march 2007 report with sensitive security information removed . to obtain information on the process used to modify passenger checkpoint screening procedures , we reviewed and analyzed available tsa documentation on proposed procedure modifications that were considered between april 2005 and december 2005 , as well as threat assessments and operational studies that supported sop modifications . we also reviewed and analyzed similar documentation for proposed modifications considered between august 2006 and november 2006 in response to the alleged terrorist plot to detonate liquid explosives onboard multiple aircraft en route from the united kingdom to the united states . we included modifications to passenger checkpoint screening procedures related to this particular event because they provided the most recent information available of tsa's approach to modifying screening procedures in response to an immediate perceived threat to civil aviation . to assess tso compliance with standard operating procedures , our work also involved a review of available documentation , including guidance , checklists , and other evaluation tools used by tsa . in addition , we met with tsa headquarters officials who were involved in the process of determining whether proposed changes to passenger checkpoint screening procedures should be implemented , and who were responsible for overseeing efforts to monitor tso compliance with screening procedures . we also visited or conducted phone interviews with staff at 25 airports , which we selected based on variation in size , geographic location , and level of performance on compliance - related assessments . at each airport , we interviewed federal security directors ( fsd ) , members of their management teams , and tsos with passenger screening responsibilities . information from these interviews cannot be generalized to all airports nationwide .