3 md . some guard officials also expressed concerns that their states' guards had not received additional federal funding to support homeland security missions , even as homeland security missions are continuing and as the homeland security advisory system threat level has risen . while the states have funded some homeland security activities , such as guarding critical infrastructure , and purchased some equipment , such as decontamination equipment , officials said that homeland security requirements must compete with other needs in limited state budgets . furthermore , state officials said that the guard is not generally eligible for funding from the department of homeland security because its grants are limited to “first responders,” such as police or firefighters . officials in all four states we visited raised concerns about their guards' readiness for homeland security and other state missions . for example: new jersey guard units that responded to a terrorist threat alert in december 2003 reported that they lacked some essential equipment , such as humvees , night vision equipment , cold weather gear , chemical protective suits , and nerve agent antidote . the state paid for some essential equipment for its guard forces during this time on an emergency basis . at the time of our visit , new jersey was preparing to deploy large numbers of its state guard personnel overseas and was determining how it would respond to another terrorist threat with almost 60 percent of its forces unavailable . georgia officials told us that hosting the 2004 international economic summit of eight industrialized nations , known as the g - 8 summit , in june 2004 , increased georgia's security missions such as aerial reconnaissance and surveillance , at a time when its army national guard aviation units were deployed overseas . national guard units from 12 other states participated . the state also received federal funds for the g - 8 summit , which reimbursed the state for costs of activating guard personnel . in addition , recognizing the guard's unique role in homeland security , active component forces were commanded by a national guard general for this operation — a new arrangement designed to provide unity of command for homeland missions that defense officials stated might serve as a model for the future . in 2002 , the state of oregon called up more than 1,400 army national guard soldiers to respond to one of the worst forest fire seasons in a century . oregon officials said that because many of the state's guard forces and equipment were deployed and the state had only limited engineering capability left , it would not be able to provide the same level of support to civilian authorities if similar circumstances were to occur . all of the texas guard's aviation assets that would be needed to fight fires and all of the state's military police were deployed at the time of our visit . however , texas officials said that the state had been able to meet their homeland security needs , even at the height of its guard's overseas deployments , because its largest army national guard unit had not been fully deployed and , as a large state , it had ample state emergency response capability .