physicians . physician gme , also known as residency , provides the clinical training required for a physician to be eligible for licensure and board certification to practice medicine independently in the united states . specifically , after completing medical school and receiving a medical degree , physicians enter a multi - year residency training program during which they complete their formal education as a physician , primarily in teaching hospitals . completion of a residency can take from 3 to 7 years after graduation from medical school , depending on the specialty or subspecialty chosen by the physician . in some cases , physicians may choose to pursue additional training — referred to as fellowships — to become a subspecialist , such as a cardiologist . nps and pas . since the first np and pa training programs in the united states were founded in 1965 , these professions and their educational requirements have evolved to allow them to furnish more care that was traditionally provided by physicians , such as diagnosing patients , prescribing medication , and performing certain procedures . the extent to which they can provide care independently from physician supervision varies by state . there are multiple pathways for students to become nps . in general , after completion of a bachelor's degree , a nurse may become an np once he or she achieves a master's or doctoral degree in nursing . full - time master's programs are generally 18 to 24 months and doctoral programs are generally 3 to 5 years . both programs include classroom and clinical work . in addition , np students may have varying amounts of hands - on nursing experience before entering an np program . np programs generally include the following focus areas: family practice , women's health , acute care , adult / geriatric health , child health , neonatal health , and mental health . nps are trained according to a nursing care model , which emphasizes providing comprehensive care for patients that encompasses their physical and other needs . after completion of a bachelor's degree , students become pas once they earn a master's degree in physician assistant studies . the average full - time pa program takes about 27 months to complete , which includes classroom education followed by clinical work conducted through rotations in internal medicine , family medicine , surgery , pediatrics , obstetrics and gynecology , emergency medicine , and behavioral medicine . in addition , pa students have varying amounts of hands - on work experience in health care before entering a pa program . pas are trained to approach patient care according to a medical model focused on assessing , diagnosing , and treating disease . cms's evaluation of its graduate nurse education demonstration estimated the total cost of graduate clinical np training to be about $47,000 per student , based on the funds paid to the demonstration sites from fiscal year 2012 through fiscal year 2018 , and the physician assistant education association estimated the total cost of graduate pa training to be about $45,000 per student , based on the results of its 2018 survey .