that was more than 2 years ago . in enacting exon - florio , the congress , while recognizing the need for confidentiality , indicated a desire for insight into the process by requiring the president to report to the congress on any transaction that the president prohibited . in response to concerns about the lack of transparency in the committee's process , the congress passed the byrd amendment to exon - florio in 1992 , requiring a report to the congress if the president makes any decision regarding a proposed foreign acquisition . in 1992 , another amendment also directed the president to report every 4 years on whether there is credible evidence of a coordinated strategy by one or more countries to acquire u.s. companies involved in research , development , or production of critical technologies for which the united states is a leading producer , and whether there are industrial espionage activities directed or assisted by foreign governments against private u.s. companies aimed at obtaining commercial secrets related to critical technologies . while the byrd amendment expanded required reporting on committee actions , few reports have been submitted to the congress because withdrawing and refiling notices to restart the clock limits the number of cases that result in a presidential decision . since 1997 , only two cases — both involving telecommunications systems — resulted in a presidential decision and a subsequent report to the congress . infrequent reporting of committee deliberations on specific cases provides little insight into the committee's process to identify concerns raised during investigations and determine the extent to which the committee has reached consensus on a case . further , despite the 1992 requirement for a report on foreign acquisition strategies every 4 years , there has been only one report — in 1994 . in conclusion , in recognition of the benefits of open investment , exon - florio comes into play only as a last resort . however , since that is its role , effective application in support of recognizing and mitigating national security risks remains critical . while exon - florio provides the committee on foreign investment in the united states the latitude to address new emerging threats , the more traditional interpretation of what constitutes a threat to national security fails to fully consider the factors currently embodied in the law . further , the practical requirement to complete reviews within 23 days to meet the 30-day legislative requirement , along with the reluctance to proceed to an investigation , limits agencies' abilities to complete in - depth analyses . however , the alternative — allowing companies to withdraw and refile their notifications — increases the risk that the committee , and the congress , will lose visibility over foreign acquisitions of u.s. companies . our report lays out several matters for congressional consideration to ( 1 ) help resolve the differing views as to the extent of coverage of exon - florio , ( 2 ) address the need for additional time , and ( 3 ) increase insight and oversight of the process .