state acknowledged that there may be a lag in guidance . this information is checked against stored fingerprints in ident . if no matching prints are in ident , the foreign national is enrolled in us - visit ( i.e. , biographic and biometric data are entered ) . if the foreign national's fingerprints are already in ident , the system performs a comparison of the fingerprint taken at the port of entry to the one on file to confirm that the person submitting the fingerprints is the person on file . if the system finds a mismatch of fingerprints or a watch list hit , the foreign national is held for further screening or processing . state's implementation of the technology aspects of the biometric visa program is currently on schedule to meet the october 26 , 2004 , deadline . according to state officials , a well - planned rollout of equipment and software and fewer technical problems than anticipated led to smooth implementation of the technological aspects of the program at the 201 posts that had the program operating as of september 1 , 2004 . but amid the fast pace of rolling out the program to meet the deadline , dhs and state have not provided comprehensive guidance for consular posts on how the information about visa applicants made available through the biometric visa program should best be used to help adjudicate visas . indeed , we found several significant differences in the implementation of the biometric program during our visits to san salvador , el salvador , and santo domingo , dominican republic . state acknowledged that posts may be implementing the program in various ways across the 207 consular posts that issue nonimmigrant visas . according to state officials , the implementation process for the biometric program led to far fewer technical problems than expected . early on , state had a few difficulties in transmitting data between the posts and dhs's ident , primarily related to server and firewall ( computer security ) issues . according to state , most issues were resolved within a few days . in fact , 201 nonimmigrant visa ( niv ) - issuing posts out of 207 had the software and hardware installed and were transmitting prints to ident for analysis as of september 1 , 2004 . state anticipates the completion of the installation by the october 2004 deadline . according to state's data , from february to august 2004 , the total biometric visa process averaged about 30 minutes for an applicant's prints to be sent from an overseas post to the state server , and on to dhs for ident analysis and then for the response to be returned through state's server to the posts . ident response time could affect visa issuance times because a visa cannot be issued until the post has received and reviewed the ident response . our observations at posts in san salvador and santo domingo demonstrated the importance of the length of time required to receive an ident response . we observed that most interviews average only a few minutes , but the ident response time currently is 30 minutes .