schedule changes . this figure consists of two timelines that identify key milestones for the program . the first timeline is based on the initial apb dhs leadership approved after the department's current acquisition management policy went into effect . the second timeline identifies when the program expected to reach its major milestones as of august 2019 and includes milestones introduced after the program's initial apb . dates shown are based on the program's apb threshold dates or updates provided by the program office . test status . this table identifies key recent and upcoming test events . it also includes dhs's director , office of test and evaluation's assessment of programs' test results , if an assessment was conducted . staffing profile . this figure identifies the total number of staff a program needs ( measured in full time equivalents ) including how many are considered critical and how many staff the program actually has . lastly , each program assessment summarizes comments provided by the program office and identifies whether the program provided technical comments . page left blank intentionally . automated commercial environment ( ace ) customs and border protection ( cbp ) the ace program is developing software that will electronically collect and process information submitted by the international trade community . ace is intended to provide private and public sector stakeholders access to information , enhance the government's ability to determine whether cargo should be admitted into the united states , increase the efficiency of operations at u.s. ports by eliminating manual and duplicative trade processes , and enable faster decision making . program completed operational testing in june 2018 , but cybersecurity was not tested . collections functionality will remain in the legacy system until additional funding is provided for development . gao last reported on this program in may 2018 and march 2018 ( gao - 18-339sp , gao - 18- 271 ) . following a cost and schedule breach in april 2017 , cbp separated the ace program's collections functionality — which collects and processes duties owed on imported goods — from its core functionality to permit deployment of the other post - release capabilities , such as liquidations and reconciliation . cbp previously reported that officials were not versed in the complexities of collection in the legacy system and underestimated the level of effort required to integrate collections capabilities into ace . in august 2018 , the program received department of homeland security ( dhs ) approval to defer collections functionality as an unfunded requirement . cbp officials said the collections functionality will remain in the legacy system until funding for development is provided . ace continued deployment of the core functionality and updated acquisition documents including the program's acquisition program baseline ( apb ) and life - cycle cost estimate ( lcce ) to reflect the program changes . dhs leadership approved the program's updated apb in november 2018 — removing the program from breach status . the program achieved full operational capability ( foc ) for core functionality and received acquisition decision event ( ade ) 3 approval in november 2018 — approximately 2 years later than initially planned .