, not provided ) . i didn't have lower back problems , and i work out a lot , but i started having lower back problems.” “my eyesight has been getting worse.” see figure 10 for an example of a pilot flying a simulated mission in an rpa cockpit . during our site visits for this review , participants in 14 focus groups that we conducted said that maintaining fitness was difficult . they said they are not motivated to work out as they are frequently exhausted after flying long shifts and then completing other extra duties as well . further , participants in 11 of 14 focus groups told us that nutrition is difficult for rpa crews . for example , participants said that they consume energy drinks , soda , and sugary foods to stay awake during the midnight shift . studies have shown negative psychological effects on rpa aircrews . an air force study from 2010 of the psychological attributes critical to the performance of rpa sensor operators noted it is important that rpa sensor operators be aware prior to training that they would be targeting and destroying enemy combatants . it stated that it was likely that some candidates might choose not to become sensor operators once they fully understand their role in precision - strike operations . these motivational attributes were not deemed critical to performance , but were deemed critical to retention and job satisfaction . participants in 10 of our 14 focus groups we conducted said that some crew members — either themselves or others — did not initially understand what the job entails , such as killing . one focus group participant noted “the first time you know what you're getting into emotionally is the first day of training at holloman , which is too late because you already have wings.” participants in 13 of 14 focus groups we conducted stated that witnessing or causing violence has a negative psychological impact but two - thirds of our survey respondents ( 66 of 105 ) said that the air force has not assessed their level of stress and fatigue related to their role as an rpa pilot or sensor operator . a study published in 2018 described how rpa aircrew members are affected by their own actions in combat as well as by connections with either people who they target or support on the ground regardless of the physical distance separating them . one focus group participant commented “f - 16s drop and then go . for rpa aircrews , we get in and we are there for 20 hours . we watch who we employ weapons on , then get the battle damage assessment , including seeing body parts…on the ground. rpa personnel stated that their base's services are not consistently available to rpa aircrews rotating shifts to conduct missions 24 hours every day or to their families as they live in remote locations . collectively , participants in all 14 focus groups we conducted expressed concerns about the availability of services such as medical services , childcare , spouse and family support services , and base locations and housing .