gao - 03-669 . and people — in areas such as information technology , financial management , procurement , and human capital — as well as in its security and administrative services , for greater efficiency and effectiveness . figures 1 and 2 show the dhs and dhs management directorate's organizational structures . the homeland security act of 2002 gave dhs's usm responsibility for the management and administration of the department , including the transition and reorganization process , among other things . the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( 9 / 11 commission act ) enhanced the usm position by designating the usm as the chief management officer ( cmo ) of dhs and principal advisor to the secretary on matters related to the management of the department , including management integration and transformation . dhs also defined the usm responsibilities for integration in department management directives following the creation of the department . for example , a dhs management directive assigns the usm responsibility and accountability for designing departmentwide integrated systems to improve mission support . within the management directorate , the management chiefs' roles and responsibilities for the integration of the department are established in dhs management directives . for example , dhs management directives give the departmental management chiefs responsibility to ensure the integration of their management function and to review their programs in order to recommend program improvements and corrective actions where appropriate . dhs management directives also require the departmental management chiefs to annually establish milestones for the integration of their management function's activities . component management chiefs are to implement initiatives within their respective functional areas that relate to management integration . in 2004 , the secretary of homeland security issued a departmentwide memo on dhs efforts to integrate management functions . in order to ensure that both department and component personnel took responsibility for supporting performance of management functions , the memo describes the concept of dual accountability in which both the heads of component agencies , such as tsa or cbp , and the dhs management chiefs , such as cpo or cio , share responsibility for implementing management functions . for example , the tsa administrator and dhs's cpo are both responsible to the dhs secretary , through their respective chains , for procurement performance at tsa . an accompanying memo from the deputy secretary of homeland security in 2004 noted that component agency heads would be responsible for accomplishing the mission of their component agencies , and management chiefs would be responsible for providing the support systems to help components accomplish their mission . while linkages are being most clearly defined at the department chief level within their individual management functions , department chiefs are not consistently providing the guidance and input required by department management directives and in accordance with performance management leading practices . the inconsistent application of such guidance and practices presents challenges to institutionalizing individual accountability and enabling the effective exercise of authority at the department . without ensuring that the management chiefs provide input into component chiefs' performance plans and evaluations as required , the management directorate cannot be sure that component chiefs are fully implementing management integration .