these comments are reproduced in appendix i . the court also provided technical clarifications , which we incorporated when appropriate . the superior court generally agreed with the findings of our report and concurred with our recommendations . regarding our recommendation on the number of nonjudicial staff needed for the family court , the superior court said that the results of the staffing study will be available shortly and will assist the family court in finalizing its staffing request . with regard to providing a determination of the number of individuals identified in the plan that meet the qualifications for judges on the family court , the superior court said that assignments are based on the judges' expressed preferences , an evaluation of judicial competencies , and the court's needs . the court also said that the chief judge had determined that all 12 family court judges were qualified , either through experience or training , or both , to serve on the family court . regarding our recommendation that the superior court provide its analysis of how the family court identified the number of magistrate judges needed under the expedited appointment procedures , the superior court provided an explanation that we incorporated in this report . in commenting on the need to develop a training plan , the court said that it has developed training programs that are closely aligned with the mission , goals , and objectives of the family court . therefore , we deleted this recommendation in our final report . finally , regarding the development of outcome measures , the court said that it will include information on child - related outcomes and agrees that this type of information would contribute to a greater understanding of how children and families before the court are faring . the superior court also commented that the presiding judge of the family court , in consultation with the chief judge of the superior court , is responsible for implementation of all aspects of the family court act . in addition , the court said that , while the court has not yet completed its development of baseline data for all components of the family court , it has data in two critical areas — case processing times for abuse and neglect cases prior to the implementation of asfa and after its implementation . we are sending copies of this report to the office of management and budget , the subcommittee on oversight of government management , restructuring , and the district of columbia , senate committee on governmental affairs ; and the subcommittee on the district of columbia , house committee on government reform . we are also sending copies to the joint committee on judicial administration in the district of columbia , the chief judge of the superior court of the district of columbia , the presiding judge of the family court of the superior court of the district of columbia , and the executive director of the district of columbia courts . copies of this report will also be made available to others upon request . if you have any questions about this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-8403 . other contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix ii .