the majority of agencies have not addressed key planning considerations . for example , ● 22 agencies reported not having developed a business case , ● 21 agencies reported not having plans , ● 19 agencies reported not having inventoried their ipv6-capable ● 22 agencies reported not having estimated costs . agency responses demonstrate that few efforts outside dod have been initiated to address ipv6 . if agency planning is not carefully monitored , it could result in significant and unexpected costs for the federal government . to address the challenges ipv6 presents to federal networks , in our report we recommended that federal agencies begin addressing key ipv6 planning considerations . specifically , we recommended that the director of omb instruct agencies to begin developing inventories and assessing risks , creating business cases for the ipv6 transition , establishing policies and enforcement mechanisms , determining the costs , and identifying timelines and methods for transition , as appropriate . to help ensure that ipv6 would not result in unexpected costs for the federal agencies , we recommended that the director consider amending the federal acquisition regulation with specific language that requires that all information technology systems and applications purchased by the federal government be able to operate in an ipv6 environment . finally , because poorly configured and unmanaged ipv6 capabilities present immediate risks to federal agency networks , we recommended that agency heads take immediate action to address the near - term security risks . such actions could include determining what ipv6 capabilities they may have and initiating steps to ensure that they can control and monitor ipv6 traffic to prevent unauthorized access . figure 1 is a simplified illustration of this concept . in addition to containing the addresses of sender and receiver , the header also contains a series of fields that provide information about what is being transmitted . limited ipv4 address space prompted organizations that need large numbers of ip addresses to implement technical solutions to compensate . for example , network administrators began to use one unique ip address to represent a large number of users . in other words , to the outside world , all computers behind a device known as a network address translation router appear to have the same address . while this method has enabled organizations to compensate for the limited number of globally unique ip addresses available with ipv4 , the resulting network structure has eliminated the original end - to - end communications model of the internet . because of the limitations of ipv4 , in 1994 the internet engineering task force ( ietf ) began reviewing proposals for a successor to ipv4 that would increase ip address space and simplify routing . the ietf established a working group to be specifically responsible for developing the specifications and standardization of ipv6 . over the past 10 years , ipv6 has evolved into a mature standard . a complete list of the ipv6 documents can be found at the ietf web site . interest in ipv6 is gaining momentum around the world , particularly in parts of the world that have limited ipv4 address space to meet their industry and consumer communications needs .