iii. ) as shown in table 1 , the majority of federal funding spent by these agencies for the system came from general revenues . on average , general revenues accounted for $3 billion , or 80 percent , of the total amount expended for the system . to provide a perspective on the uses for which federal expenditures were applied , we analyzed the type of service or activity for which each expenditure was directed . enhancing capacity of existing infrastructure through increased maintenance and rehabilitation is an important supplement to , and sometimes a substitute for , building new infrastructure . similarly , different operating arrangements may also be able to produce efficiencies . for example , the u.s. army corps of engineers is investigating the possibility of automating the operation of locks and dams on the inland waterways to reduce congestion at bottlenecks . the final component of a framework for developing a federal investment strategy is evaluating results and incorporating lessons learned into the decision - making process . evaluating the effectiveness of existing or proposed federal investment programs could provide decision makers with valuable information for determining whether intended benefits have been achieved and whether goals , responsibilities , and approaches should be modified . such evaluations are also useful for better ensuring accountability and providing incentives for achieving results . leading organizations that we have studied have stressed the importance of developing performance measures and linking investment decisions and their expected outcomes to overall strategic goals and objectives.hypothetically , for example , one goal for the marine transportation system might be to increase throughput ( that is , the volume of cargo ) that can be transported through a particular lock and dam system on the nation's inland waterways . a performance measure to gauge the results of an investment for this goal might be the increased capacity ( such as number of barges per hour ) that results from this investment and the economic benefits associated with that increase . assessing progress in achieving this goal is , therefore , dependent on carrying out analyses of accurate and complete outcome data . there are substantial differences in the federal approach for supporting the commercial marine transportation system and the approaches for supporting air and highway transportation . compared to these two other transportation modes , the federal approach for marine transportation funding relies more extensively on general revenues and less extensively on users of the system . these differences notwithstanding , there is growing awareness of , and agreement about , the need to view various transportation modes from an integrated standpoint , particularly for the purposes of developing and implementing a federal investment strategy and alternative funding approaches . also , an intermodal perspective appears especially important as the nation reacts to the increased security needs for transportation networks and as it plans for better , more efficient transportation for the future . in such an effort , the framework of goals , roles , tools , and evaluation can be particularly helpful — not only for marine transportation funding , but for other modes as well .