gao - 07-1235t . washington , d.c.: september 18 , 2007 . global war on terrorism: reported obligations for the department of defense . gao - 07-1056r . washington , d.c.: july 26 , 2007 . this approach is a marked departure for the army . prior to the creation of the warrior transition units , the army separated active and reserve component soldiers into different units . one review group reported that this approach contributed to discontent about which group received better treatment . moreover , the army did not have formalized staffing structures nor did it routinely track patient - care ratios , which the independent review group reported contributed to the army's inability to adequately oversee its program or identify gaps . as the army has sought to fill its warrior transition units , challenges to staffing key positions are emerging . for example , many locations have significant shortfalls in registered nurse case managers and non - commissioned officer squad leaders . as shown in figure 1 , about half of the total required staffing needs of the warrior transition units had been met across the army by mid - september 2007 . however , the army had filled many of these slots thus far by temporarily borrowing staff from other positions . permanently assigned ( 832 ) temporarily borrowed ( 451 ) unfilled ( 1,127 ) the warrior transition unit staffing shortages are significant at many locations . as of mid - september , 17 of the 32 units had less than 50 percent of staff in place in one or more critical positions . ( see table 2. ) consequently , 46 percent of the army's returning servicemembers who were eligible to be assigned to a unit had not been assigned , due in part to these staffing shortages . as a result , these servicemembers' care was not being coordinated through the triad . army officials reported that their goal is to have all warrior transition units in place and fully staffed by january 2008 . the senior oversight committee's approach for providing a continuum of care includes establishment of recovery coordinators and recovery plans , as recommended by the dole - shalala commission . this approach is intended to complement the military services' existing case management approaches and place the recovery coordinators at a level above case managers , with emphasis on ensuring a seamless transition between dod and va . the recovery coordinator is expected to be the patient's and family's single point of contact for making sure each servicemember receives the care outlined in the servicemember's recovery plan — a plan to guide and support the servicemember through the phases of medical care , rehabilitation , and disability evaluation to community reintegration . the senior oversight committee has indicated that dod and va will establish a joint recovery coordinator program no later than october 15 , 2007 . at the time of our review , the committee was determining the details of the program .