see figure 1 . claimants who are dissatisfied with the initial dds determination have up to three additional levels of adjudicative appeal . the claimant may request a “reconsideration” of the claim , which is conducted by dds personnel who were not involved in the original decision . if the reconsideration team concurs with the initial denial of benefits , the claimant then has 60 days from the time of this decision to appeal and request a hearing before an administrative law judge ( alj ) . aljs , who are based in 140 hearing offices located throughout the nation , can consider new evidence and request additional information including medical evidence or medical and vocational expert testimony . a claimant who is dissatisfied with the hearings decision may request , within 60 days of the alj's decision , that the appeals council review the claim . the appeals council is ssa's fourth and final adjudicative appeals level and is comprised of administrative appeals judges . the appeals council may uphold , modify , or reverse the alj's action , or it may return the claim back to the alj for another hearing and issuance of a new decision . the decision of the appeals council is the commissioner's final decision . to appeal this decision , the claimant must file an action in federal court . ssa measures its performance in managing its workloads in various ways . for its disability claims process , at each level of the claims process ssa tracks the number of claims pending a decision each year and the time it takes to issue a decision . the agency also uses a relative measure to determine the backlog by considering how many cases should optimally be pending at year - end . this relative measure is referred to as “target pending” and is set for each level of the disability process with the exception of the reconsideration level . from 1999 to 2006 , ssa's target pending was 400,000 for claims at the initial stage and 300,000 and 40,000 for the hearings and appeals council stages , respectively . the number of pending claims that exceed these numbers represents the backlog . with respect to service delivery , ssa uses various measures of performance , including work productivity ( average work units performed per year , per employee ) , customer wait times at field offices , and overall customer satisfaction with service delivery . ssa has experienced increased backlogs and processing times associated with disability claims in recent years , as well as declines in measures of field office service . these trends are likely due to rising workloads and staffing shortfalls . the total number of backlogged disability claims in ssa more than doubled over the last decade , with the greatest accumulation of claims occurring at the hearing level . by the close of fiscal year 2006 , the total number of backlogged disability claims , by ssa's measure , reached 576,000 , which represented an overall growth rate of more than 120 percent from fiscal year 1997 . as shown in figure 2 , backlogs of varying degree have occurred at all stages of the claims process where backlogs are calculated .