fda did not comment on our recommendations . in addition , fda made six comments about specific aspects of our draft report . first , concerning our description of the complexity of the postmarket decision - making process , fda stated that the draft report implied the process is too complex and that fda should not be criticized for its difficult task of weighing the risks and benefits associated with drugs with the data available to the agency . we agree with fda that postmarket drug safety issues are inherently complex . for that reason , we believe that fda needs to have greater clarity about how decisions are made and to establish more effective oversight of the decision - making process . furthermore , we believe that our report fairly characterizes the limitations of the data that fda relies on in this complex process . with epidemiologic training . the division's safety evaluators are assigned to cover specific groups or classes of marketed drugs . they primarily review reports of individual adverse events from aers in order to detect safety signals . the division's epidemiologists work collaboratively with the safety evaluators , using population - level data to analyze potential safety signals and put them into context . they also review the published literature and conduct research through the use of contracts and other agreements with researchers outside of government , health care utilization databases , and surveillance systems . finally , safety evaluators and epidemiologists interact with international colleagues on drug safety issues . ods operates primarily in a consultant capacity to ond and does not have any independent decision - making responsibility . when there is a safety concern , ods staff conduct an analysis and produce a written report for ond called a consult . safety consults conducted by ddre staff include analyses of adverse event reports and assessments of postmarket study designs and risk management plans . in fiscal year 2004 , ddre completed approximately 600 safety consults . a majority of ddre's consults are requested by ond . in fiscal year 2004 , 71 percent of ddre's consults were requested by ond ; 22 percent were requested by other sources ; and 7 percent were self - initiated by ddre . over time , the proportion of ddre - initiated consults has declined while the proportion of ond - requested consults has increased . in general , ods staff take a population - based perspective in their work , which ods staff we spoke with contrasted with the clinical perspective of ond . they look at how a drug is being used in the general population and its side effects , and they base their safety analyses on adverse event reports , observational studies , and other population - based data sources . ods staff do not typically use clinical trial data for their safety analyses and conclusions . in their postmarket work , ods staff also do not operate under pdufa drug review goals and therefore do not face the same kinds of deadlines that ond staff face . furthermore , ods staff have sometimes taken an academic research approach to safety work , for example , publishing case reports about adverse events or safety analyses in peer - reviewed journals .