( app . ii provides more detailed information on the two sets of mpc. ) we found that both sets of mpc generally align with most of the elements of a high - performance green building , as established by eisa , and with key federal energy and water conservation requirements and goals ( see tables 3 and 4 ) . however , the mpc do not address one statutory high - performance green building element — to reduce the environmental and energy impacts of transportation through building location and site design . for example , a project could address this element by installing the infrastructure necessary for alternative fuel vehicles or giving priority parking to carpool and van - share participants . according to gsa officials , they did not include this element in the mpc because the mpc are based on the guiding principles for federal leadership in high performance and sustainable buildings , which does not specifically address transportation . gsa officials noted that a number of the gsa recovery act projects are making transportation - related improvements as part of their efforts to obtain a leadership in energy and environmental design ( leed ) silver rating . however , because the mpc do not require such improvements , project managers may not be systematically determining whether transportation - related improvements can be included in projects , as they are for energy and water conservation improvements , thereby missing opportunities to incorporate that high - performance green building element . furthermore , because gsa has not given transportation - related improvements the mpc designation , gsa will not be collecting data on those improvements that are being done as part of recovery act projects . we also found that the mpc are expected to contribute toward meeting the federal conservation requirements and goals to reduce energy and water intensity , although they do not explicitly address these objectives . the mpc do not mention the specific percentages and dates set out in law and executive order for reducing energy and water intensity . gsa officials said that this is because the objectives apply to gsa's building inventory as a whole , rather than to individual buildings . nevertheless , the officials stated that they expect recovery act projects to contribute significantly toward meeting the agency's inventorywide federal requirements and goals for both energy and water . according to the officials , new construction and full building modernization projects should exceed these requirements and goals because they must meet other , more stringent , mpc for energy and water conservation . for example , they explained , the mpc require new construction and full modernization projects to exceed ashrae standard 90.1-2007 by 30 percent , which is a higher energy conservation standard than the federal requirement to decrease energy intensity by 3 percent per year . gsa officials said they expect partial building modernizations and limited scope projects to make a more modest contribution toward meeting these requirements due to their reduced scope . according to gsa officials , all buildings receiving recovery act funds are expected to move toward becoming high - performance green buildings .