develop a risk mitigation plan . reengineer its business processes so that the commercial off - the - shelf software products selected for iemp could support these processes . at the time of our last report , nasa was making plans to reengineer some of its business processes . however , because the agency was in the very early planning stage of implementing this recommendation , the details for how nasa would accomplish its objectives were still vague . overall , our september 2005 report concluded that it was not possible to assess whether nasa's plans would accomplish its stated goal of enhancing the core financial module to provide better project management information for decision - making purposes . since september 2005 , when we last reported on nasa iemp implementation efforts , nasa has implemented some of the disciplined processes needed to manage iemp . specifically , nasa has , as we previously recommended , implemented more effective requirements management and testing processes , improved its performance metrics program related to tracking system defects , and developed an iemp risk management strategy . in addition , nasa has developed quantitative entry and exit criteria for moving from one phase of an iemp project to another — a recognized industry best practice . however , weaknesses in the areas of requirements development and project scheduling have undermined some of the progress made in other key areas . as a result , nasa struggled to complete required systems testing and deliver the agency's core financial upgrade . ultimately , through the heroic efforts of the core financial upgrade team , nasa delivered the upgrade within about 2 weeks of the october 30 , 2006 , planned completion date . according to nasa officials , the system is functioning as expected for most transactions . however , until the end of march 2007 , the upgrade was in a “stabilization” phase as nasa worked on correcting a number of system errors , including posting errors for certain types of transactions . because the upgrade was still quite new and nasa was continuing to stabilize the system , we were unable to determine the significance of these weaknesses . since our september 2005 report , nasa has used its new requirements management process — which documents sufficiently detailed requirements that are traceable from the highest ( most general ) level to the lowest ( most detailed ) level in nasa's requirements management system — for both the core financial upgrade and the contract management module . for example , we selected several requirements for both the core financial module and the contract management module and validated that the requirements management process ( 1 ) clearly linked related requirements consistent with industry standards and ( 2 ) contained the information necessary to understand how each requirement should be implemented and tested in a quantitative manner . although nasa made a concerted effort , as part of its core financial system upgrade , to involve program managers and other key stakeholders in the requirements development process , it did not follow standard industry practices for identifying and documenting user requirements .