by and large , this approach has worked . state pointed out that the convention was never meant to have the authority to require that unsafe reactors be shut down . according to state , it is the position of iaea and its member states that each country operating nuclear power plants should have its own nuclear regulatory agency that would have the authority to shut down plants . the parties to the convention generally agree that it would be difficult to amend the convention . consequently , several parties have taken the lead in making changes to the convention's rules and procedures . to date , some steps have been taken to improve the convention's peer review process , and parties are considering several additional proposals . half the parties responding to our survey indicated that it did . performance indicators and benchmarks are currently being used to track safety in civilian nuclear power plants that could be adapted to help countries enhance safety . for example , the world association of nuclear operators ( wano ) publishes quantitative indicators of nuclear plant performance for 11 key areas , including industrial safety accidents and unplanned automatic shutdowns of nuclear power plants . although the convention itself lacks performance metrics , one - quarter of parties responding to our survey reported that they themselves measure progress toward convention goals using performance metrics — specifically , in some cases , by comparing their activities with the results of iaea safety review missions to countries that request them and actions taken in response to questions and comments from other parties at convention review meetings . neither state nor nrc has formally proposed the adoption of performance metrics . however , nrc officials told us that performance metrics could play a useful role in helping parties measure their progress toward meeting safety obligations and that they could be introduced through a modification to the rules and procedures governing the convention . specifically , article 22 of the convention provides for the preparation of guidelines by the parties regarding the form and structure of their national reports . the guidelines can be revised by consensus at review meetings . the guidelines provide only suggestions for drafting the reports ; parties remain free to structure their reports as they see fit . however , the suggestions provided are very detailed and touch upon more than just form and structure . for example , the guidelines provide detailed suggestions on the content of the national reports . they also contain an appendix detailing voluntary practices that parties are encouraged to engage in regarding the public availability of their national reports . the convention is designed to maximize the number of countries that will participate in order to achieve its goal of promoting the safe operation of civilian nuclear power reactors worldwide ; however , it is voluntary in nature . since 2009 , three countries that are considering developing civilian nuclear power programs — libya , jordan , and the united arab emirates — have become parties to the convention . two others — kazakhstan and saudi arabia — approved the convention in 2010 and are expected to become parties to it later this year .