property classification . we identified a case in which payments appear to be higher than the amount communities would have received had the property remained on the tax rolls in the condition in which it was acquired . in the case of benton county , the property classification that forms the basis of its requested pilt payments does not appear to be based on the classification of the property when it was acquired . benton county's original pilt agreement from 1996 shows that , when acquired , hanford property in the county was classified as 11 percent farmland and 88 percent rangeland . however , the agreement also states that , considering uses of the land at the time of the agreement , 72 percent of the land would be treated for the purpose of pilt as farmland in the category of “irrigable land” and only 27 percent as rangeland . in 2017 , irrigable land in benton county was valued at $6,495 per acre whereas rangeland was valued at $410 per acre — higher percentages of irrigable land compared to rangeland therefore result in higher payments . using these land classifications is inconsistent with the pilt goal that payments will not exceed the taxes that would have been payable for the property in the condition in which it was acquired . doe headquarters officials we spoke with were not aware of this discrepancy in benton county's property classification . in addition , doe did not have documentation to explain doe's decision , but an office of the general counsel official noted that doe agreed to these terms as part of a settlement agreement at a time when a number of issues , beyond just pilt issues , were in dispute between benton county and doe . because of this inconsistency in land classifications , it appears that benton county's payments may not have reflected the revenues the county would have received had the property remained on the tax rolls in the condition in which it was acquired . had doe maintained more thorough documentation and had there been independent review of pilt invoices , these higher payments might have been avoided . determination of land value . we identified one case in which payments were not clearly linked to the revenue communities would have received if the property had remained on the tax rolls . specifically , doe negotiated with savannah river site counties to apply a dollar amount per acre that is not directly tied to assessed property values . doe and the counties originally negotiated values in 1988 of $1,000 per acre for aiken and barnwell and $426 for allendale counties . those amounts remained flat until 2007 , when doe agreed to adjust them with a “time value of money” factor to $1,641 and $712 respectively . according to county officials , the counties and doe agreed to use a negotiated rate rather than a rate based on current assessment values partly because of the difficulty of conducting appraisals because of the large amount of land , lack of comparable properties , and the high expense of an appraisal .