( recommendation 10 ) . nasa systems are highly interconnected . the agency is also affected by geopolitics and is targeted by cybercriminals , including those that may be sponsored by foreign intelligence services . in addition , entities with whom nasa collaborates may also be targets of cybercriminals . the national aeronautics and space administration transition authorization act of 2017 included a provision for us to review the effectiveness of nasa's approach to overseeing and managing it , including its ability to ensure that resources are aligned with agency missions and are cost effective and secure . further , nasa lacks procedures to ensure that action items identified are tracked . we identified instances in which the it program management board did not consistently track action items identified for it investments . nasa's investments typically report back to the it program management board at future decision point reviews about steps taken to address documented action items . however , the board's meeting minutes and documentation identified multiple examples of investments that were returned to the board at future decision points without reporting on whether identified action items had been addressed . moreover , nasa's oversight processes do not encompass highly - specialized or other it that supports mission programs . after reviewing nasa's fiscal year 2015 budget request , omb directed nasa to identify unreported it investments throughout the agency to ensure that all related spending would be documented . nasa established a team in 2016 to explore how to identify such investments so that they could be reported to the cio . roles and responsibilities of the it governance boards and agency - wide governance councils are not clearly defined . nasa continues to operate a federated governance model with decentralized roles and responsibilities for governance of mission and business it investments . business it is selected and approved by the it - specific governance boards , but mission it follows a different path for investment selection in that it is not reviewed and approved by the cio along with other it investments proposed for selection . for example , the office of the cio proposed that the capital planning and governance division be renamed the it business management division . as of march 2018 , nasa had not yet approved or implemented the planned reorganization . figure 1 depicts the organization of the office of the cio , including relevant reporting relationships for center cios and mission directorate it representatives , as of march 2018 . we and nasa's office of inspector general have reported on longstanding it management weaknesses within the agency . for example , in october 2009 , we reported that nasa had made progress in implementing it security controls and aspects of its information security program , but that it had not always implemented appropriate controls to sufficiently protect the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of information and systems . we also identified control vulnerabilities and program shortfalls , which , collectively , increased the risk of unauthorized access to nasa's sensitive information , as well as inadvertent or deliberate disruption of its system operations and services . we recommended that the nasa administrator take steps to mitigate control vulnerabilities and fully implement a comprehensive information security program .