electronics manufacturers . for a broad perspective , we interviewed representatives of two national associations of electronics manufacturers: the consumer electronics association and the information technology industry council . we also interviewed representatives of a judgmental sample of nine individual manufacturers . we selected manufacturers to interview to include a range of sizes and business models , including manufacturers of information technology equipment and televisions as well as companies that no longer manufacture products covered under state laws but still bear responsibility for recycling costs in some states . in addition to these interviews , we reviewed manufacturers' policy positions and other documents on the state - by - state approach to managing used electronics or on particular state and local electronics recycling legislation . electronics retailers . we interviewed representatives of the consumer electronics retailers coalition , an association of consumer electronics retailers , and of a judgmental sample of four national consumer electronics retailers , including retailers that are also considered manufacturers or collectors under some state electronics recycling legislation . in each of the five states we selected for detailed review , we spoke with representatives from state retail associations , whose members include large national retailers , as well as smaller retailers operating in the five states . we also reviewed available documents pertaining to retailers' efforts in managing used electronics and their policy positions on the state - by - state approach . recyclers and refurbishers of used electronics . for a broad perspective from the electronics recycling industry , we interviewed a representative of the institute of scrap recycling industries , many of whose members are involved in the recycling of used electronics . in addition , for the perspective of refurbishers , we conducted an interview with techsoup , a nonprofit organization that has established a partnership with microsoft to increase the number of personal computers available to nonprofits , schools , and low - income families across the globe by reducing the cost of software to refurbishers . we also interviewed representatives of a judgmental sample of recyclers and refurbishers encompassing a variety of sizes and business models , including large corporations operating in multiple states as well as nonprofit organizations or smaller entities operating in a single state . the targets are set at an amount of used electronics equal to 80 percent of the weight of video display devices sold to households during the year . ( the target was 60 percent for the first program year. ) manufacturers that exceed their targets earn recycling credits that can be used to meet their targets in subsequent years or sold to other manufacturers . conversely , manufacturers that fail to meet their targets pay recycling fees on the basis of how close they are toward meeting their obligation . state officials told us the recycling program is based primarily on market economics and does not require significant government involvement . in particular , the state does not set the prices paid for recycling , and manufacturers have flexibility in selecting collectors and recyclers to work with . recyclers seek to be reimbursed for their costs by marketing and selling recycling pounds to manufacturers .