i for survey results ) . at the time of the survey , the federal fleet energy requirements and directives for fiscal year 2017 were still in effect , as the 2015 executive order had not yet been revoked . we received a 100 percent response rate to our survey . we also reviewed documentation from these agencies , including their strategic sustainability performance plans and fleet management plans . the strategic sustainability plan is to prioritize agency actions to support the reduction of greenhouse gas emission and other agency wide targets . the fleet management plan is to specifically address how an agency's fleet will meet its greenhouse gas reduction targets and other relevant fleet requirements . in addition , we interviewed fleet managers and other agency officials from the case study agencies as well as gsa and doe on the challenges agencies face related to fleet energy requirements and goals . ( see app . for more information about our scope and methodology , see appendix ii . we conducted this performance audit from november 2017 to july 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . federal agencies' fleets consist of many types of vehicles that support a variety of purposes . for example , federal vehicles may be used to carry staff and gear to remote , off - road locations to perform maintenance or other tasks ; to transport and provide healthcare to veterans ; or to support daily operations on military installations . congress and several administrations have required federal agencies to take various steps to reduce federal fleets' petroleum use and greenhouse gas emissions . during fiscal year 2017 , agencies were: to meet requirements to acquire alternative fuel vehicles and low greenhouse - gas - emitting vehicles ; to increase use of alternative fuel ; and to decrease use of petroleum and per - mile greenhouse gas emissions ( see table 1 ) . according to doe guidance for the 2015 executive order , acquiring such vehicles and increasing the use of alternative fuels can facilitate the goals of reducing both petroleum use and greenhouse gas emissions . for fiscal year 2017 , in addition to meeting the above requirements , federal agencies were to meet other requirements related to overall fleet management . federal regulations require agencies to complete a fleet management plan annually and conduct an assessment of their fleet at least every 5 years . in addition , an executive order issued by the prior administration in 2015 directed agencies to determine and plan for their optimum fleet inventory with emphasis placed on eliminating unnecessary or non - essential vehicles . certain federal fleet energy directives in place in fiscal year 2017 were revoked by an executive order issued in may 2018 . specifically , directives related to acquiring zero emission ( electric ) vehicles and reducing per - mile greenhouse gas emissions , as well as the additional fleet management expectations , were revoked .