va concurred with all of our recommendations . va further provided information on how it intends to address our recommendations , with target dates for completion in december 2020 . we are sending this report to the appropriate congressional committees and to the secretary of the department of veterans affairs . in addition , this report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or vonaha@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . other key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . to understand the costs of the activations of the eight selected facilities , we asked activation officials at each facility to provide a breakdown of the activation costs by the following categories: ( 1 ) furniture , fixtures , and equipment ; ( 2 ) staffing ; ( 3 ) supplies ; ( 4 ) other ; and ( 5 ) total cost . we used these cost categories because these are the categories in the template that facilities complete to estimate activation costs . in addition to the contact above , heather halliwell ( assistant director ) ; alison snyder ( analyst - in - charge ) ; rose almoguera ; brian bothwell ; geoffrey hamilton ; jason lee ; terence lam ; ethan levy ; josh ormond ; daniel setlow ; laurel voloder ; mary weiland ; and elizabeth wood made key contributions to this report . vha officials stated they work backwards from the construction endpoint to determine when to order items . vha officials told us they need to place orders for certain items — such as high - tech equipment or made - to - order furniture — well in advance of the facility's opening because the items are known to have long delivery times . for example: officials from one clinic reported they ordered their facility's imaging equipment 22 months before they needed it . similarly , an official from a different clinic said that furniture is often not manufactured until it is ordered , so it can take several months to arrive . in contrast , the official said items like a staff refrigerator could be picked up at a local store within days and do not require substantial advance planning . facilities also begin planning for their workforce needs prior to building acceptance . for example: an official from one clinic stated that facilities typically identify their staffing needs during this time period by position , title , and pay . officials from an annex said that before their facility's construction groundbreaking , they discussed how many staff would move from the old facility to the new facility , and how many new staff they expected to hire . after activation teams determine their staffing needs , facilities hire and begin training new staff .