state . state's office of economic sanctions policy and implementation ( spi ) — housed in the bureau of economic and business affairs , division for counter threat finance and sanctions — is responsible for providing foreign policy guidance for the vast majority of sanctions programs and obtaining international cooperation with u.s. agencies enforcing sanctions . according to spi , it acts as state's central coordinating office for 25 of the 30 sanctions programs that were active as of april 2019 . spi also implements sanctions under authorities delegated to the secretary of state , including sanctions on iran and syria . commerce . in commerce's bis , the foreign policy division ( fpd ) of the office of nonproliferation and treaty compliance is one of the components that implements sanctions through u.s. export controls . the division is responsible for developing , analyzing , evaluating , and coordinating export controls related to sanctions policy . in addition to having units that primarily focus on sanctions , treasury , state , and commerce have units that carry out roles in sanctions implementation in addition to other responsibilities . treasury . treasury's ofac , part of the department's office of terrorism and financial intelligence ( tfi ) , administers and enforces economic sanctions based on u.s. foreign policy and national security through consultation with the secretary of state . ofac acts under presidential national emergency powers , as well as authority granted by specific legislation , to impose controls on transactions and freeze assets under u.s. jurisdiction . ofac consists of four offices: the office of sanctions policy and implementation leads ofac's design , implementation , and evaluation of sanctions programs and develops ofac's public guidance , licenses , and regulations . the office of compliance and enforcement works to promote compliance with ofac's sanctions programs and investigates apparent violations . the office of global targeting works with other units within tfi , other u.s. agencies , and foreign partners to identify and investigate targets for sanctions designation . the office of sanctions support and operations supports all sanctions - related functions at ofac , including human capital and budgetary functions . treasury . treasury has several other units that support sanctions implementation . for example , in tfi , the office of intelligence and analysis examines classified and unclassified reporting , financial transactions , and open - source databases for evidence of sanctions violations . the financial crimes enforcement network monitors and analyzes financial information on threats , producing intelligence reports that may identify targets for designation and sanctions violators . in addition to tfi units , the internal revenue service , the office of international affairs , and the office of the general counsel also have roles in sanctions implementation . for example , the office of international affairs helps to assess the likely impact of sanctions and conducts outreach to foreign counterparts regarding sanctions implementation . state . units at state have sanctions implementation roles related to their expertise . some of these units take actions in all five of the sanctions roles shown in table 1 and are responsible for specific sanctions authorities within state , according to state officials .