gao - 08-804 . washington , d.c.: july 31 , 2008 . lcs is a recent example . in this program , the navy sought to concurrently design and construct two lead ships in an effort to rapidly meet pressing needs in the mine countermeasures , antisubmarine warfare , and surface warfare mission areas . however , changes to navy requirements required redesign of major elements in both lead ships to provide enhanced survivability , even after construction had begun on the first ship . while these requirements changes improved the robustness of lcs designs , they contributed to out - of - sequence work , rework , and weight increases on the lead ships . these demands do not all fall just within the province of the navy — industry , congress , and the office of the secretary of defense all play important roles . these difficulties caused lcs construction costs to grow and delivery schedules to be extended and prompted the navy to reduce speed requirements for the class due to degraded hydrodynamic performance . the primary mission of ddg 1000 — and the foundation for its business case — was land attack . yet , subsequent decisions ultimately forced trade - offs in that mission . for example , while including features like a more sophisticated radar and stealth characteristics may be good decisions individually , collectively they made the ship more expensive . efforts to contain cost involved both reducing the quantity of ships and the actual land attack capability possessed by each individual ship . ironically , the advanced gun system , which was the primary land attack weapon of the ship and a technical success to date , will now not have a platform to operate from beyond the first two ddg 1000s . the reconsideration of the ddg 1000 buy reflects poorly on the requirements , acquisition , and funding processes that produced the ship's business case . unless some attempt is made to examine the root causes of decisions that hope for the best and result in poor outcomes , shipbuilding programs seem destined to the same fate: despite the best efforts to manage , the scope of the program will outstrip the cost and schedule budget . this examination must begin with an honest self - appraisal of what each player in the shipbuilding acquisition process demands of programs in terms of requirements , technologies , design , industrial base , quantities , and cost . otherwise , while cost and other problems of current ships are lamented , these same problems could continue to curb the outcomes of future programs like the potentially sophisticated next - generation cruiser ( cg ( x ) ) or even renewed construction of ddg 51 . mr. chairman , that concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions . to develop information on the status of the ddg 1000 program , we relied largely on our current work examining the ddg 1000 program , as well as a number of prior gao products on shipbuilding programs . we supplemented this work with analysis of the navy's most recent and previous long - range plan for ship construction and selected acquisition reports for current navy ships .