( see fig . self - propelled warehouse trucks and tractors 146 . self - propelled warehouse trucks and tractors 575 64 40 . nuclear regulatory commission office of personnel management social security administration united states agency for international development grand total . this report addresses: ( 1 ) the number , type , and cost of heavy equipment items that are owned by the 24 cfo act agencies ; ( 2 ) the heavy equipment items selected agencies have recently acquired and how selected agencies decided to purchase or lease this equipment ; and ( 3 ) how selected agencies manage the utilization of their heavy equipment . to identify the number , type , and cost of heavy equipment owned by federal agencies , we first interviewed officials at the general services administration to determine whether there were government - wide reporting requirements for owned heavy equipment and learned that there are no such requirements . we then obtained and analyzed data on agencies' spending on equipment purchases and leases from the federal procurement data system – next generation ( fpds - ng ) , which contains government - wide data on agencies' contracts . however , in reviewing the data available and identifying issues with the reliability of the data , we determined that data on contracts would not be sufficient to answer the question of what heavy equipment the 24 cfo act agencies own . we therefore conducted a data collection effort to obtain heavy equipment inventory information from the 24 cfo act agencies , which are the departments of agriculture , commerce , defense , education , energy , health and human services , homeland security , housing and urban development , the interior , justice , labor , state , transportation , the treasury , and veterans affairs ; environmental protection agency ; general services administration ; national aeronautics and space administration ; national science foundation ; nuclear regulatory commission ; office of personnel management ; small business administration ; social security administration ; and agency for international development . because there is no generally accepted definition of heavy equipment , we identified 12 federal supply classes in which the majority of items are self - propelled equipment but not passenger vehicles or items that are specific to combat and tactical purposes , as these items are generally not considered to be heavy equipment . ( see table 5. ) we then vetted the appropriateness of these selected supply classes with interior , fws , nps , and air force agency officials , as well as with representatives from a fleet management consultancy and a rental company , and they generally agreed that items in selected federal supply classes are considered heavy equipment . federal supply classes are used in fpds - ng and are widely used in agencies' inventory systems . overall , about 90 percent of the heavy equipment items that agencies reported were assigned a federal supply class in the agency's inventory data . in discussing heavy equipment categories in the report , we use the category titles below .