state did not have any comments . dol agreed with our recommendation that additional guidance may be helpful to aid plan sponsors and plan fiduciaries of ongoing plans in meeting their existing fiduciary obligations to search for missing participants and to pay benefits . ssa agreed with our recommendation to take steps to improve the likelihood that the notice of potential private pension benefit information corresponds to actual retirement benefits in the future , for example , by working with irs as necessary . in its written comments , irs stated that it generally agreed with the report and its findings . irs specifically cited that the report identifies several challenges for participants to manage their retirement savings , such as updating former employers with address changes to continue receiving information about retirement plan accounts with former employers and responding to former employers regarding retirement plan accounts . irs also stated that u.s. individuals participating in foreign retirement plans often do not know how to correctly report foreign retirement accounts and associated income due to complex federal requirements and treaty provisions governing the taxation of foreign retirement accounts . this recognition by irs of the complex federal requirements and treaty provisions governing the taxation of foreign retirement accounts is in line with gao's concerns about u.s. individuals with foreign workplace retirement accounts having trouble with routine account transfers within the same foreign workplace retirement plan or between two such plans in the same country . we have asked congress to consider modifying the internal revenue code to allow routine account transfers within the same foreign workplace retirement plan or between two foreign workplace retirement plans in the same country to be free from u.s. tax in countries covered by an existing income tax treaty that provides for favorable u.s. tax treatment of foreign workplace retirement plan contributions . congress' ability to modify the internal revenue code in such a way can help u.s. individuals participating in foreign workplace plans to better save for retirement by allowing them to consolidate accounts in a tax - deferred manner without being taxed on the entire balance when their account is transferred . irs agreed with two of our recommendations to improve the management of retirement savings . specifically , irs agreed to review taxation issues relating to distributions involving incorrect participant addresses and uncashed benefit checks and to clarify for the public the internal revenue code's requirements in these circumstances . we believe that irs' consideration of this recommendation and any subsequent actions the agency takes to clarify the issue will help to address questions about tax withholding from distributions in situations where the participant may be missing or where a distribution check remains uncashed after a period of time . irs also agreed to work to improve the likelihood that the notice of potential private pension benefit information corresponds to actual retirement benefits in the future , and agreed to take steps to ensure that the data reported on form 8955-ssa are accurate and to advise plan sponsors of any changes to reporting these data .