gao - 10-849 . washington , d.c.: september 7 , 2010 . ( see fig . 1 for key events related to security clearance reform. ) we have previously noted that top leadership must be committed to organizational transformation . to this end , committed executive leadership has worked to reform the personnel security clearance process by improving timeliness and developing quality measures . congressional oversight through hearings held by this subcommittee in february , july and september 2008 , and in october 2009 has helped focus attention on the need for security clearance reform . in addition , the recently passed intelligence authorization act for fiscal year 2010 requires reports by the president on the security clearance process , including information on timeliness and quality . as noted earlier , my statement today will highlight the key findings and recommendations from the report we are issuing today . specifically , i will focus on the extent to which select executive branch agencies ( 1 ) investigate and adjudicate initial personnel security clearance applications for civilian , military , and industry personnel in a timely manner ; ( 2 ) honor previously granted personnel security clearances and the challenges , if any , that exist related to reciprocity ; and ( 3 ) share personnel clearance information in a single , integrated database . the scope of our audit work included dod , select agencies within the intelligence community , and a nonprobability sample of six executive branch agencies that use the office of personnel management ( opm ) to conduct background investigations . the agencies we selected in our review account for approximately 98 percent of initial clearance cases governmentwide annually . to assess timeliness , reciprocity , and the sharing of information in a single , integrated database , we reviewed the requirements specified in irtpa related to timeliness , reciprocity , and the creation of a single database ; obtained and reviewed first , second and third quarter data for fiscal year 2010 on executive branch agencies , including intelligence community agencies , provided by the performance accountability council subcommittee on performance measurements and management , which were current as of august 2010 ; obtained and reviewed quarterly data for the executive branch agencies provided by opm for the same time periods ; and analyzed executive branch reports to congress , executive orders , opm memorandums , and agency guidance related to security clearances . to supplement our analysis , we also interviewed agency officials , security managers , and adjudicators from our selected list of agencies that are knowledgeable about timeliness , reciprocity and security clearance databases . we assessed the reliability of the data and determined that the data are sufficiently reliable for our purposes . our review was performed from october 2009 through november 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our objectives .