act early . awareness campaign by elevating the importance of increasing awareness of developmental milestones to national visibility . see appendix i for a list of nih's and cdc's autism efforts . as required by the caa , the interagency autism coordinating committee ( iacc ) — initially established under the children's health act — restructured its membership and assumed additional responsibilities to coordinate autism efforts within hhs . the caa reauthorized the iacc and specified that the iacc include both federal and nonfederal members . according to officials within the national institutes of health office of autism research coordination ( oarc ) , the agencies and organizations in these reports have been identified by the iacc and oarc as being involved in autism research and have agreed to participate . according to the iacc , the intent of these analysis reports is to better inform the iacc and interested stakeholders about the funding landscape for a particular year . additionally , the analysis examines the extent to which a particular year's funding and research topics align with the iacc's most recent strategic plan . the iacc reports that the portfolio analysis may also be used by federal agencies and private research organizations to help guide future funding priorities by outlining current gaps and opportunities in autism research , as well as serving to highlight current activities and research progress . oarc officials told us that they plan to issue the 2011 report in 2013 . summary of advances in autism spectrum disorder research ( 2007 , 2008 , 2009 , 2010 , 2011 ) each year the iacc releases its list of scientific advances in autism research . as reported by the iacc , the report highlights studies on autism published in the previous year in peer - reviewed journals and selected by members of the iacc . the number of studies featured over the years ranges from 20 to 54 . the caa requires that the iacc produce the summary of advances annually . as reported by the iacc , this report describes several key aspects of worldwide autism research publications , which may be used to inform planning and strategic funding decisions for future autism research . autism - related research articles published between 1980 and 2010 were analyzed to identify historical trends and publication outputs across the seven questions and research areas of the 2011 iacc strategic plan . information found in research publications was also used to assess the institutions conducting autism research , funding organizations supporting the research publications , and the extent of collaboration between authors from different countries and research institutions . additionally , measures , such as citation counts , were used as an assessment of the impact of the published research . oarc officials told us that there are no plans to update this report annually . in 2008 and 2010 , oarc , national institute of mental health , prepared this report on behalf of the iacc . in 2009 , oarc , national institute of mental health , and acclaro research solutions , inc. , prepared this report on behalf of the iacc .