epa began to evaluate its library network in 2003 . it developed and issued studies to determine the value of library services and inform regional management of their options to support library services beyond fiscal year 2006 . epa also issued an internal report in november 2005 , which offered recommendations on how to maintain an effective library network if the library support budget were reduced . after these reports were issued , epa established a library steering committee — composed of senior managers from epa's program offices and regions — to develop a new model for providing library services to epa staff . in august 2006 , the steering committee issued the epa fy 2007 library plan: national framework for the headquarters and regional libraries . the august 2006 library plan provided the framework for the network to begin reorganizing in the summer of 2006 in preparation for the proposed fiscal year 2007 budget reduction beginning in october 2006 . the plan provided guidelines for epa staff to determine how the collections would be managed ; noted that oei libraries in regions 5 , 6 , and 7 would close , and that the headquarters library would close physical access to its collection but would function as a repository library , along with the oarm libraries in cincinnati , ohio , and research triangle park , north carolina . in addition , according to the plan , epa is to develop library centers of excellence , where a library with more expertise in a specific area of reference research would provide that service to staff in other regions . as a part of epa's 2006 reorganization effort , some epa libraries have closed , reduced their hours of operation , or changed the way that they provide library services . furthermore , some of these libraries have digitized , dispersed , or disposed of their materials . the future of epa's library network — its configuration and its operations — are contingent on final policies and procedures , on epa's response to directions accompanying its fiscal year 2008 appropriation , and on epa's 2008 library plan . for example , management in only a few of the regions solicited views from their regional staff through discussions with their regional science councils — an employee group located in each region composed of epa scientists and technical specialists — or unions . in addition , epa generally did not communicate with and solicit views from external stakeholders before and during the reorganization because it was moving quickly to make changes in response to proposed funding cuts . of the libraries that closed , only the headquarters library informed the public of the changes occurring at its library by posting a notification in the federal register . epa also did not fully communicate with and solicit views from professional library associations while planning and implementing its library reorganization . epa did meet with the american library association , a professional library association , on a few occasions , but did so later in the reorganization planning process . without an agencywide communication strategy , staff ownership for the changes may be limited , and staff may be confused about the changes .