the income approach was rarely used . some mortgage industry stakeholders have argued that wider use of the cost approach in particular could help mitigate what they view as a limitation of the sales comparison approach . they told us that reliance on the sales comparison approach alone can lead to market values rising to unsustainable levels and that using the cost approach as a check on the sales comparison approach could help lenders and appraisers identify when this is happening . for example , these stakeholders pointed to a growing gap between average market values and average replacement costs of properties as the housing bubble developed in the early to mid - 2000s . however , other mortgage industry participants noted that a rigorous application of the cost approach may not generate values much different from those generated using the sales comparison approach . they indicated , for example , that components of the cost approach — such as land value or profit margins of real estate developers — can grow rapidly in housing markets where sales prices are increasing . the data we obtained did not allow us to analyze the differences between the values appraisers generated using the different approaches . factors such as the location and complexity of the property affect consumer costs for appraisals . for example , a property may have unique characteristics that are more difficult to value , such as being much larger than nearby properties or being an oceanfront property , which may require the appraiser to take more time to gather and analyze data to produce a credible appraisal . mortgage industry participants we spoke with told us that the amount a consumer pays for an appraisal is generally not affected by whether the lender engages an appraiser directly or uses an appraisal management company ( amc ) — which manages the appraisal process on lenders' behalf — to select an appraiser . they said that amcs typically charge lenders about the same amount that independent fee appraisers would charge lenders directly , and lenders generally pass on these charges to consumers . in general , lenders , amc officials , appraisers , and other industry participants noted that consumer costs for appraisals have remained relatively stable in the past several years . however , appraisers have reported receiving lower fees when working with amcs compared with working directly with lenders because amcs keep a portion of the total fee . a provision in the dodd - frank act that requires lenders to pay appraisers a customary and reasonable fee could affect consumer costs and appraisal quality , depending on interpretation and implementation of federal rules . the effect of this change on consumer costs may depend on the approach lenders and amcs take in order to demonstrate compliance . for example , some lenders and industry groups are having fee studies done to determine what constitutes customary and reasonable fees . according to the dodd - frank act , these studies cannot include the fees amcs pay to appraisers . as a result , some industry participants , including some amc officials , expect these studies to demonstrate that appraiser fees should be higher than what amcs are currently paying .