actions taken . as part of its integrated communications plan , the bureau's lead communications contractor segmented the market and developed a series of strategic frameworks targeting advertising and messaging to hard - to - count subpopulations through demographic profiles . these groups include: persons experiencing homelessness ; households with young children ; lesbian , gay , bisexual , transgender , queer , and questioning persons ; persons with disabilities ; the young and mobile . in addition to demographic profiles for each of these groups , the contractor compiled lists of relevant community partners and consulted with stakeholders to construct a “day - in - the - life” analysis and develop advertising strategies to align tailored census advertising with the experiences of each group . according to bureau documentation , these strategic frameworks provide the npp data to decide how to best target related outreach resources . the bureau also developed for 2020 a publicly - available tool that displays the areas of the country that are considered hard to count , according to an index of demographic indicators known as the low response score . using this index , the bureau is able to monitor incoming census data for those areas , such as response rates and hiring and recruitment numbers , to see if efforts to reach hard - to - count areas are succeeding amid challenging current events , such as the covid - 19 outbreak , which could affect willingness of workers to participate in work taking them door - to - door to nonrespondents . using funds appropriated under the further continuing appropriations act , 2020 , the bureau also developed a mobile questionnaire assistance ( mqa ) initiative to deploy census workers to specific locations , such as grocery stores , houses of worship , and community centers , or at specific events , such as festivals , to assist residents of low - response areas in filling out the census . for the beginning of the self - response period , partnership specialists identified the initial locations and times for the initiative within hardest - to - count census tracts . the bureau plans to then monitor actual self - response data later in the operation to target those areas reporting the lowest response rates . in april 2020 , the bureau announced an indefinite delay of this latter stage of mqa in response to the outbreak of covid - 19 . basis for continued monitoring . participation in the census and availability of nonrespondents for follow - up will help indicate whether the bureau is successfully reaching hard - to - count groups . with self - response and follow - up for nonrespondents still ongoing , it is too early to know the effectiveness of the bureau's outreach efforts . however , multiple streams of data will provide indications of bureau success in enumerating areas and demographic groups considered hard to count: as during the 2018 census test , the bureau is monitoring active data on self - response rates at the local level , which it can compare across areas it deems hard to count .