is this correct ? ( yes / no ) 2 . have you completed a non - nrp employment tax examination since completing an nrp employment tax examination ? ( yes / no ) . if the survey respondents answered no to either question , they were sent to the conclusion section of the survey , and did not provide responses to the remaining demographics questions and questions about the six nrp practices . we received a response rate of 85 percent , with 209 of the 246 examiners who met our criteria completing the survey . we also reviewed the raw data of the survey and made changes to ensure the skip patterns in the survey were adhered to by the respondents . we analyzed the survey data by the irs business unit , current position , and key case year of nrp returns on which the respondent worked . for each of the six nrp practices , we also asked an open - ended question about why they thought the nrp practice was helpful . we also asked an open - ended question on whether the respondents had any other views to share at the end of the survey . to analyze the responses to these questions , one of our analysts reviewed the responses and coded them to identify themes for the seven opened - ended responses with a second analyst reviewing those themes and the coded responses ; we reconciled any disagreements through discussion . after analyzing the closed - ended and open - ended data from the survey , we discussed the irs examiners' summary responses with irs examination staff in sb / se and te / ge . specifically , we discussed applying the six nrp examination practices to operational employment tax examinations . to help lead those discussions with irs examination staff , we used the following criteria , which were used for our prior work evaluating the nrp individual study . would the change be likely to help examiners correctly identify more noncompliance ? is it likely to make the examination more efficient — ( i.e. , reduce the cost of conducting an examination , increase benefits for the same cost , or increase benefits commensurate with justifiable or no increase in costs ) ? is it likely to reduce taxpayer burden ? would the change meet any other irs need ? where available , we asked for documentation on the criteria above to assess whether to apply those nrp practices to operational examinations . these criteria generally are based on our 2005 report , understanding the tax reform debate ( gao - 05-1009sp ) , office of management and budget circular a - 94 , and the internal revenue manual . irs officials agreed that these criteria were valid . as noted in our 2005 report , the criteria may conflict with each other , and as a result , trade - offs are to be considered among the criteria when evaluating a particular proposal . in those cases , we used our professional judgment in weighing the relative importance of these criteria in making our recommendations . we discussed these criteria with irs to get its feedback .