we made recommendations to address each issue . further , we identified additional information that could increase the report's transparency , and we suggested that congress consider amending section 2464 to include additional elements to increase the transparency of future biennial core reports . consistent with our recommendations , congress amended section 2464 and added additional reporting requirements . we discuss dod's actions to address our specific recommendations to improve the completeness of its 2018 biennial core report later in this report . in the 2018 biennial core report , dod and the military services addressed 8 of 10 required reporting elements , as shown in table 1 and discussed in more detail below . according to department officials , the department did not address two of the elements because changes to its guidance and processes for developing the 2018 report resulted in the 2016 and 2018 reports not being directly comparable . dod officials stated that they plan to address these two elements in the 2020 biennial core report . to address reporting elements 1 and 2 , the military services presented their respective requirements and projected workloads in direct labor hours and associated costs , using the work breakdown structure . according to the army's 2018 core report submission , the army previously determined this requirement based on the number of people assigned to the army's software sustainment activities . however , the army revised its methodology for calculating its software sustainment workload to reflect actual workload , not just the number of people conducting the work . after identifying projected shortfalls , officials used that information to determine how best to close gaps and mitigate risks in future implementation . table 2 shows dod's reported direct labor hours for the depots' core requirements , as well as projected maintenance workloads and costs of workloads to sustain core requirements by military service . the military services presented core requirements and workloads , down to the second - level subcategories , to address reporting element 7 . this structure represents all of the sub - specialties required to maintain core depot - level capabilities across the 10 categories of the work breakdown structure . for example , the aircraft category is broken down into 7 second - level subcategories: rotary , vertical / short take - off and landing , cargo / tanker , fighter / attack , bomber , unmanned systems , and aircraft engines . dod in the 2018 biennial core report did not address progress made in implementing mitigation plans from the prior core report ( element 6 ) , nor did they address the degree to which projected workload reported in the prior core report was executed ( element 10 ) . according to office of the assistant secretary of defense for logistics and materiel readiness ( oasd l&mr ) officials , they did not address these elements because the elements require dod to compare information in the 2018 biennial core report with information in the 2016 biennial core report .