year 2011 . a goal of this contract is to build an inventory of targets that can be used to meet testing needs as they arise . likewise , mda may also make a decision on its strategy for procuring medium - range targets . following the cancellation of the solicitation in 2010 , mda officials reported that they are considering options for procurement of future medium - range targets . intercept capabilities .  mda's plan to field abir in fiscal year 2019 is inconsistent with justification for developing the program . the program participated in five abir tests demonstrating missile - tracking accuracy . background and overview abir is being designed to track enemy ballistic missile raids soon after launch with airborne sensors forward in the theater in order to enable early intercept attempts . mda began exploring a similar concept of an operational unmanned aerial system ( uas ) infrared missile detection system with the airborne infrared system ( airs ) in fiscal year 2002 . in fiscal year 2009 , mda began assessing new platform and sensor alternatives and decided to conduct abir experiments and demonstration efforts to determine the usefulness of uass to perform missile defense missions . in addition , mda plans to have an operational abir program fielded by fiscal year 2019 as part of phase iii of the phased adaptive approach ( paa ) for the defense of europe and the united states . mda is following a different acquisition approach for abir than it has with some of its other acquisition development programs , according to program officials . rather than developing a system from the ground up , mda is using existing technology to demonstrate the usefulness of uas infrared sensors to perform early missile tracking . abir experiments and demonstrations will inform the requirements for an operational system . to facilitate this process , mda will utilize experiments and demonstrations to meet dedicated knowledge points , such as verifying the infrared sensor's performance , assessing missile raid size handling , and launching an interceptor on abir sensor tracks . for the experiments and demonstration efforts , mda and the air force jointly conducted an analysis of alternatives to select the infrared sensor and decided on the multi - spectral target system - class sensor , an infrared sensor with built - in integration to uass that was used in earlier risk - reduction activities for abir . program officials stated that mda collaborated with the air force and determined that the mq - 9 reaper , a medium - to - high altitude , long endurance uas , best fit both mda's and the air force's needs . while abir will use the multi - spectral target system - class sensor and the mq - 9 reaper , according to program officials , the operational system will be selected through industry competition . to that end , program officials stated they are developing the prototypes so that they are not necessarily tied to a specific uas or sensor platform to enhance future competition .