there are several reasons for these inconsistencies . as previously noted , multiple agencies did not include their planned savings for the federal data center consolidation initiative as part of their portfoliostat savings estimates . similarly , those same agencies did not include actual savings as part of portfoliostat either . several agencies told us that they had reported information about their portfoliostat savings to omb , but that omb did not include this information in its report to congress . the omb portfoliostat lead analyst stated that staff from the e - government office review information submitted by agencies in their integrated data collection reports and follow up with them as appropriate when clarification is needed . they ultimately only include “what makes sense” in the reports to congress . in other cases , agencies did not always follow instructions about what information to report , or when to report it , and consequently the information provided to us or to congress was incorrect or out of date . several other agencies , including the national science foundation , social security administration , and department of the treasury , did not provide an explanation . until these inconsistencies are addressed , the validity of the achieved savings reported by agencies and omb will remain questionable , making it difficult to determine the extent to which the portfoliostat initiative is meeting its goals . one of the goals for portfoliostat articulated by omb in its fiscal year 2013 guidance is the reinvestment of savings achieved through eliminating unnecessary and lower - value investments , and reducing consistent with this goal , the three selected agencies operating costs.we reviewed — dhs , the department of agriculture , and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) — explained how they reinvested the portfoliostat savings for their two initiatives that were expected to yield the highest savings in fiscal year 2013 . however , these agencies were not always able to provide support for how such savings were used . specifically: dhs reported achieving approximately $176 million in savings from its data center consolidation and enterprise licensing agreements initiatives . officials from the department's enterprise business management office told us that the reinvestment of funds is handled at the component level and thus is not tracked at the department level . officials from dhs's component agencies provided information about reinvesting portfoliostat savings as follows: customs and border protection and immigration and customs enforcement stated that their savings were used to mitigate budget reductions . however , they did not provide documentation to support this . four dhs component agencies ( the domestic nuclear detection office , departmental management and operations , the office of health affairs , and the transportation security administration ) identified a variety of purposes for which their savings were reinvested , such as fixing critical system issues , investment in engineering support contracts , investment in an innovation project , and additional monitoring and remediation of real - time technical operational activities and incidents . however , these components did not provide supporting documentation to illustrate the reinvestment of such savings . the science and technology directorate reported that it used its achieved savings for general management purposes .