( app . i provides detailed information on our scope and methodology. ) between 1999 and 2001 , the oecd member nations negotiated environmental policy framework for their ecas . ( see fig . with the exception of the united states , oecd members agreed in november 2001 to voluntarily implement a version of this framework , known as the common approaches . this process of negotiation followed a 1997 communiqué from the group of eight ( g - 8 ) that indicated a strong interest in negotiating common environmental guidelines for ecas . at the 1999 g - 8 summit , the heads of state issued a second communiqué stating that they hoped for agreement within the oecd by their 2001 summit , a deadline the g - 8 reiterated the following year . the united states led the effort to regularly place common eca environmental procedures on the g - 8 agenda . the united states sought to promote uniform standards because it was concerned about unequal export market conditions and growing concern from nongovernmental organizations ( ngo ) that eca - funded projects had the potential to cause significant environmental harm . however , the most current version of the common approaches required neither public disclosure of project information nor establishment of a single set of technical standards . because the united states believed that these provisions were essential , it objected and said it would block the agreement if it were sent before the oecd council for approval . twenty - eight of 29 oecd members of the working party on export credits and credit guarantees ( ecg ) subsequently opted to voluntarily adhere to the common approaches , thus implementing the framework without a formal decision . application of the common approaches began on january 1 , 2002 . ( see app . ii for a list of oecd participants and ecg members that are implementing the common approaches. ) some ecas have used environmental guidelines from the world bank group as a model for the development of environmental procedures and standards to use in evaluating projects . the environmental guidelines of ex - im bank , for example , were developed using world bank standards as a reference point . while the environmental review policies of different organizations within the world bank group vary somewhat , they generally follow a similar screening and categorization process ( see fig . the world bank's environmental policies include evaluation and technical standards , such as those for emissions , which are laid out in the pollution prevention and abatement handbook . it also has a set of qualitative environmental and social standards , known as safeguard policies . these outline broad project and evaluation expectations , including guidelines on involuntary movement of peoples , impacts on cultural property , and conservation of natural habitats . representatives of both the business community and the environmental ngo community have expressed considerable interest in the issue of environmental review procedures for ecas , but for different reasons . some businesses in the united states are concerned that if ex - im bank maintains environmental standards more stringent than the standards of some competitor ecas , the additional project review and mitigation costs may hurt u.s. exports .