( see fig . most operators reported finding pipelines in good condition and free of major defects , requiring only minor repairs or recoating . a few operators found more than 10 immediate repairs . operators nonetheless found these assessments valuable in determining the condition of their pipelines and finding damage . most of the operators told us that , if the 7-year reassessment requirement was not in place , they would respond to the conditions that they identified during baseline assessments by reassessing their pipelines every 10 , 15 , or 20 years , based on industry consensus standards . these baseline assessment findings suggest that — at least for the operators we contacted — the 7-year requirement is conservative . however , the 7-year reassessment requirement may be more appropriate for higher - stress pipelines than for lower - stress pipelines . the 7-year reassessment requirement is generally more consistent with scientific - and engineering - based intervals for pipelines operating under higher - stress . higher - stress transmission pipelines are typically those that transport natural gas across the country from a gathering area to a local distribution company . for higher - stress pipelines , the industry consensus standard sets maximum reassessment periods at 5 or 10 years , depending on operating pressure . phmsa does not collect information in such a way that would allow us to readily estimate the percentage of all pipeline miles in highly populated or frequented areas that operate under higher pressure . for the 25 operators that we contacted , the operators told us that about three - fourths of their pipeline mileage in highly populated or frequented areas operated at higher pressures . finally , industry data suggest that in the neighborhood of 250,000 miles of the 300,000 miles ( over 80 percent ) of all transmission pipelines nationwide may operate at higher pressure . some operators told us that the 7-year reassessment requirement is conservative for pipelines that operate under lower - stress . this is especially true for local distribution companies that use their transmission lines mainly to transport natural gas under lower pressures for several miles from larger cross - country lines in order to feed smaller distribution lines . they pointed out , for example , that in a lower - pressure environment , pipelines tend to leak rather than rupture . leaks involve controlled , slow emissions that typically create little damage or risk to public safety . i will discuss the 7-year reassessment requirement in more detail shortly . as part of our assessment of the integrity management program , we are also examining how phmsa and state pipeline agencies plan to oversee operator implementation of the program . to help federal and state inspectors prepare for and conduct integrity management inspections , phmsa developed detailed inspection protocols tied to the integrity management regulations and a series of training courses covering the protocols and other relevant topics , such as corrosion and in - line inspection . furthermore , in response to our 2002 recommendation , phmsa has been working to improve its communication with states about their role in overseeing integrity management programs .