we reviewed 24 of these in detail . we could not review the remainder to the same level of detail because their military utility assessments were incomplete or not available and because we did not choose to present information on those projects that were highly classified . to assess the results of the completed actds , we examined each project's military utility assessment documents , final program reports , lessons learned reports , and other pertinent actd documents , such as the program acquisition strategies . we interviewed operational and technical managers and other knowledgeable program officials at the unified combatant commanders , defense agencies , and the services to discuss the phases of each actd project and its transition status . specifically , we interviewed officials at the science and technology office of the united states pacific command , camp smith , hawaii ; the european command , stuttgart , germany ; the central command , tampa , florida ; the special operations command , tampa , florida ; the joint forces command , norfolk , virginia ; the air combat command , hampton , virginia ; the army training and doctrine command , hampton , virginia ; and the marine corps warfighting lab , quantico , virginia . we also contacted actd officials at the program executive office of the air base and port biological program office , falls church , virginia ; the defense information systems agency , falls church , virginia ; the defense advanced research projects agency , arlington , virginia ; the defense threat reduction agency , fort belvoir , virginia ; and the defense intelligence agency , arlington , virginia . to determine the factors that affected the transition outcomes of completed actd projects , we met with the operational and technical managers for each actd as well as other knowledgeable program officials and the designated actd representatives from each of the services . we compared information gathered on the individual actds to discern those factors that were salient in a majority of the cases . in order to better understand actd program guidance , funding , and management that can affect transition outcomes , we spoke with relevant officials within the office of the deputy undersecretary of defense , advanced systems and concepts ( dusd ( as&c ) ) , including staff responsible for funding and transition issues , and the executive oversight manager for each actd . we also discussed actd management and transition issues with representatives of the dusd ( as&c ) , comptroller ; the joint staff ; and the director , defense research and engineering ; the defense advanced research projects agency ; and the defense information systems agency . we did not conduct a detailed review of the users' acceptance or satisfaction with the items of the actd process . we conducted our review between october 2001 and october 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the subcommittee on defense , senate committee on appropriations ; the house committee on armed services ; and the subcommittee on defense , house committee on appropriations ; and the secretaries of defense , the army , the navy , and the air force .