detection . as reported by equifax officials , an expired digital certificate contributed to the attackers' ability to communicate with compromised servers and steal data without detection . specifically , while equifax had installed a tool to inspect network traffic for evidence of malicious activity , the expired certificate prevented that tool from performing its intended function of detecting malicious traffic . the certificate had expired before may 2017 , meaning that traffic was not being inspected throughout the breach . segmentation . because individual databases were not isolated or “segmented” from each other , the attackers were able to access additional databases beyond the ones related to the online dispute portal , according to equifax officials . the lack of segmentation allowed the attackers to gain access to additional databases containing pii , and , in addition to an expired certificate , allowed the attackers to successfully remove large amounts of pii without triggering an alarm . data governance . data governance includes setting limits on access to sensitive information , including credentials such as usernames and passwords . according to equifax officials , the attackers gained access to a database that contained unencrypted credentials for accessing additional databases , such as usernames and passwords . this enabled the intruders to run queries on those additional databases . in addition to these four broad categories , equifax officials noted one other factor that also facilitated the breach . specifically , the lack of restrictions on the frequency of database queries allowed the attackers to execute approximately 9,000 such queries — many more than would be needed for normal operations . according to equifax's public filings , including its annual 10-k filing submitted to the securities and exchange commission in march 2018 and its notice of 2018 annual meeting and proxy statement , following the 2017 incident , equifax undertook a variety of remediation efforts to address the factors identified in their investigation . equifax officials responsible for coordinating the response to the incident stated that , once the company identified how the attackers were able to gain unauthorized access to company systems and remove sensitive data , it took measures to address the internal factors that led to the breach . the measures were intended to better protect the company's infrastructure from future disruptions , compromises , or failures . we did not independently assess equifax's efforts to address the identified factors . specifically , equifax officials stated that system - level remediation measures were implemented to address the factors that led to the breach . for example , to work toward addressing concerns about identifying vulnerable servers , equifax reportedly is implementing a new management process to identify and patch software vulnerabilities and confirm that vulnerabilities have been addressed . also , to help ensure that detection of malicious activity is not hindered in the future , equifax officials said they have developed new policies to protect data and applications and implemented new tools for continuous monitoring of network traffic . further , in an effort to improve segmentation between devices that do not need to communicate , equifax officials stated that they have implemented additional controls to monitor communications at the external boundary of the company's networks and added restrictions on traffic between internal servers .