we did not assess the quality of this training . regarding longshoremen's union concerns , we reviewed scientific literature related to radiation safety and the nuclear regulatory commission guidelines on radiation levels . we also spoke with longshoremen's representatives to discuss whether cbp had addressed their concerns since we issued our 2004 report . last , we also met with cbp's radiation safety officer to gain a further understanding of the potential risks associated with cbp's inspection equipment and actions he took to address longshoremen's concerns . how does cbp systematically analyze security inspection results and incorporate them into ats ? what steps has cbp taken to better implement the rest of its targeting strategy at the seaports ? to address these questions , we interviewed cbp officials in headquarters and visited six seaports: baltimore , charleston , los angeles - long beach , miami , new york - new jersey , and savannah . because we did not select a random sample of ports to visit , the results from these visits cannot be generalized to ports nationwide . we also met with cbp's contractor responsible for conducting cbp's peer review of ats and longshoremen's union representatives . we reviewed cbp's policies and procedures for targeting and inspecting shipments , and its documentation on intelligence gathering and dissemination , targeting strategies , random inspections , training , and radiation safety as well as its peer review report . we also examined information on officers trained and certified in cbp's sea cargo targeting training course . we did not independently validate the reliability of cbp's targeting results or test the effectiveness of ats . we conducted our work in response to this request from october 2005 through march 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . oceangoing cargo containers have an important role in the movement of cargo between global trading partners . approximately 90 percent of the world's trade is transported in cargo containers . in the united states almost half of incoming trade ( by value ) arrives by containers aboard ships . if terrorists smuggled a weapon of mass destruction into the nation using a cargo container and detonated such a weapon at a seaport , the incident could cause widespread death and damage to the immediate area , perhaps shut down seaports nationwide , cost the u.s. economy billions of dollars , and seriously hamper international trade . the department of homeland security and cbp are responsible for addressing the threat posed by terrorist smuggling of weapons in oceangoing containers . to carry out this responsibility , cbp uses a layered security strategy . one key element of this strategy is ats . cbp uses ats to review documentation , including electronic manifest information submitted by the ocean carriers on all arriving shipments , to help identify containers for additional inspection . the comptroller general's internal control standards include the establishment and review of performance measures as one example of a control activity to help an entity ensure it is achieving effective results . in july 2005 , cbp contracted with a consulting firm to develop such performance metrics .