we made a number of recommendations to address these issues . while interior's reorganization of mms includes plans to hire additional staff with expertise in oil and gas inspections and engineering , these plans have not been fully implemented , and it remains unclear whether interior will be fully successful in hiring , training , and retaining these additional staff . moreover , the human capital issues we identified with blm's management of onshore oil and gas continue , and these issues have not yet been addressed in interior's reorganization plans . federal oil and gas resources generate billions of dollars annually in revenues that are shared among federal , state , and tribal governments ; however , we found interior may not be properly assessing and collecting these revenues . interior generally agreed with our recommendations and is taking initial steps to implement these recommendations . furthermore , we reported in july 2009 on numerous problems with interior's efforts to collect data on oil and gas produced on federal lands , including missing data , errors in company - reported data on oil and gas production , and sales data that did not reflect prevailing market prices for oil and gas . as a result of interior's lack of consistent and reliable data on the production and sale of oil and gas from federal lands , interior could not provide reasonable assurance that it was assessing and collecting the appropriate amount of royalties on this production . we made a number of recommendations to interior to improve controls on the accuracy and reliability of royalty data . interior generally agreed with our recommendations and is working to implement many of them , but these efforts are not complete , and it is uncertain at this time if the efforts will fully address our concerns . interior expects to complete this study later this year . accordingly , we recommended that the secretary of the interior develop a strategy to evaluate options to encourage faster development of oil and gas leases on federal lands . recently , interior has stated its intent to pursue legislation establishing a per acre fee on non - producing leases to encourage development of federal leases . in conclusion , interior's oversight of federal oil and gas resources is in transition . our past work has found a wide range of material weaknesses in interior's oversight of federal oil and gas resources . these findings and related recommendations were the results of years of intensive evaluation of how interior oversaw the oil and gas development functions . while interior may shift responsibilities around , many of these weaknesses remain key challenges to address as interior works through the implementation of its reorganization . for the reorganization to be most effective , it is important that interior remains focused on efforts to implement our past recommendations and incorporate them into the new oversight bureaus . we remain hopeful that the structural changes made to interior's bureaus , coupled with a concerted effort to implement the many recommendations we have made should provide greater assurance of effective oversight of federal oil and gas resources . chairman issa , ranking member cummings , and members of the committee , this concludes our prepared statement .