link to strategic planning . identify talent from multiple organizational levels , early in careers , or with critical skills . emphasize developmental assignments in addition to formal training . address specific human capital challenges , such as diversity , leadership capacity , and retention . madam chairwoman and members of the subcommittee: i am pleased to be here today to discuss the need for increased attention on succession planning and management in the federal government . my main point today is that the experiences of other countries can provide insights to agencies here in the united states on how to engage in broad , integrated succession planning and management efforts to identify and develop the leaders , managers , and workforce necessary to meet the challenges that will confront government in the 21st century . chairwoman davis , today you are releasing a report that we prepared at your and senator voinovich's request that shows specific practices that leading public sector organizations abroad are implementing as part of their integrated succession planning and management initiatives that focus on strengthening both current and future organizational capacity . we recently testified before your subcommittee that fundamental questions need to be asked about what the federal government should do , how it should do it , and in some cases , who should be doing it . as federal agencies seek to transform their cultures in response to governance challenges , it is important to focus not just on the present but also on future trends and challenges . as part of this reexamination , succession planning and management can help the organization become what it needs to be , rather than simply to recreate the existing organization . over the past several years , countries around the world have increasingly come to recognize the challenges posed by succession . for example , canada faces a public service workforce with about 80 percent of both its executives and executive feeder groups eligible to retire by the end of the decade . in the united states , we project that more than half of all the members of the senior executive service ( ses ) employed by the government in october 2000 will have left by october 2007 and about 15 percent of the overall federal workforce will retire from 2001 to 2006 . u.s. general accounting office , human capital: insights for u.s . agencies from other countries' succession planning and management initiatives , gao - 03-914 ( washington , d.c.: sept. 15 , 2003 ) . adequately prepare them for the future . in 1997 , the national academy of public administration reported that of the 27 agencies responding to its survey , 2 agencies had a succession planning program or process in place . in a 1999 joint office of personnel management ( opm ) and senior executive association survey of the ses , more than 50 percent of all career members said that their agencies did not have a formal succession planning program for the ses , and almost 75 percent said that their agencies did not have such a program for managers . succession planning and management is starting to receive increased attention .