this program was transferred to dhs . our recent work in the emergency preparedness and response mission area has identified a number of challenges that must be overcome if the nation is to effectively minimize the damage and successfully recover from future terrorist attacks that may occur despite its best efforts at preventing them . one challenge involves the adoption of an “all - hazards” approach to emergency preparedness and response . addressing this challenge would ensure that the nation is better prepared for terrorist events while simultaneously better preparing itself to deal with natural disasters . another challenge involves providing better governmental planning and coordination with regard to first responder issues . an example of the challenge faced here concerns the national capital region ( ncr ) , where there exists no coordinated regionwide plan for first responder priorities . other challenges with regard to first responders include better preparing them to respond to incidents involving catastrophic terrorism and restructuring the federal grant system . an additional challenge involves improving public health communications and information sharing . an example of this challenge is the lack of a coordinated review process that ensures that communications projects complement one another . additional challenges include better preparing health care providers to respond to incidents involving bioterrorism ; improving regional response planning involving multiple municipalities ; ensuring that hospitals have the medical equipment necessary for large influxes of patients ; ensuring adequate communications among responders and with the public , and defining the roles and responsibilities of dod in defending the homeland and providing military support to civil authorities . the strategy calls for the creation of “a fully integrated national emergency response system that is adaptable enough to deal with any terrorist attack , no matter how unlikely or catastrophic , as well as all manner of natural disasters.” this all - hazards approach to emergency preparedness and response has been embodied in a number of documents , including hspd - 5 and hspd - 8 ; the national incident management system ; and the national response plan . in our may , june , and july 2004 reports , we pointed out that the challenges the nation's emergency responders face in adapting an all - hazards approach include ( 1 ) identifying the types of emergencies — eg , hurricane or truck bomb attack — for which they should be prepared and the requirements — eg , incident management plans and procedures , equipment , and training — for responding effectively to these different types of emergencies ; ( 2 ) assessing current capabilities against those requirements ; ( 3 ) developing and implementing effective , coordinated plans among multiple first responder disciplines and jurisdictions to close the gap between current capabilities and established requirements ; and ( 4 ) defining the roles and responsibilities of federal , state , and local governments and private entities in defining requirements , assessing capabilities , and developing and implementing coordinated plans to enhance first responder capabilities . the gilmore and 9 / 11 commissions made recommendations with regard to this challenge . the strategy emphasizes a shared national responsibility — involving all levels of government — in responding to a serious emergency , such as a terrorist incident .