they also provided incentives for employers to provide work opportunities for claimants . managers of these other programs also explained to us that they have developed techniques — such as separating ( or triaging ) claims — to use staff with the appropriate expertise to provide return - to - work assistance to claimants in a cost - effective manner . va's individual unemployability decision - making practices lag behind those used in the private sector . as we have reported in the past , a key weakness in va's decision - making process is that the agency did not routinely include a vocational specialist in the evaluation to fully evaluate an applicant's ability to work . preliminary findings from our ongoing work indicate that va still does not have procedures in place to fully assess veterans' work potential . in addition , the iu decision - making process lacks sufficient incentives to encourage return to work . regardless of the overall type of staff organization , each of the three insurers facilitates the interaction of its core staff — claims managers , medical experts , and vocational rehabilitation experts — by pulling these experts together into small , multidisciplinary teams responsible for managing claims . for example , one insurer's average claims manager's caseload for these stable and mature claims is about 2,200 claims , compared with an average caseload of 80 claims in the same company for claims managed more actively . unlike disability compensation programs in the private sector , va has not drawn on vocational experts for iu assessments to examine the claimant's work potential and identify the services and accommodations needed to help those who could work to realize their full potential . in our 1987 report , we found that va had not routinely obtained all vocational information needed to determine a veteran's ability to engage in substantially gainful employment before it granted iu benefits . without understanding how key vocational factors , such as the veteran's education , training , earnings , and prior work history , affect the veteran's work capacity , va cannot adequately assess the veteran's ability to work . to perform this analysis , va officials told us that the agency has vocational specialists who are specially trained to perform this difficult analysis . skilled vocational staff can determine veterans' vocational history , their ability to perform past or other work , and their need for retraining . by not collecting sufficient information and including the expertise of vocational specialists in the assessment , va did not have an adequate basis for awarding or denying a veteran's claim for unemployability benefits . preliminary findings from our ongoing work indicate that va still does not have procedures in place to fully assess veterans' work potential . in addition , the iu decision - making process lacks sufficient incentives to encourage return to work . in considering whether to grant iu benefits , va does not have procedures to include vocational specialists from its vr&e services to help evaluate a veteran's work potential .