we provided a draft of this report to usps for review and comment . usps had no comments , but provided technical clarifications , which we incorporated into the report as appropriate . usps would then process and transport the bulk mail to its final destinations . by 2007 , however , a significant portion of this mail bypassed the bulk mail center network and was dropped at a processing plant closer to its final delivery point . in fiscal year 2009 , usps reported that it had begun transforming its 21 bulk mail centers into network distribution centers and completed the transformation in fiscal year 2010 . according to the 5-year plan , half of usps's career employees — 283,000 employees — will be retirement eligible by 2016 . in march 2010 , usps presented a detailed proposal to prc to move from a 6-day to a 5-day delivery schedule to achieve its workforce and cost savings reduction goals . usps projected that its proposal to move to 5-day delivery by ending saturday delivery would save about $3 billion annually and would reduce mail volume by less than 1 percent . however , on the basis of its review , prc estimated a lower annual net savings — about $1.7 billion after a 3-year phase - in period — as it noted that higher revenue losses were possible . in february 2012 , usps updated its projected net savings to $2.7 billion after a 3-year implementation period . implementing 5-day delivery would require usps to realign its operations network to increase efficiency , maintain service , and address operational issues . some business mailers have expressed concern that reducing processing facilities as a result of eliminating overnight delivery service could increase costs for business mailers who will have to travel farther to drop off their mail . in addition , business mailers have expressed concern that service could decline as usps plans to close an unprecedented number of processing facilities in a short period . usps employee associations have said that the proposed changes would reduce mail volume and revenue , thus making usps's financial condition worse . business mailers have commented that such a change in delivery service standards and postal facility locations could shift mail processing costs to them and reduce the value of mail for their businesses . while many of usps's customers who are business mailers indicated they would be willing to accept the service standard changes and understood the need for such a change , several mailers noted that it is never good when an organization reduces services . as a result of usps's plan , businesses using bulk first - class mail , standard mail , or periodicals may have fewer locations where mail can be entered and may therefore need to transport it to locations different from those now in use . furthermore , businesses using standard mail may have to transport their bulk mail to other locations to take advantage of discounts . usps officials told business mailers in february 2012 , when it announced the facilities it planned to close , that it did not plan immediate changes to the locations where business mailers drop off their mail or to the associated discounts .