this problem is not new . the hhs - oig reported in 2006 that fda was not entering into the database the information from asrs , noting , for example , that for primarily requested studies , the study start dates were present for only 6 percent and original projected completed dates were present for only 21 percent . as a result , the hhs - oig recommended that fda improve its database for monitoring postmarketing studies so that it provides timely , accurate , and useful information and ensure that studies are being monitored . given that fda's medical reviewers are not routinely reviewing asrs and do not have reliable information readily available to track the status of postmarketing studies , the agency cannot effectively monitor these studies . fda does not know the current status of many postmarketing studies or whether they are progressing towards completion . in addition , fda does not know whether drug sponsors are submitting complete and accurate asrs in a timely manner . as a result , fda lacks current , reliable , and easily accessible information on the status of open postmarketing studies , and meeting federal reporting requirements is difficult . the information available regarding postmarketing studies can only be as accurate and complete as the data contained in fda's postmarketing database . fda has three initiatives in place to address the agency's oversight weaknesses . first , to ensure fda has current information on the status of open postmarketing studies and facilitate the timely review of asrs , fda retained the contractor in 2008 to review asrs for all postmarketing studies classified as open . as part of this effort , the contractor will support the work performed in fda's medical review divisions and conduct an initial review of all newly submitted asrs . this initial review is intended to help ensure that asrs are reviewed within fda's 90-day review goal . based on its review , the contractor will determine whether the status of the postmarketing studies that sponsors listed in the asr is correct , and meet biweekly with fda staff to discuss ongoing issues . fda staff will use this information to determine the appropriate status of open studies and update its tracking database . fda also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . regarding our recommendation , fda indicated that it would be difficult , if not impossible , to provide further clarification as to when it might utilize its authority to expedite withdrawal of a drug approved on the basis of surrogate endpoints . fda acknowledged that there have been cases where confirmation of the clinical benefit of drugs approved under the accelerated approval program did not occur in a timely manner . however , fda stressed that , unless there are clear safety concerns emanating from the confirmatory trial , it must carefully assess each case and consider the underlying reasons and consequences of all regulatory options , including their potential impact on patients . in expressing its disagreement and the need for case - by - case assessments , fda cited the examples of two drugs mentioned in our report — proamatine and iressa .