( see fig . by 2003 , medicare spending on these services totaled $47.9 billion . during much of this period , increases in both the volume and intensity of services physicians provided to each beneficiary were an important factor in spending growth . before the physician fee schedule was implemented , medicare payments for physician services were largely based on historical charges . experience in the 1980s repeated the experience of the prior decade: the congress froze fees or limited fee increases , but spending continued to rise . from 1980 through 1991 , for example , medicare spending per beneficiary for physician services grew at an average annual rate of about 11.6 percent . ( see fig . total medicare spending for physician services depends on the fee paid for each service , the number of beneficiaries served , the number of services provided to each beneficiary ( volume ) , and the mix of those services — that is , the combination of more and less expensive services ( intensity ) . of these factors , physicians directly influence only the volume and intensity of services provided to beneficiaries . much of the spending growth resulted from increases in the volume and intensity of services . for example , from 1986 until 1992 , physician payment rates grew by less than 2 percent annually , while the volume and intensity of services rose , on average , by almost 8 percent per year . in 1986 , the congressional budget office stated that “oth the price and the volume of services must be controlled to constrain costs….” in 1989 , citing the need for spending targets to limit spending growth for physician services , the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) testified that “medicare physician spending has increased at compound annual rates of 16 percent over the past 10 years . and in spite of our best efforts to control volume and rein in expenditures , medicare physician spending is currently out of control… . an expenditure target…sets an acceptable level of growth in the volume and intensity of physician services. annual spending growth during the 1990s was far lower than in the preceding 10 years . beginning in 1992 , the congress introduced spending targets for physician services to help constrain the rise in medicare spending for physician services . unlike prior attempts to control spending , spending target systems sought to limit the growth in the volume and intensity of services each year . from 1992 until 1999 , the growth in the volume and intensity of physician services per medicare beneficiary moderated . ( see fig . during this time period , the average annual increase in medicare spending due to changes in volume and intensity of services per beneficiary was about 1 percent , in contrast with the average annual growth of about 7 percent in the period from 1985 through 1991 . the moderation of volume and intensity growth slowed the rate of increase in spending on physician services . this spending grew from $25.6 billion in 1992 to $36.9 billion in 2000an average annual rate of 4.7 percent . in contrast , from 1985 through 1991 , total spending increased at an average annual rate of about 10.8 percent .