: jun . the navy's separation policy has not been updated to be fully the navy officials stated they were consistent with dod policy.unaware that dod had revised its separation policy in 2011 , and again in 2014 , until we discussed this with them in may 2014 during the course of our review . the marine corps' separation policy has not been updated to be fully consistent with dod policy , since the navy is responsible for revising and implementing such policies for the marine corps . the air force reserves and national guard separation policy was created in 2005 and has not been updated over time as dod has updated its separation requirements for non - disability mental conditions . for example , the policy does not contain the separation requirements applicable to servicemembers who served in an idp area . because the services have been separating servicemembers based on outdated dod policy , some servicemembers may not have been afforded the protections intended by dod's updated separation requirements . for example , servicemembers who served in an idp area may not have had their diagnosis endorsed by the military services' office of the surgeon general as required by dod and have been separated without the benefit of a confirmation of their diagnosis by this senior medical entity . during the course of our review , we also found that the air force national guard does not have a process to separate national guard members for non - disability mental conditions . in 2013 , air force national guard reported that it had not been separating guard members for non - disability mental conditions because it did not have a process to get a mental health assessment or diagnosis for national guard members . national guard members believed to have non - disability mental conditions were either returned to duty or separated for another reason such as misconduct or unsatisfactory performance of duty . according to dod policy , when separation for unsatisfactory performance or misconduct is warranted , separating a servicemember for a non - disability mental condition is not appropriate . once va determines the eligibility of veterans who have applied for va health care , it assigns them to an enrollment priority group . compliance information for reservists and national guard members was missing . nineteen of the 20 compliance reports did not assess compliance with separation requirements for reservists and national guard members who were separated while not on active duty . some military service officials stated that they did not provide information on these reservists and national guard members because dod did not specifically ask for them to be included in the reports . however , dod instructed the secretaries of the army , the air force , and the navy and the commandant of the marine corps to include a random sampling of all personality disorder separations for each military department , in which reservists and national guard members are included as part of their respective departments . compliance information for servicemembers who served in an idp area was missing . eight of the 20 compliance reports did not indicate how many of the servicemembers in their review sample had served in an idp area , if any .