creations . department of health and human services officials reported administering 28 new stem education programs . these programs are housed in the department's national institutes of health , which generally bases its funding decisions on scientific opportunities and its own peer review process . one new program is the building infrastructure leading to diversity initiative . this program supports undergraduate institutions in implementing and studying approaches to engaging and retaining students from diverse backgrounds in biomedical research . terminations . department of education officials reported that four stem education programs funded in fiscal year 2010 were terminated before fiscal year 2016 . one such program was the women's educational equity program . congress last funded this program in fiscal year 2010 . based on our analysis of questionnaire responses , nearly all stem education programs in fiscal year 2016 overlapped with at least one other stem education program , in that they offered at least one similar service to at least one similar group in at least one similar stem field to achieve at least one similar objective ( see text box ) . similar levels of overlap occurred among programs funded in fiscal year 2010 . similarities among overlapping federal science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education programs similar services many of the 163 stem education programs provided similar services . to support students , most programs ( 143 ) provided research opportunities , internships , mentorships , or career guidance . in addition , 110 programs supported short - term experiential learning activities , and 99 programs supported long - term experiential learning activities . short - term experiential learning activities include field trips , guest speakers , workshops , and summer camps . long - term experiential learning activities last throughout a semester in length or longer . to support teachers , 77 programs provided curriculum development and 45 programs supported teacher in - service training , professional development , or retention activities . similar groups intended to be served many programs also provided services to similar groups , such as k - 12 students , postsecondary students , k - 12 teachers , and college faculty . a majority of stem programs reported primarily benefiting postsecondary students ; specifically , 103 programs intended to serve 4-year undergraduate students , 76 intended to serve master's degree students , and 83 intended to serve doctoral students . most programs also intended to serve multiple groups ; 137 of the 163 programs served two or more groups . similar stem fields more than 75 percent of programs focused on specific stem academic fields of study . the most common fields were biology ( 85 programs ) , technology ( 75 programs ) , engineering ( 72 programs ) , and computer science ( 71 programs ) . of those programs that focused on specific stem fields of study , about 55 percent ( 68 programs ) focused on 5 or more different fields . similar objectives many stem education programs had similar objectives . an objective of a majority of programs ( 115 ) was to provide training opportunities for undergraduate or graduate students in stem fields . most programs ( 139 ) also reported having multiple primary stem objectives .