additional information . education has required certain reporting or follow - up information , other than that included in conditional approval of amendments or high - risk status , and has used other measures deemed appropriate . for example , according to education officials , one state that experienced procurement problems is required to provide monthly procurement information to education . withholding of funds . although education may withhold grant funds from states if they do not comply with the terms of the award,education officials said they have not withheld funds from any rtt state . officials added that states have always demonstrated progress toward addressing education's concerns . education helps states meet their rtt goals and implement high - quality reforms by providing technical assistance , including access to experts and information on options for evaluation systems . education officials said technical assistance helps states resolve implementation issues , including those identified through the monitoring process . most rtt federal assistance is provided by the contractor - supported rsn , and education also provides some technical assistance to rtt states.officials said they work closely with education staff to learn about the rsn types of technical assistance that might be useful to states on teacher and leader effectiveness , including teacher and principal evaluations , as well as other rtt topics . from 2010 through march 2013 , rsn provided technical assistance on teacher and leader effectiveness in group settings — such as webinars and in - person meetings — to rtt states , as well as individualized technical assistance ( see fig . rsn officials said they provide individualized assistance to states when requested , particularly for states in more advanced stages of implementation with needs that could not be met through larger group technical assistance activities . rsn also developed publications related to teacher and leader effectiveness , including case studies , tool kits , and lessons learned , and has provided them through the rtt grantee web portal . these publications included longer reports on school reform and shorter briefs , such as a paper that described rules governing classroom observations used in teacher evaluations in selected rtt states . rsn has worked to strengthen the quality of its technical assistance and adapt to states' changing needs , according to education and rsn officials . they said that early in the contract , rsn revised its approach to better meet the needs of states . for example , in response to state feedback , rsn provided states with access to education practitioners who had worked in schools rather than experts without hands - on experience , as they had done in the initial stages of the contract . rsn officials also said issues for which states requested technical assistance changed as implementation progressed , and rsn adapted its technical assistance accordingly . for example , early in implementation , states often requested assistance with designing evaluation systems , communicating with stakeholders , working with unions , and measuring growth in nontested grades and subjects , according to rsn officials . as implementation progressed , states requested assistance with issues such as the consistency of observations and the sustainability of evaluation systems .