providing training . oip provides a full suite of foia training for agency foia professionals . this training gives instruction on all aspects of foia and is designed for all levels of professionals . for example , the office offers an annual training class that provides a basic overview of the act , as well as hands - on courses about the procedural requirements involved in processing a request from start to finish . in addition , it offers a seminar outlining successful litigation strategies for attorneys who handle foia cases . oip also provides agencies customized training upon request . preparing annual reports . every year , oip prepares three major reports for the public , the president , and / or congress . the first report , summary of annual foia reports , is a summary of the information contained in the annual foia reports that are prepared by each of the federal agencies subject to the foia . issuing guidance . oip has developed guidance , available on its website , to assist federal agencies by instructing them in how to ensure timely determinations on requests , expedite the processing of requests , and reduce backlogs . the guidance also informs agencies on what should be contained in their annual foia reports to justice's attorney general . the office also has documented ways for federal agencies to address backlog requests . in march 2009 the attorney general issued guidance and related policies to encourage agencies to reduce their backlogs of foia requests . in addition , in december 2009 , omb issued a memorandum on the open government act , which called for a reduction in backlogs and the publishing of plans to reduce backlogs . further , in august 2014 and december 2015 , oip held best practices workshops and issued guidance to agencies on reducing foia backlogs and improving timeliness of agencies' responses to foia requests . the oip guidance instructed agencies to obtain leadership support , routinely review foia processing metrics , and set up staff training on foia . overseeing agencies' compliance . oip collects information on compliance with the act by reviewing agencies' annual foia reports and chief foia officer reports . these reports describe the number of foia requests received and processed in a fiscal year , as well as the total costs associated with processing and litigating requests . the report also provide a statistical breakdown of the government's overall foia administration . the second report , summary of agency chief foia officer reports , is a summary of the annual chief foia officer reports and an assessment of agencies' progress in administering foia . this report summarizes government - wide efforts to improve foia in five key areas of foia administration , and it individually scores each agency on several milestones tied to these efforts . the third report , the justice foia litigation and compliance report , which is directed to congress and the president , describes justice's efforts to oversee and encourage government - wide compliance with foia , and includes a list of , and information about , foia matters in litigation .