pub . 112-95 , § 112 , 126 stat . totaled $5.2 billion , while nonaviation revenues were just over $5 billion . according to aci - na , non - aviation revenue has grown faster than passenger growth since 2004 , over 4 percent on average for non - aviation revenue versus 1.5 percent average growth in passenger boardings over the same period . further , some airports have developed unique commercial activities with stakeholders from local jurisdictions and the private sector to help develop airport properties into retail , business , and leisure destinations . some examples include: non - aviation development on airport property: airports have turned to an increasing range of unique developments on airport property , including high - end commercial retail and leisure activities , hotels and business centers , and medical facilities for non - aviation revenues . for example , airports in denver , miami , and indianapolis have built cold storage facilities on airport property in an effort to generate revenue by leasing cold storage space to freight forwarders and businesses that transport low - volume , high - valued goods , including pharmaceuticals , produce , and other time - sensitive or perishable items . public - private partnerships: airports can fund airport improvements with private sector participation . public - private partnerships , involving airports and developers , have been used to finance airport development projects without increasing the amount of debt already incurred by airports . for example , the port authority of new york and new jersey has recently received responses for its request for proposals for the private sector to demolish old terminal buildings and construct , partially finance , operate , and maintain a new central terminal building for laguardia airport in new york city . privatization: faa's airport privatization pilot program ( appp ) , which was established in 1997 to reduce barriers to airport privatization that we identified in 1996 , has generated limited interest from the public and private sectors . as we reported in november 2014 , 10 airports have applied to be part of the pilot program and one airport — san juan luis muñoz marín international airport in puerto rico — has been privatized ( see fig . in our report , we noted that several factors reduce interest in the appp — such as higher financing costs for privatized airports , the lack of state and local property tax exemptions , and the length of time to complete a privatization under the program . public sector airport owners have also found ways to gain some of the potential benefits of privatization without full privatization , such as entering airport management contracts and joint development agreements for managing and building an airport terminal . in conclusion , last year commemorated one century since the first commercial airline flight,commercial aviation has grown at an amazing pace to become an and in that relatively short time span ubiquitous and mature industry in the united states .