platooning . technology developers and researchers told us there is ongoing development and testing of truck platoons , which involve one or more trucks following closely behind a lead truck , linked by wireless — or vehicle - to - vehicle — communication ( see fig . in a platoon , the driver in the lead truck controls the braking and acceleration for all of the connected trucks in the platoon , while the driver in each following truck controls its own steering . several stakeholders we interviewed and three studies we reviewed identified potential benefits from platooning , including fuel savings and increased safety , for example , due to the trucks' faster reaction times for braking . self - driving for part of a route . most of the technology developers we spoke with said they were developing automated trucks that will be self - driving for part of a long - haul route , such as exit - to - exit on highways ( see fig . representatives from one developer explained that their truck uses self - driving software installed on the truck . the software instructs the truck what to do , such as to steer or brake . in addition , cameras and other sensors on the truck's exterior provide the self - driving software with a view of the truck's surroundings to inform the software's instructions . for example , light detection and ranging ( lidar ) sensors use lasers to map a truck's surroundings ( see fig . such trucks would operate with no driver intervention under favorable conditions , such as on highways in good weather . two developers said that in their business models a driver would be in the truck for the first and last portions of the route to assist with picking up and dropping off trailers at hubs outside urban areas . alternatively , one developer said a remote driver — one not in the truck but operating controls from another location — would drive the first and last portions of a route . stakeholders identified potential benefits of self - driving for part of a route , such as increased safety , labor cost savings , and addressing what they said is a truck driver shortage . research funded by industry also suggests that an automated truck could improve productivity by , for example , continuing to drive to a destination while a human in the truck conducts other work or rests . in addition , one study noted that the most likely scenario for widespread adoption of automated trucks is the one in which trucks are capable of self - driving from exit - to - exit . self - driving for an entire route . none of the technology developers we interviewed told us they are planning to develop automated trucks that are self - driving for an entire route ( see fig . such trucks would be able to drive under all weather and environmental conditions . a person would not be expected to operate these trucks at any time .