, common controls ) . although the department had maintained release notes on updates , scoring documents , and presentations on ipost , key information about the program and its capabilities was not fully documented . for example , there were no diagrams of the architecture of ipost or a configuration baseline . in addition , there was no documentation of appropriate authorization and approval of changes included in ipost updates . furthermore , although state improved its process for testing applications and subsequent versions of ipost from a manual and informal testing process in april 2010 , it still lacks a written test plan and acceptance testing process with new releases being approved prior to release . for example , test procedures were not performed or documented to ensure that scripts for applying scoring rules matched the stated scoring methodology and that the scoring scripts were sufficiently tested to ensure that they fulfilled state's intended use . as the department moves forward with implementation of additional capabilities for ipost , the need for a robust configuration management and testing process increases . until such a process is fully developed , documented , and maintained , state has reduced assurance that ipost is configured properly and updates or changes to the application and scoring rules are working as intended . according to nist , as part of a risk management framework for federal information systems , a strategy for the selection of appropriate security controls to monitor and the frequency of monitoring should be developed by the information system owner and approved by the authorizing official and senior information security officer . priority for selection of controls to monitor should be given to controls that are likely to change over time . in addition , the security status of the system should be reported to the authorizing official and other appropriate organizational officials on an ongoing basis in accordance with the monitoring strategy . the authorizing official should also review the effectiveness of deployed controls on an ongoing basis to determine the current risk to organizational operations and assets . according to the foreign affairs manual , risk management personnel should balance the tangible and intangible cost to the department of applying security safeguards against the value of the information and the associated information system . although the pilot was completed in april 2009 , state officials noted they continue to rely on ipost users to report missed scans and inaccurate or incomplete data observed . notwithstanding these controls , the timeliness , accuracy , and completeness of ipost data were not always assured . for example , several instances where ipost data were not updated as frequently as scheduled , inconsistent , or incomplete are illustrated below .  frequency of updates to ipost data supports federal requirements but vulnerability scanning was not conducted as frequently as state scheduled . fisma requires that agencies conduct periodic testing and evaluation of the effectiveness of information security policies , procedures , and practices , to be performed with a frequency based on risk but no less frequent than annually . according to ipost documentation , each host is to be scanned for vulnerabilities every 7 days .