this case is discussed below . omega sprinklers were installed in hundreds of thousands of nonfederal facilities and in about 100 gsa - managed buildings . in 1990 , a fire occurred at a hospital in miami , fl , resulting in four injuries . during this fire , omega sprinklers failed to activate . through 1998 , at least 16 additional fires occurred , during which omega sprinklers failed to work , including a may 16 , 1995 , fire at a department of veterans affairs hospital in canandaigua , ny . during the new york fire , an omega sprinkler head located directly over the fire failed to activate . losses resulting from these and other fires were estimated at over $4.3 million ( see table 1 ) . although none of the fires reported in table 1 occurred in fairfax county , va , the county fire department became concerned that many of the sprinklers were installed in public and private facilities in the county . throughout the mid - 1990s , by publicizing its concerns about the sprinklers , the county fire department contributed to the widespread dissemination of information about the sprinklers in the media . in addition , tests performed in 1996 at independent testing laboratories — underwriters laboratories and factory mutual research corporation — revealed failure rates of 30 percent to 40 percent . on march 3 , 1998 , the consumer product safety commission announced that it had filed an administrative complaint against the manufacturer , resulting in the october 1998 nationwide recall of more than 8 million omega sprinklers . the agency began investigating central sprinkler company's omega sprinklers in 1996 when an agency fire engineer learned about a fire at a marriott hotel in romulus , mi , where an omega sprinkler failed to activate . after identifying that there was a hazard that warranted recalling the product , the commission staff sought a voluntary recall from central . unable to reach such an agreement with central , the agency's staff were authorized to file an administrative complaint against the company . moreover , the commission attempted to coordinate with other federal agencies , such as the department of veterans affairs and gsa . the department of veterans affairs participated in the recall in accordance with the terms of the commission's settlement agreement with the manufacturer . gsa officials stated that they became aware of the problems associated with omega sprinklers in 1996 after hearing about them from the news media and fairfax county fire department officials . gsa began a survey to identify the 100 gsa - managed buildings that contained the sprinklers . it also pursued an agreement with the manufacturer , resulting in a 1997 negotiated settlement for the replacement of some 27,000 devices in gsa - controlled buildings . officials from osha stated that they were unsure about when they became aware of the problems associated with omega sprinklers . an agency official explained that osha generally does not monitor information regarding problems with specific products , except for consumer product safety commission recalls . according to osha , it checks such recalls only informally and within the limited context of one of its programs , but not as a part of its primary compliance efforts .