noaa programs face similar unrealistic estimates . for example , the total development cost of the goes i - m acquisition was over three times greater than planned , escalating from $640 million to $2 billion . additionally , the delivery of the first satellite was delayed by 5 years . noaa has several efforts under way to improve the reliability of its cost and schedule estimates for the goes - r program . noaa's chief financial officer has contracted with a cost - estimating firm to complete an independent cost estimate , while the goes - r program office has hired a support contractor to assist with its internal program cost estimating . the program office is re - assessing its estimates based on preliminary information from the three vendors contracted to develop preliminary designs for the overall goes - r system . once the program office and independent cost estimates are completed , program officials intend to compare them and to develop a revised programmatic cost estimate that will be used in its decision on whether to proceed into system development and production . in addition , noaa has planned for an independent review team — consisting of former senior industry and government space acquisition experts — to provide an assessment of the program office and independent cost estimates for this decision milestone . it is a backup for the other two satellites should they experience any degradation in service . the others in the series , goes - o and goes - p , are planned for launch over the next few years . noaa is also planning a future generation of satellites , known as the goes - r series , which are planned for launch beginning in 2012 . each of the operational geostationary satellites continuously transmits raw environmental data to noaa ground stations . the data are processed at these ground stations and transmitted back to the satellite for broadcast to primary weather services both in the united states and around the world , including the global research community . raw and processed data are also distributed to users via ground stations through other communication channels , such as dedicated private communication lines and the internet . that report contains a detailed overview of our scope and methodology . all the work on which this testimony is based was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . since the 1960s , geostationary and polar - orbiting environmental satellites have been used by the united states to provide meteorological data for weather observation , research , and forecasting . noaa's national environmental satellite data and information service ( nesdis ) is responsible for managing the civilian geostationary and polar - orbiting satellite systems as two separate programs , called goes and the polar operational environmental satellites , respectively . unlike polar - orbiting satellites , which constantly circle the earth in a relatively low polar orbit , geostationary satellites can maintain a constant view of the earth from a high orbit of about 22,300 miles in space . noaa operates goes as a two - satellite system that is primarily focused on the united states ( see fig .