we closed the first recommendation as implemented . the last two recommendations remain unimplemented pending va's completion of planned actions . to ensure that the bhap data are accurate , complete , and consistent , va created a checkbox in the bhap template to indicate that the data were checked by vamc leadership . va's initial random checks indicate the checkbox is being used and vamc leadership is reviewing entries resulting in better consistency of the data . va plans to run monthly reviews to determine compliance . additionally , va created a software program to compare data from the bhap templates to the data entered into another suicide prevention database maintained by va. va officials plan for this review to become part of the quarterly routine review process and information about missing cases will be sent back to the vamcs for correction on a quarterly basis . chairman coffman , ranking member kuster , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you might have at this time . if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact randall b. williamson , director , health care at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or williamsonr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony are marcia a. mann , assistant director ; emily binek ; cathleen hamann ; sarah resavy ; and jennifer whitworth . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . further details on our scope and methodology are included in our report . va provides care to veterans with mental health needs in vamc primary and specialty care clinics . the uniform mental health services in va medical centers and clinics handbook ( handbook ) , which defines va's minimum clinical requirements for mental health services , requires that va facilities provide evidence - based treatment through the administration of medication , when indicated , consistent with the mdd clinical practice guideline ( cpg ) recommendations . the cpg is guidance intended by va to reduce current practice variation between clinicians and provide facilities with a structured framework to help improve patient outcomes , but should not take the place of the clinician's clinical judgment . the mdd cpg includes approximately 200 evidence - based recommendations to provide information and assist in decision making for clinicians who provide care for adults with mdd . cpg recommendations describe , for example , the use of standardized assessments of veterans' depressive symptoms as part of an evidence - based treatment plan .