iii ) . a national database would enhance fmcsa's ability to identify drivers who engage in job - hopping , and ensure compliance with return - to duty requirements . since there is currently no effective way to identify job - hoppers , a national database would make positive test information more readily available to carriers and to fmcsa for use in its initiative targeted at carriers that employ job - hoppers and job - hoppers themselves . a national database would also likely encourage drivers to go through the return - to - duty process in order to continue working in the trucking industry . however , a database would not be effective at stopping all job - hopping because not all carriers will report to or query the database , particularly if they are not complying with drug testing regulations or do not have a drug testing program in place . in addition , a database would not necessarily address the problem of self - employed owner - operators who test positive and fail to remove themselves from service , and fail to complete the return - to - duty process . stakeholders generally support a national database , which fmcsa is considering , but several challenges would need to be addressed . many stakeholders , including carriers , industry associations , and one union with whom we spoke are supportive of a database , particularly if privacy concerns and drivers' rights are adequately addressed . some of these stakeholders said a national database could affect drivers' rights if results are reported by unauthorized entities , if unauthorized persons gain access to the information , if drivers are unable to clear inaccurate reports from their records , or if drivers are unable to have return - to - duty completion information posted to their records . other challenges to implementing this option include the following: the time and technological resources required to receive , process , and respond to potentially thousands of queries each day could be significant , even though the database would only maintain records on the drivers who test positive or refuse to test . a 2004 fmcsa report estimates the number of national database users at up to 750,000 or more . this report also estimates the one - time cost of developing and implementing a national database at approximately $1.2 million and ongoing annual costs , including project and fmcsa staffing , at $994,000 . fmcsa and odapc officials noted that the costs in this report were likely underestimated . fmcsa officials are estimating the initial cost of the database to be nearly $9 million . fmcsa plans to refine its cost estimate as part of its rule - making process . a laboratory analyzes the specimen . dot is required to adhere to testing protocols developed by hhs and to use laboratories certified by hhs ; as of april 2008 , there were 42 such laboratories . a medical review officer , who is a licensed physician , is responsible for receiving and reviewing laboratory results for a carrier's drug testing program and evaluating medical explanations for certain drug test results .