these questions are reprinted below . during each focus group , the gao moderator asked questions related to the topics of our review to participants who , in turn , provided their perspectives on the topics . during the focus - group meetings , three gao team members took separate sets of detailed notes to document the participants' comments . see table 2 for the complete list of questions and follow - up questions that we asked during our focus groups . following our focus - group meetings , we consolidated our separate sets of detailed notes for each focus group to create a compiled final record of the participant comments from each focus group . to do this , a gao analyst reviewed the set of detailed notes and compiled them in a final record for each focus group . a key rule of this compilation was that if one analyst recorded a comment , but another did not , we included the material in the final record . to ensure that our compiled final record of each focus group was accurate , a second analyst then reviewed at least 25 percent of each of the final records . in instances where an analyst identified some discrepancies between the detailed notes and the final record , the reviewing analyst corrected the discrepancy and reviewed a higher percentage of the notes for that focus group . next , we used content analysis to analyze the final records of each focus group to identify themes that participants expressed across all or most of the groups . to do this , three gao analysts first met to discuss and agree on a preliminary set of themes . we then analyzed an initial set of the records and counted instances that we observed these initial themes . we then reconvened as a group to discuss and agree on additional themes to add to our analysis and to consolidate and delete others . we then analyzed our records and made coding decisions . following the initial analysis by one analyst , a second analyst independently reviewed all of the coding decisions that the first analyst made for each of the records . where there were discrepancies , the analysts reviewed one another's coding and rationale for their coding decisions and reached a consensus on which codes should be used . see figure 8 for the complete results of our analysis . when describing the results of our analysis of our focus groups in this report , we use the term “some,” as in “pilots in some focus groups,” to report topics that were discussed by rpa pilots in two to four of our focus groups . the information we present from our focus groups accurately captures the opinions provided by the rpa pilots who attended the 10 focus groups at the three air force bases we visited . however these opinions cannot be generalized to all of the rpa pilots at the three air force bases we visited or to all rpa pilots in the air force .