relocation opportunities . border patrol , ofo , and amo have formal programs that provide law enforcement officers with opportunities to relocate . for example , in fiscal year 2017 , border patrol implemented its operational mobility program and received initial funding to relocate about 500 border patrol agents to new locations based on the component's staffing needs . according to border patrol officials , retaining current employees is a top focus for leadership at the component and this program provides border patrol agents with opportunities for a paid relocation to a more desirable location at a lower cost to cbp than an official permanent change of station transfer . as of april 2018 , border patrol officials told us that 322 border patrol agents had accepted reassignment opportunities through the program and the component hoped to continue receiving funding to provide these opportunities . financial incentives and other payments and allowances . cbp's three operational components have also taken steps to supplement employees' salaries through the use of human capital flexibilities — such as retention and relocation incentives and special salary rates — as well as other payments and allowances . cbp's goal in pursuing these human capital flexibilities is to retain current employees — especially in remote or hard - to - fill locations — who are likely to internally relocate within cbp to more desirable duty locations or depart the agency for similar positions at other law enforcement organizations or commercial airlines . however , we found that from fiscal years 2013 through 2017 , cbp's use of such financial incentives and other payments was limited , as the agency paid a total of four retention incentives and 13 relocation incentives , and implemented one special salary rate for all positions during this 5-year period . from fiscal years 2013 through 2017 , border patrol did not offer retention incentives to agents and paid two relocation incentives to transfer border patrol agents to artesia , new mexico , and washington , d.c. , at a cost of roughly $78,000 . however , in fiscal year 2018 , border patrol increased its use of relocation incentives to facilitate the transfer of agents to duty stations along the southwest border that are less desirable due to the remoteness of the location and lack of basic amenities and infrastructure . specifically , as of april 2018 , 67 border patrol agents had received such incentives to relocate to duty stations in ajo , arizona ; calexico , california ; and big bend , texas ; among others . while border patrol did not offer retention incentives during our review period , it submitted a formal request to cbp leadership in february 2018 for a 10 percent across - the - board retention incentive for all border patrol agents at the gs - 13 level and below , which represents the majority of the component's frontline workforce . according to border patrol documentation , these incentives , if implemented , could help reduce border patrol's attrition rate — which has consistently outpaced its hiring rate — by helping retain agents who may have otherwise left border patrol for similar positions in ofo , ice , or other law enforcement agencies .