deductibles . hsa - eligible plans typically have higher deductibles than ppo plans . we considered all costs for covered services that enrollees incurred before meeting their deductible . out - of - pocket spending limits . hsa - eligible plans typically have higher out - of - pocket spending limits than ppo plans . how do the characteristics of enrollees compare between hsa - eligible and traditional plans ? what are enrollees' experiences with hsa - eligible plans ? how are hsas funded , and how are hsa account holders using their funds ? we also reviewed the financial features of plans offered in 2005 by three large employers in the public , utility , and insurance sectors , as well as those of plans sold for 2005 by ehealthinsurance , a large , national broker of individual and small business health insurance . to compare the covered health care services and provider networks of hsa - eligible plans with those of traditional plans , we reviewed plan brochures provided by the three large employers and spoke with employer and insurance carrier officials and industry experts . to compare the financial features of hsa - eligible plans with those of traditional plans , we summarized 2005 data from national employer health benefits surveys . we compared the total costs for enrollees who used extensive and low to moderate amounts of health care . to illustrate the potential health care costs faced by hsa - eligible and traditional plan enrollees , we examined the total annual costs to enrollees of the three employers' hsa - eligible and ppo plans in 2005 . to compare the characteristics of hsa - eligible and traditional plan enrollees , we analyzed demographic data provided by the internal revenue service ( irs ) on adjusted gross income and age reported by tax filers who reported an hsa contribution on their returns for 2004 and compared them with the corresponding data for all tax filers under 65 years old . we also compared 2005 income and age data for hsa - eligible and traditional plan enrollees who purchased coverage from the three employers we reviewed and from ehealthinsurance . to examine how hsas are funded and used , we analyzed data on individual and employer contributions and account withdrawals . to determine the share of enrollees that opened hsas , we analyzed survey data on hsa - eligible plan enrollment and irs data on hsa contributions . we also conducted interviews with industry experts regarding the share of enrollees that opened hsas . to examine individuals' hsa contributions , we analyzed irs data on the average tax deduction for 2004 hsa contributions and reviewed data provided by the three employers on the 2005 contributions of employees enrolled in hsa - eligible plans . to examine employer hsa contributions , we analyzed irs data on the average employer contribution in 2004 and summarized 2005 data reported by two national employer health benefits surveys and the three large employers we reviewed . to determine how account holders use hsa funds , we analyzed irs data on reported hsa withdrawals in 2004 and conducted a series of focus groups with employees of the three large employers we reviewed regarding hsa - eligible plan enrollees' use of accounts in 2005 .