navy . the navy has established an energy conservation program aimed at encouraging ships to reduce energy consumption . the energy conservation program provides training materials , such as a shipboard energy conservation manual and a pocket guide to assist commanders with energy - saving activities . the program also gives quarterly awards to ships that use less than the navy's established baseline amount of fuel . the navy has also made ship design alterations to reduce fuel demand . air force . the air force has identified and begun to implement initiatives aimed at reducing mobility energy demand and increasing fuel efficiency , aligning these initiatives with its energy strategy . these initiatives include determining fuel - efficient flight routes , reducing the weight on aircraft , optimizing air refueling , and improving the efficiency of ground operations . in addition , it is testing synthetic fuels in its aircraft that could partly displace the use of petroleum - based fuel . marine corps . the marine corps has initiated efforts to develop alternative power sources and improve fuel management . for example , it is testing the use of hybrid power — by combining solar panel , generator , and battery energy sources — at remote sites to lessen its fuel transportation demands to forward - deployed locations . in addition , the office of naval research is leading efforts for the marine corps to develop decision support tools that process and analyze data and improve fuel management in combat . while dod and the military services have several efforts under way to reduce mobility energy demand , dod has not established an overarching organizational framework to guide and oversee these efforts . in the absence of a framework for mobility energy , we also found that dod has made limited progress in incorporating fuel efficiency considerations into its key business processes and in implementing recommendations from department - sponsored studies on fuel reduction . in the report that we issued today , we made recommendations that dod establish an overarching organizational framework for mobility energy . without such a framework , dod cannot be assured that its current mobility energy reduction efforts will be fully implemented and will significantly reduce its reliance on petroleum - based fuel . our prior work has shown that an overarching organizational framework is critical to successful transformation in both public and private organizations . the key elements of such a framework include ( 1 ) top - level leadership and an implementation team with dedicated resources and funding ; ( 2 ) a comprehensive strategic plan , including goals and objectives , methods and timelines for evaluating progress , and outcome - oriented performance metrics ; and ( 3 ) a communication strategy that involves creating shared expectations and reporting related progress . we found that dod's current approach to mobility energy lacks these elements . while dod has begun to increase management attention and has identified energy as a transformational priority , it has not designated a single executive - level osd official whose primary focus is on mobility energy and who is accountable for these matters across the department .