, problem ) . the department agreed with our recommendations . we also reported that don had not , among other things , economically justified its ongoing and planned investment in the naval tactical command support system ( ntcss ) and had not invested in ntcss within the context of a well - defined dod or don enterprise architecture . in addition , we reported that don had not effectively performed key measurement , reporting , budgeting , and oversight activities and had not adequately conducted requirements management and testing activities . we concluded that , without this information , don could not determine whether ntcss , as defined , and as being developed , is the right solution to meet its strategic business and technological needs . accordingly , we recommended that the department develop the analytical basis to determine if continued investment in the ntcss represents prudent use of limited resources and to strengthen management of the program , conditional upon a decision to proceed with further investment in the program . the department largely agreed with these recommendations . in addition , we reported that the army had not defined and developed its transportation coordinators' automated information for movements system ii ( tc - aims ii ) — a joint services system with the goal of helping to manage the movement of forces and equipment within the united states and abroad — in the context of a dod enterprise architecture . we also reported that the army had not economically justified the program on the basis of reliable estimates of life cycle costs and benefits and had not effectively implemented risk management . as a result , we concluded that the army did not know if its investment in tc - aims ii , as planned , is warranted or represents a prudent use of limited dod resources . accordingly , we recommended that dod , among other things , develop the analytical basis needed to determine if continued investment in tc - aims ii , as planned , represents prudent use of limited defense resources . in response , the department largely agreed with our recommendations and has since reduced the program's scope by canceling planned investments . dod it - related acquisition policies and guidance , along with other relevant guidance , provide an acquisition management control framework within which to manage business system programs like gcss - mc . effective implementation of this framework can minimize program risks and better ensure that system investments are defined in a way to optimally support mission operations and performance , as well as deliver promised system capabilities and benefits on time and within budget . thus far , gcss - mc has not been managed in accordance with key aspects of this framework , which has already contributed to more than 3 years in program schedule delays and about $193 million in cost increases . these it acquisition management control weaknesses include compliance with dod's federated bea not being sufficiently expected costs not being reliably estimated ; earned value management not being adequately implemented ; system requirements not always being effectively managed , although this has recently improved ; key program risks not being effectively managed ; and key system quality measures not being used .