formaldehyde . epa began an iris assessment of formaldehyde in 1997 because the existing assessment was determined to be outdated . new research to close data gaps . gaps ? ye , there is interest in conducting research to close data gaps . is the chemical mission critical ? white boxes with heavy lines indicate steps where potentially affected federal agencies already had an opportunity for input . no , it is not mission critical . critical ? this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . ye , it is mission critical . gaps ? ye , there is interest in conducting research to close data gaps . is the chemical mission critical ? darker shaded boxes are additional steps under epa's changes to its assessment process and indicate where epa has provided additional opportunity for input from potentially affected federal agencies for mission - critical chemicals . lighter shaded boxes with dotted lines indicate steps where epa has provided additional opportunity for input from potentially affected federal agencies for all chemicals . white boxes with heavy lines indicate steps where potentially affected federal agencies already had an opportunity for input . darker shaded boxes are additional steps , under epa's planned changes , to its assessment process and indicate steps where epa has provided additional opportunity for input from potentially affected federal agencies for mission - critical chemicals . no , it is not mission critical . lighter shaded boxes with dotted lines indicate steps where epa has provided additional opportunity for input from potentially affected federal agencies for all chemicals . formaldehyde is a colorless , flammable , strong - smelling gas used to manufacture building materials , such as pressed wood products , and used in many household products , including paper , pharmaceuticals , and leather goods . while epa currently classifies formaldehyde as a probable human carcinogen , the international agency for research on cancer ( iarc ) , part of the world health organization , classifies formaldehyde as a known human carcinogen . since 1986 , studies of industrial of workers have suggested that formaldehyde exposure is associated with nasopharyngeal cancer , and possibly with leukemia . for example , in 2003 and 2004 , the national cancer institute ( nci ) and the national institute of occupational safety and health ( niosh ) released epidemiological studies following up on earlier studies tracking about 26,000 and 11,000 industrial workers , respectively , exposed to formaldehyde ; the updates showed exposure to formaldehyde might also cause leukemia in humans , in addition to the cancer types previously identified . according to nci officials , the key findings in their follow - up study were an increase in leukemia deaths and , more significantly , an exposure / response relationship between formaldehyde and leukemia — as exposure increased , the incidence of leukemia also rose .