civilian retirees . the authorizing statutes for both the civil service retirement system and the federal employee's retirement system in effect at the time of our audit specified that retirement benefits may be offset only to the extent expressly authorized by federal statutes . ttra , section 2 , provided authority to offset salaries of “employees” of agencies but does not provide such authority for civilian employee retiree annuitants . once an individual is accepted for offset , the related debt is established in the appropriate pay system and dfas can deduct up to 15 percent of disposable pay . disposable pay is defined in gsa's federal travel regulation as an employee's compensation remaining after the deduction from an employee's earnings of any amounts required by law to be withheld ( eg , tax withholdings and garnishments ) . the amounts collected are paid to the bank on a monthly basis for military personnel and retirees and biweekly for civilian personnel . it takes approximately 2 months from the time an offset is initiated to the first bank payment . according to dfas , from october 2001 through july 2002 , bank of america referred 53,462 dod - wide cases with debt of $77.5 million to dod for offset . dod accepted and started offset for 74 percent of the cases and 69 percent of the debt amounts referred . the number and debt amount of air force - specific cases forwarded by bank of america were not available . from november 2001 through july 2002 , dfas collected $2.7 million from active and retired air force military personnel through the offset program . during the same period , dod collected $1.6 million from all dod civilian employees . however , dfas was unable to provide this amount by military service . we found that air force management encouraged a culture that emphasized the importance of integrity and ethical values and was involved in monitoring travel card delinquencies . according to travel card program officials and documentation we obtained , air force officials , from the vice chief of staff to wing commanders , have strongly emphasized for the past 2 to 3 years that the travel card program is a “commander's program” and commanders are responsible for managing their delinquency rates . they explained that officials throughout the air force chain of command have monitored travel card delinquency rates and discussed the topic at their respective staff meetings . documentation we obtained confirmed the use of detailed statistical reports to monitor installation - level delinquencies . commanding officers are holding unit commanders with excessive delinquency rates accountable to make improvements to reduce delinquencies . travel card delinquency statistics are discussed at command staff meetings , and unit commanders are held accountable for reducing their delinquencies . the importance of the tone at the top cannot be overstated . other factors contributing to the reduction in air force delinquency rates include the following . air force emphasis on financial management training . each air force installation has a financial services office with a trained financial management staff that oversee the travel card program .