mr . chairmen , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittees may have . for future information regarding this testimony , i can be contacted at ( 202 ) 512-7215 . key contributors to this testimony were brett fallavollita and linda siegel . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . dol generally agreed with both recommendations . the term “contingent work” can be defined in many ways to refer to a variety of nonstandard work arrangements . broadly defined , “contingent work” refers to work arrangements that are not long - term , year - round , full - time employment with a single employer . for example , an employer may hire workers when there is an immediate and limited demand for their services , without any offer of permanent or even long - term employment . independent contractors , temporary workers , and part - time workers are examples of contingent workers . specifically , independent contractors can be seen as individuals who obtain customers on their own to provide a product or service ( and who may have other employees working for them ) , such as maids , realtors , child care providers , and management consultants . research has shown that employers use contingent work arrangements for a variety of reasons . namely , employers are not obligated to make certain financial expenditures for independent contractors that they make for employees , such as paying certain taxes ( social security , medicare , and unemployment taxes ) , providing workers' compensation insurance , paying minimum wage and overtime wages , or including independent contractors in employee benefit plans . contingent workers who are employees are generally protected under key laws designed to protect workers , but certain categories of contingent workers — such as independent contractors — may be excluded from coverage under these laws . while most of the key worker protection laws do not distinguish between types of employees ( i.e. , contingent and standard full - time employees ) , some laws contain requirements that exclude certain categories of contingent workers or contain certain time - in - service requirements that make it difficult for them to be covered . in addition , because these laws are based on the traditional employer - employee relationship , they generally cover only workers who are employees ; independent contractors , therefore , are not covered .