geographic scope: national . pathogen: clostridium botulinum . ( see app . i for more information on state reporting requirements for a number of foodborne pathogens. ) although states can forward data to cdc about diseases that are not reportable , overall data about such diseases are often incomplete because of deficiencies in reporting by physicians and labs . to improve local and state health officials' ability to respond to a broad range of public health issues relating to infectious diseases , which include foodborne outbreaks , cdc provides funding to state and local health departments through its emerging infections programs and its epidemiology and laboratory capacity program . such increases may indicate an outbreak . cdc selected salmonella and shigella because there are many different serotypes of these organisms , and tracking and comparing the frequency of each serotype was a task well suited for computer analysis . in addition , baseline data for these two pathogens were already available through the national salmonella surveillance system and the national shigella surveillance system , described below and in appendix iii . beginning in 2002 , cdc plans to expand the system to include e. coli o157:h7 . twenty - five of the states that we surveyed told us that in their state , at least once in the last 3 years the surveillance outbreak detection algorithm had identified a cluster of cases in their state that turned out to be a previously unknown outbreak . in addition to these 4 systems , cdc also has the following 16 systems that either collect information about a number of diseases , only some of which are foodborne , or focus solely on one disease: the botulism surveillance system is a national system designed to collect information about all types of botulism , including foodborne . because every case of foodborne botulism is considered a public health emergency , cdc maintains intensive surveillance for botulism in the united states . the calicinet is a network of public health laboratories that perform genetic “fingerprinting” for foodborne viruses , allowing rapid identification and comparison of strains . cdc comments are presented in appendix iv . to describe cdc's foodborne disease surveillance systems , we obtained information from cdc on the systems used most often in conducting foodborne disease surveillance activities . the creutzfeldt - jakob disease surveillance program monitors the occurrence of this disease through periodic review of national cause - of - death data . surveillance for this disease was enhanced in 1996 to monitor for the possible occurrence of new variant creutzfeldt - jakob disease after this new form of the disease was reported to have possibly resulted from consumption of cattle products contaminated with bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( also known as “mad cow” disease ) . the epidemic information exchange ( epi - x ) is a secure web - based communications network that allows local , state , and federal public health officials to share and discuss outbreak data on a real - time basis . this system can immediately notify health officials of urgent public health events so that they can take appropriate actions .