federal evaluations . evaluations of federal demonstrations led by cms have also been limited due to data challenges and a lack of transparent reporting . for example , delays obtaining data directly from states , among other things , led cms to considerably reduce the scope of a large , multi - state evaluation , which was initiated in 2014 to examine the impact of state demonstrations in four policy areas deemed to be federal priorities . in our january 2018 report , we found that although cms had made progress in obtaining needed data , cms had no policy for making the results public . by not making these results public in a timely manner , we concluded that cms was missing an opportunity to inform important federal and state policy discussions . in light of our concerns about state - led and federal demonstration evaluations , in january 2018 , we recommended that cms ( 1 ) establish written procedures for requiring final evaluation reports at the end of each demonstration cycle , ( 2 ) issue criteria for when it will allow limited evaluations of demonstrations , and ( 3 ) establish a policy for publicly releasing findings from federal evaluations of demonstrations . hhs concurred with these recommendations . across our body of work , we have made 83 recommendations to cms and hhs and suggested 4 matters for congressional consideration to address a variety of concerns about the medicaid program . the agencies generally agreed with our recommendations and have implemented 25 of these recommendations to date , and cms still needs to take fundamental actions in three areas — having more timely , complete , and reliable data ; conducting fraud risk assessments ; and strengthening federal - state collaboration — to strengthen medicaid oversight and better manage program risks . an overarching challenge for cms oversight of the medicaid program is the lack of accurate , complete , and timely data . our work has demonstrated how insufficient data have affected cms's ability to ensure proper payments , assess beneficiaries' access to services , and oversee states' financing strategies . as part of its efforts to address longstanding data concerns , cms has taken some steps toward developing a reliable national repository for medicaid data , most notably the transformed medicaid statistical information system ( t - msis ) . through t - msis , cms will collect detailed information on medicaid beneficiaries — such as their citizenship , immigration , and disability status — as well as any expanded diagnosis and procedure codes associated with their treatments . states are to report data more frequently — and in a timelier manner — than they have previously , and t - msis includes approximately 2,800 automated quality checks . the t - msis initiative has the potential to improve cms's ability to identify improper payments , help ensure beneficiaries' access to services , and improve program transparency , among other benefits . as we reported in december 2017 , implementing the t - msis initiative has been — and will continue to be — a multi - year effort . cms has worked closely with states and has reached a point where nearly all states are reporting t - msis data .