iv ) . she noted that she also agrees that critical market organizations can take steps to improve their existing pandemic plans . accordingly , the chairman indicated that sec will issue letters to these organizations recommending that they further document their staff cross - training arrangements and their plans to maintain operations if internet congestion impairs their ability to rely on telework for support functions . further , sec staff will review compliance with this recommendation in future examinations of these organizations . the chairman also noted that sec is prepared to assist other agencies to help address the problem of potential internet congestion . in a written response to a draft of this report , the director of dhs's departmental gao / oig liaison office concurs in part with our recommendations that dhs should , among other things , develop a strategy outlining actions that could be taken to address potential internet congestion . the director's letter states that the agency agrees to take these steps to mitigate the impact of any pandemic - related congestion on the systems that the federal government uses to communicate critical national security / emergency preparedness ( ns / ep ) information , but that addressing internet congestion for other communications , as a general matter , does not fall within dhs's responsibilities , and that dhs does not have the responsibility for developing an internet congestion strategy separate and apart from assuring ns / ep communications . while we agree that dhs should ensure that ns / ep communications are maintained , dhs has been broadly tasked with leading efforts to prevent disruptions to the nation's overall telecommunications infrastructure and is the agency best positioned to do so . as discussed in this report , federal policies and plans assign dhs lead responsibility for facilitating a public / private response to and recovery from major internet disruptions . dhs was designated under hspd - 7 as the lead agency for coordinating the protection of the communications sector — a role it plays for several of the other sectors that have been identified as the nation's critical infrastructures and key resources . as lead agency for this sector , dhs is to conduct vulnerability assessments and encourage risk management strategies to protect and mitigate against attacks . hspd - 7 also notes that agencies are responsible for working with their sectors to reduce the consequences of catastrophic failures not cased by terrorism . similarly , the 2009 national infrastructure protection plan notes that risk in the 21st century results from a complex mix of man - made and naturally occurring threats and hazards , including terrorist attacks , accidents , natural disasters , and other emergencies . under this plan's risk analysis and management framework , sector - specific agencies are to combine consequence , vulnerability , and threat information to produce assessments of risks to a sector and enhance protection by setting goals and objectives , establishing priorities for mitigating risks , and implementing protective programs and resiliency strategies . based on the study that dhs itself led , congestion resulting from a pandemic appears to be one of the threats for which dhs is tasked with ensuring an adequate governmental response .