jcaho did not adopt all of these recommendations . it disagreed with the first recommendation . its response indicated that its requirement to use qualified personnel to complete the self - assessment , while more general , was sufficient . it further indicated that policies were in place for cms's second and fifth recommendations . cms later agreed that jcaho's policies do satisfactorily address the fifth recommendation . jcaho planned to examine ways to adopt cms's third and fourth recommendations . cms however , had no authority to compel jcaho to comply with the remaining recommendations . according to cms , it continues to discuss implementation of its recommendations with jcaho . jcaho stated that while its initial response to cms's recommendations in 2003 reflected then current jcaho policies , subsequent policy evolutions are addressing cms's recommendations . specifically , jcaho is working with the american society of hospital engineers to develop a process for review by experts of hospital self - assessments on life safety code issues prior to jcaho's conducting on - site accreditation surveys and to identify those hospitals for which engineering expertise should be added to on - site surveys . cms states that the goal of its validation program is to provide reasonable assurance to congress that the jcaho accreditation process ensures hospital compliance with medicare cops . however , the measure cms uses to evaluate the performance of jcaho's hospital accreditation program provides limited information and could mask problems with an accreditation program's performance in detecting serious deficiencies , and it is based on a target sample size of 1 percent of jcaho - accredited hospitals . there are currently 23 medicare cops . ( see app . ii for a description of the 23 medicare cops. ) since then , cms has revised several of the cops , including those concerning the life safety code ; quality assessment and performance improvement ; organ , tissue , and eye donations ; and nurse anesthetist supervision . health care accreditation programs other than jcaho's hospital accreditation program may generally adopt their own requirements if cms determines that an accreditation program's requirements are at least equivalent to medicare cops . if cms also determines , among other things , that the accreditation program's survey process is likely to identify any serious deficiencies in cops , it must generally grant “deeming authority” to the accreditation program and treat entities accredited by these organizations as meeting medicare cops . cms has the authority to review these programs , and it can impose a probationary period while monitoring performance and remove deeming authority if warranted . most hospitals demonstrate compliance with standards equivalent to medicare cops through accreditation by jcaho . in 2002 , jcaho accredited 4,211 , or 82 percent , of medicare - participating hospitals . hospitals accredited by jcaho received payments for medicare - covered inpatient services of approximately $98 billion , or 90 percent , of the $109 billion that was spent on hospital care in 2002 . jcaho , as part of its accreditation - related activities , also develops survey procedures , trains its surveyors , and formulates performance measures . jcaho is governed by a 29-member board of commissioners and has a staff of over 1,000 .