federal government contribution . the following formula is used to determine the federal government's contribution amount: the federal government contribution represents the portion of nc not covered by participants' contributions . lump sum payout . aggregate funding method . this method , as used by the judicial survivors' annuities system ( jsas ) plan , defines the normal cost as the level percentage of future salaries that will be sufficient , along with investment earnings and the plan's assets , to pay the plan's benefits for current participants and beneficiaries . the formula is as follows: the present value of future normal costs ( pvfnc ) equals the present value of future benefits less net asset value . pvfnc is the amount that remains to be financed by judges and the federal government . the normal cost ( nc ) percentage equals pvfnc divided by present value of future salaries . under jsas , a lump sum payout may occur upon the dissolution of marriage either through divorce or death of spouse . payroll contributions cease , but previous contributions remain in jsas . also , if there is no eligible surviving spouse or child upon the death of a participating judge , the lump sum payout to the judge's designated beneficiaries is computed as follows: lump sum payout equals total amount paid into the plan by the judge plus 3 percent annual interest accrued less 2.2 percent of salaries for each participating year ( forfeited amount ) . in effect , the interest plus any amount contributed in excess of 2.2 percent of judges' salaries will be refunded . we are sending copies of this report to the director of aousc . copies of this report will be made available to others upon request . this report is also available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact steven j. sebastian at ( 202 ) 512-3406 or sebastians@gao.gov if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report were hodge herry , assistant director ; joseph applebaum ; jacquelyn hamilton ; amy bowser ; and kwabena ansong . the administrative office of the united states courts ( aousc ) administers three retirement plans for judges in the federal judiciary . the judicial retirement system automatically covers united states supreme court justices , federal circuit and district court judges , and territorial district court judges and is available , at their option , to the administrative assistant to the chief justice , the director of aousc , and the director of the federal judicial center . the judicial officers' retirement fund is available to bankruptcy and full - time magistrate judges . the united states court of federal claims judges' retirement system is available to the united states court of federal claims judges . this is our fourth report since the passage of the 1992 act . most federal civilian employees are covered by the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) or the federal employees' retirement system . both of these retirement plans include survivor benefit provisions .