contract out the work . if employers cannot fill vacancies for employees in certain occupations , they may contract out those tasks to another company . turn down work . if an employer has exhausted other means to mitigate its hiring challenges and vacancies persist , it may choose to turn down work or curtail services . airlines and pilot schools have used a number of these strategies to attract more potential individuals to a career as an airline pilot . economic literature suggests that increased recruiting is a logical first step to fill vacancies because it requires relatively fewer resources to implement than other potential options for attracting more interest in an occupation experiencing a shortage . most of the airlines with whom we spoke reported that they have continued involvement with various recruiting activities , such as attending career events , including job fairs , and a couple of airlines reported that they had increased such activity to recruit more potential pilots . for example , representatives of one regional airline told us that after not hiring for several years and furloughing pilots , they have increased their recruiting efforts at some college aviation schools as well as part 135 air service providers as part of their plan to begin hiring again . in addition , representatives from another airline said that they have almost doubled the size of their recruiting department to facilitate attendance at events and started to advertise new job openings — something they have not previously done . some collegiate pilot schools have also expanded recruiting efforts to the next generation of potential future pilots . officials at some of the collegiate pilot schools we met with had developed outreach programs focused on local elementary and high school students to build interest in aviation , which economic literature suggests could limit any future labor for example , embry - riddle aeronautical university works shortages.with seven high schools that provide stem - related courses ( science , technology , engineering , and math ) intended to immerse and prepare high school students in these academic areas for college as well as jobs in the aviation industry . in another example , the metropolitan state university of denver , which has a commercial pilot program , coordinates with other groups in colorado to stimulate interest in careers in stem fields from the preschool level through the graduate school level . airlines were also looking for ways to help new pilots to gain additional flight time and training to eventually qualify for an r - atp or atp certificate , and some regional and mainline airlines had begun to restructure “bridge agreements” with collegiate and vocational pilot schools . prior to the new pilot qualification rule , regional airlines would develop these arrangements with aviation schools as a way to directly recruit pilot graduates with a commercial pilot certificate and instrument rating as first officers , in which the airlines would typically lower their minimum hiring standards related to flight time and experience for desired pilots from these schools . some regional and mainline airlines indicated that they had implemented such partnerships with pilot schools to promote greater interest in the field and provide a pathway from pilot school to employment as an airline pilot .