improving management information . epa has a number of ongoing activities to improve the agency's enforcement data , but the data problems are long - standing and complex . it will likely require a number of years and a steady top - level commitment of staff and financial resources to substantially improve the data so that they can be effectively used to target enforcement actions in a consistent and equitable manner . enhancing workforce planning and allocation . for the past several years , epa has taken measures to improve its ability to match its staff and technical capabilities with the needs of individual regions and states . for example , epa developed a human capital strategy and performed a study of its workforce competencies . nonetheless , the agency still needs to determine how to deploy its employees among its strategic goals and geographic locations so that it can most effectively use its resources , including its compliance and enforcement resources . epa's enforcement program depends heavily upon inspections by regional or state enforcement staff as the primary means of detecting violations and evaluating overall facility compliance . for example , as figure 1 indicates , the number of inspections conducted under the clean air act in fiscal year 2000 compared with the number of facilities in each region subject to epa's inspection under the act varied from a high of 80 percent in region 3 to a low of 27 percent in regions 1 and 2 . while the variations in enforcement raise questions about the need for greater consistency , it is also important to get behind the data to understand the cause of the variations and the extent to which they reflect a problem . for example , epa attributed the low number of inspections by its region 5 , in chicago , to the regional office's decision at the time to focus limited resources on performing detailed and resource - intensive investigations of the region's numerous electric power plants , rather than conducting a greater number of less intensive inspections . we agree that regional data can be easily misinterpreted without the contextual information needed to clarify whether variation in a given instance is inappropriate or whether it reflects the appropriate exercise of flexibility by regions and states to tailor their priorities to their individual needs and circumstances . in this regard , we recommended that it would be appropriate for epa to ( 1 ) clarify which aspects of the enforcement program it expects to see implemented consistently from region to region and which aspects may appropriately be subject to greater variation and ( 2 ) supplement region - by - region data with contextual information that helps to explain why variations occur and thereby clarify the extent to which variations are problematic . our findings were also consistent with the findings of epa's inspector general and oeca that regions vary in the way they oversee state - delegated programs .