it has been in development for a number of years . between 1998 and 2001 , three industry teams competed to identify and provide the assets needed to transform the coast guard . in 2001 , we described the deepwater project as “risky” due to the unique , untried acquisition strategy for a project of this magnitude within the coast guard . rather than using the traditional approach of replacing classes of ships or aircraft through a series of individual acquisitions , the coast guard chose to use a system - of - systems acquisition strategy that would replace its deteriorating assets with a single , integrated package of aircraft , vessels , and unmanned aerial vehicles , to be linked through systems that provide c4isr , and supporting logistics . in june 2002 , the coast guard awarded the deepwater contract to integrated coast guard systems ( icgs ) . icgs — a business entity jointly owned by northrop grumman and lockheed martin — is a system integrator , responsible for designing , constructing , deploying , supporting , and integrating the deepwater assets to meet coast guard requirements . the management approach of using a system integrator has been used on other government programs that require system - of - systems integration , such as the army's future combat system , a networked family of weapons and other systems . this type of business arrangement gives the contractor extensive involvement in requirements development , design , and source selection of major system and subsystem subcontractors . government agencies have turned to the system integrator approach when they believe they do not have the in - house capability to design , develop , and manage complex acquisitions . giving contractors more control and influence over the government's acquisitions in a system integrator role creates a potential risk that program decisions and products could be influenced by the financial interest of the contractor ( who is accountable to its shareholders ) , which may not match the primary interest of the government - - maximizing its return on taxpayer dollars . the system integrator arrangement creates an inherent risk , as the contractor is given more discretion to make certain program decisions . along with this greater discretion comes the need for more government oversight and an even greater need to develop well - defined outcomes at the outset . the proper role of contractors in providing services to the government is currently the topic of some debate . i believe there is a need to focus greater attention on what type of functions and activities should be contracted out and which ones should not . there is also a need to review and reconsider the current independence and conflict of interest rules relating to contractors . finally , there is a need to identify the factors that prompt the government to use contractors in circumstances where the proper choice might be the use of civil servants or military personnel . possible factors could include inadequate force structure , outdated or inadequate hiring policies , classification and compensation approaches , and inadequate numbers of full - time equivalent slots . the deepwater program has also been designated as a performance - based acquisition .