these comments are reprinted in appendix ii . bbg also provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 15 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the broadcasting board of governors ; the executive director , broadcasting board of governors ; the director , office of cuba broadcasting ; the secretary of state ; and the director , office of management and budget . this report will also be made available to others on request . this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report or need additional information , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or huttonj@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix iii . our objectives were to evaluate the processes used ( 1 ) by the international broadcasting bureau ( ibb ) to award the radio mambi and tv azteca contracts , and ( 2 ) by the office of cuba broadcasting ( ocb ) to award its talent services contracts . for the purposes of this review , talent services contracts refer to those contracts awarded by ocb for writers , performers , program hosts , reporters , and technical support required to produce and broadcast radio and tv news and entertainment programming . to determine the laws and regulations governing the award of these contracts , we reviewed the competition in contracting act , the federal acquisition regulation , the broadcasting board of governors' ( bbg ) acquisition regulations , and ibb's contracting for talent and other professional services handbook . collectively , these provide guidance applicable to ibb and ocb on soliciting , evaluating , and awarding contracts above and below the simplified acquisition threshold of $100,000 . we also reviewed the smith - mundt act , as amended , as well as the radio broadcasting to cuba act and the television broadcasting to cuba act to determine the authority by which ocb may broadcast radio and television programming to cuba . we did not specifically assess whether the award and the terms and conditions of the broadcasting contracts were in compliance with these acts . to evaluate the processes used by ibb to award the radio mambi and tv azteca contracts , we reviewed the contract files to determine the information and assumptions supporting ibb's decisions leading to the award of the two contracts in december 2006 . as both contracts were awarded using other than full and open competition , we reviewed ibb's justification and approval documents and other unclassified documentation supporting the solicitation process and award decision , including the july 2006 report of the commission for assistance to a free cuba .