dod concurred with our recommendation . additionally , congress , in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2004 , required the secretary of defense to develop a strategy for dod to ( 1 ) promote the development of space personnel career fields within each of the military departments and ( 2 ) ensure that the space personnel career fields developed by the military departments are integrated with each other to the maximum extent practicable . the act also required the secretary of defense to provide a comprehensive assessment of the adequacy of the actions of the secretary of the air force to establish a space career field for air force officers . dod provided the strategy and assessment to congress in february 2004 . the strategy set out goals , objectives , and approaches to develop and integrate dod's space cadre . the assessment listed actions the air force had taken and plans to take to improve management of its space cadre and training for its space personnel . the act also required us to review dod's space human capital strategy and the status of efforts by the military departments to develop their space personnel career fields . the act required us to assess ( 1 ) dod's strategy and the efforts of the military departments for developing the personnel required and ( 2 ) the effectiveness of dod's strategy and the efforts by the military departments in developing the personnel required and the progress made in integrating the space career fields of the military departments . in addition to the individual named above , alan m. byroade , john e. clary , raymond j. decker , linda s. keefer , renee s. mcelveen , and kimberly c. seay also made key contributions to this report . the government accountability office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . this report responds to the first of these two requirements . as agreed with your committees , our objectives for this report were to ( 1 ) determine whether dod's space human capital strategy and management approach to implementing the strategy promote the development and integration of the military services' space cadres and ( 2 ) assess the extent of each of the military services' initiatives to develop and manage their space cadres . to determine if dod's strategy and approach to implementing it promote the development and integration of the military services' space cadres , we reviewed and analyzed the strategy , compared the strategy to the elements of a results - oriented management framework , and conducted discussions with dod and military service officials . to assess the extent to which the military services have taken initiatives to develop their space cadres , we reviewed and analyzed the initiatives of the services . we conducted our review from october 2003 through june 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . ( see appendix i for more detailed information on our scope and methodology. ) table 2 shows the strategy's objectives .