prescription services . veterans can fill prescriptions for medications at a vha pharmacy or through the mail . veterans whose prescriptions require a copayment are charged either $8 ( for veterans in priority groups 2 through 6 ) or $9 ( for priority groups 7 and 8 ) for supplies of 30 days or less . if authorized , prescriptions may be filled for up to a 90-day period at a time with a corresponding copayment charge based on a longer number of days . priority group 1 veterans do not pay any prescription copayment charges . veterans in priority groups 2 through 6 are subject to applicable copayment charges but have an annual cap that limits their total prescription copayment charges to $960 per year . priority group 7 and 8 veterans are generally subject to applicable prescription copayments but do not have an annual cap . inpatient services . inpatient stay copayment charges are $1,100 for up to the first 90 days of care during a 365-day period and $550 for each additional 90 days . in addition to the inpatient stay copayment charges , patients are also subject to inpatient per diem charges of $10 per day . as with other medical services , no inpatient copayment or per diem will be charged if the stay is related to the veteran's service - connected conditions or special treatment authority .  revenue reviews . staff from va's management quality assurance service's ( mqas ) health care financial assurance division may evaluate specific veteran copayment bills on a limited , ad hoc basis as part of the recurring reviews of va revenue activities at selected individual medical centers . during these reviews , mqas officials said they devote most of their resources to evaluating third - party insurance collections , as they make up the majority of the medical care collections fund ( mccf ) . these revenue reviews are focused on third - party insurance recoveries and in only some instances may involve reviewing the accuracy of individual veteran copayment charges .  local compliance programs . individual medical centers and consolidated patient account centers ( cpac ) have decentralized compliance programs that include varied processes and procedures related to reviewing some individual copayment charges . vha's databases do not separately identify or track unbilled services , so this set of databases contained both billed and unbilled fiscal year 2010 medical services . the population of medical services consisted of five broad types: ( 1 ) prescription , ( 2 ) outpatient , ( 3 ) inpatient , ( 4 ) extended care , and ( 5 ) fee basis ( see table 7 ) . because the vha - provided population of all medical services from which we selected our sample included services that resulted in copayment charges , we initially selected a larger probability sample of 150 medical services . after checking billing records , we excluded any sampled medical services that resulted in a copayment charge . from the remaining medical services , we selected the first 100 as our probability sample of unbilled medical services .