new jersey . medicaid officials said that it can be difficult to track blood lead screenings that are performed using funding from sources other than medicaid ; for example , those performed by the state health department . officials said that they have been building a lead registry to capture data on lead screenings performed , regardless of how they are funded . new jersey medicaid officials said they collect data every 6 months on screenings not paid for by medicaid and enter the data into the state's blood lead registry . cms has stated that screenings are important for identifying beneficiaries with elevated blood lead levels at as young an age as possible , because lead exposure can harmfully affect nearly every system of the body and cause developmental delays . according to a presidential task force on environmental health and safety risks to children , co - chaired by hhs , early identification of developmental delays allows providers and communities to intervene earlier to improve health outcomes . the presidential task force issued goals in december 2018 to reduce lead exposure and associated harms , including a goal to identify lead - exposed individuals and improve their health outcomes . without complete information about blood lead screenings , cms cannot identify the number of beneficiaries who have not received blood lead screenings . as a result , the agency may be unaware of beneficiaries with unidentified lead exposures . cms issued guidance in 2016 to states on improving blood lead screening reporting , including correcting reporting errors and partnering with providers to ensure beneficiaries receive blood lead screenings . ( see sidebar for examples of efforts states have taken to improve available data about blood lead screenings. ) however , as of february 2019 , the screening data remained incomplete , according to agency officials . cms officials also told us they are currently in discussions with the centers for disease control and prevention about how to capture more complete information about medicaid beneficiaries who are receiving blood lead screenings through programs funded by that agency . however , as of february 2019 , cms officials had not identified specific actions to gather this data . the lack of data is inconsistent with federal internal control standards , which specify that management should obtain relevant data from reliable sources based on identified information requirements , and use such data for effective monitoring . according to cms , the results of recent pilot studies indicate that t - msis data can be used to replicate some information on the cms - 416 and child core set . cms officials said that the results also suggest that cms may eventually be able to use t - msis data to produce the cms - 416 and child core set data , thus eliminating the need for states to report this information themselves separately . as previously noted , cms intends for t - msis to both reduce the number of reports cms requires states to submit and to provide more information to improve medicaid oversight . cms officials said that they were encouraged that the pilot studies to replicate portions of the cms - 416 and child core set generally yielded positive results .