as of january 2016 , dhs has not reported overstay estimates . the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 , directed dhs to provide to congress within 30 days of enactment a report on nonimmigrant overstay data by country , and a comprehensive plan for implementation of the biometric entry and exit data system , both of which are required by law . in addition , the act withheld $13 million from the office of the secretary and executive management until dhs provides the overstay report and comprehensive plan . our july 2013 report found that , although dhs had taken action to strengthen its overstay data , dhs had not yet validated or tested the reliability of those actions and challenges to reporting reliable overstay data remained . cbp plans to conduct this test for approximately 1 year . finalizing the evaluation framework consistent with our recommendation would help guide dhs's efforts to assess the benefits and costs of various air exit options . as we have previously reported , challenges in developing and implementing a biometric exit system , as well as weaknesses in departure data , have affected the reliability of dhs's data on overstays . specifically , in april 2011 , we found that dhs's efforts to identify and report on overstays were hindered by unreliable data , and we identified various challenges to dhs's efforts to identify potential overstays , including the incomplete collection of departure data from nonimmigrants at ports of entry , particularly land ports of entry , and the lack of mechanisms for assessing the quality of leads sent to ice field offices for investigation . because of concerns about the reliability of the department's overstay data , neither dhs nor its predecessor has regularly reported annual overstay rates to congress since 1994 . according to statute , dhs is to implement a program to collect data , for each fiscal year , regarding the total number of nonimmigrant foreign nationals who overstayed their authorized periods of admission in the united states ; and submit an annual report to congress providing numerical estimates of the number of aliens from each country in each nonimmigrant classification who overstayed an authorized period of admission that expired during the fiscal year prior to the year for which the report is made . in april 2011 , we reported that dhs officials stated that the department had not reported overstay estimates because it had not had sufficient confidence in the quality of its overstay data . dhs officials stated at the time that , as a result , the department could not reliably report overstay estimates in accordance with the statute . in february 2013 , the secretary of homeland security testified that dhs planned to report overstay estimates by december 2013 . we reported in july 2013 that , according to dhs office of policy officials , the department was better positioned than in the past to describe the limitations in the overstay data .