the agency did not concur with our recommendation . however , without comprehensive security control assessments for these systems , opm is at increased risk that it may not detect vulnerabilities in the systems . therefore , we believe the recommendation is warranted . a remedial action plan is a key component of an agency's information security program , as described in fisma . such a plan assists agencies in identifying , assessing , prioritizing , and monitoring progress in correcting security weaknesses that are found in an information system . nist recommends that agencies develop a poa&m for an information system to document the agency's planned remedial actions to correct identified weaknesses . opm developed a poa&m for each of the three reviewed systems and recorded 63 of 64 security weaknesses identified in security assessments for those systems . tracking the weaknesses that arise from security assessments allows opm to keep track of the weaknesses as they are remediated or their risk is accepted . table 4 shows the number of security weaknesses per system reviewed . opm policy also requires management oversight and review of remediation plans . contractors are to provide evidence , which is to be reviewed and approved by multiple parties at opm before a poa&m is considered closed . however , because the assessments we selected were so recent , we were unable to evaluate whether this process had been effectively implemented . we focused on one or more actions described in the plans of action and milestones provided to us . we interviewed officials from opm's office of the chief information officer ( ocio ) and reviewed the agency's information security documentation , to include policies , plans , and procedures . we also performed limited testing of the agency's internal network and software tools to determine the extent to which us - cert's recommendations had been implemented . this testing included examining system and device configurations , firewall rules , system status reports , and account listings . we focused on those software tools that opm indicated it had deployed as actions taken to implement us - cert recommendations . if , after reviewing the plans provided by opm and performing our own testing , we could not account for a specific recommendation or disagreed with the implementation status , we followed up with the agency . for this objective , we evaluated the reliability of the data related to the number of workstations at opm , as well as the number of outstanding patches . we assessed the data reliability by various means , including reviewing related documents , conducting observations of systems generating data , interviewing knowledgeable agency officials , and reviewing internal controls such as agency policies and procedures . we concluded that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this reporting objective . as part of this objective , because the data breaches involved background investigation information , we also reviewed opm's plans to establish the new national background investigations bureau ( nbib ) , its plans to transfer the information systems supporting nbib to the department of defense ( dod ) , and dod's plans for the national background investigations system .