pub . 111-148 , §§ 1421 , 10105 , 124 stat . 119 at 237 , 906 ( codified at 26 u.s.c . ppaca mandated that gao review the affordability of health insurance coverage 5 years after enactment . specifically , in this report we examine 1. what is known about the effects of the aptc and the small employer tax credit on health insurance coverage ; and 2. the extent to which affordable health benefits plans are available and individuals are able to maintain minimum essential coverage . to examine what is known about the effects of the aptc and the small employer tax credit on health insurance coverage , we conducted a structured literature search to identify relevant studies . to conduct this review , we searched over 30 reference databases for studies published on these topics . two analysts independently reviewed each of the results for relevance . to supplement this search , we performed further internet searches and asked experts we interviewed to recommend literature . we interviewed experts from 11 research or industry organizations as well as officials from the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) center for consumer information and insurance oversight , assistant secretary of planning and evaluation , and the chief actuary ; and from the internal revenue service ( irs ) . we identified the experts through their published or other work , and we asked them about how the tax credits were likely to affect health insurance coverage . we also reviewed laws , regulations , and guidance related to ppaca's individual mandate , the aptc , the small employer tax credit , individual exchange regulation , and the esi affordability threshold . to further analyze the effects of the small employer tax credit on health insurance coverage , we incorporated summary data from our previous report on this topic and requested updated summary data from the irs on claims for tax years 2011 and 2012 , the most current years available at the time of our analysis . to assess the reliability of the data , we reviewed the data and supporting documentation for obvious errors , as well as irs's internal controls for producing the data . we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to examine the extent to which affordable health benefits plans are available and individuals are able to maintain minimum essential coverage , we reviewed studies resulting from our literature review , as well interviewed experts as described above . we asked experts about the types of individuals that may have more or less difficulty accessing affordable coverage and maintaining minimum essential coverage . in addition , we analyzed 2014 premium data — the most recent data available at the time of our analysis — from the federally facilitated exchanges and state - based exchanges to determine the percent of household income that households would have had to spend on premiums for the lowest - cost plans available . we obtained these premium data from the henry j. kaiser family foundation ( kff ) and from the state of new york . to assess these data for reliability , we interviewed key officials , checked the data for outliers and validated selected data .