education benefit . children and spouses of public safety officers who are killed or become totally disabled in the line of duty can receive grants that will cover the cost of tuition , fees , books , educational supplies , and living expenses associated with an undergraduate education at an accredited california postsecondary institution . onetime death benefit . available to volunteer firefighters , career firefighters , police officers , and sheriffs: $100,000 provided to beneficiaries by either the iowa state fire marshal's office ( for volunteer firefighters ) or the state pension programs . workers' compensation: death benefit . ( 3 ) to what extent does the psob program follow recognized government standards and guidelines for effective program management ? ( 2 ) what issues , if any , were raised by state and local agencies and advocacy organizations seeking benefits on the behalf of claimants ? to determine receipt of program benefits and length of the processing time , we drew a stratified random probability sample of 233 out of the 1,632 psob death , disability , and education claims that were opened during fiscal years 2006 to 2008 . our sample of cases is generally of a sufficient size to allow us to project our findings to the universe of death , disability , and education claims for this time period . all of our percentage estimates are within a margin of error of plus or minus 10 percentage points at the 95 percent confidence level for claims approval and denial outcomes , and 95 percent confidence intervals are reported for estimates of time , unless otherwise noted . to determine what aspects of the program raised issues among agencies that assist with benefit applications , we interviewed psob program officials and state and local officials that serve both larger urban and smaller , more rural communities in the following five states — california , iowa , louisiana , maryland , and new york . we selected these states based on a range in the number of public safety officer deaths in recent years , geographic location , and other characteristics . the officials we interviewed represented local police and firefighting departments ; employee advocacy groups , such as chapters of concerns of police survivors , inc. ( cops ) ; and the fraternal order of police ; state firefighters associations ; and unions . we also interviewed the national affiliates of these state and local organizations , including the national fallen firefighters foundation ( nfff ) and the international association of fire fighters ( iaff ) . finally , to evaluate the effectiveness of the psob program's management , we interviewed program officials and reviewed and analyzed available documents on performance monitoring , program outreach , assistance for those seeking benefits , and current and future plans for automating the claims process . we analyzed this information based on criteria set forth in gao's and the office of management and budget's ( omb ) guidelines for internal controls , strategic planning and reporting , and information system development and acquisition . we conducted this performance audit from september 2008 to october 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .