and gao's funding levels . the comptroller general provided an annual adjustment in 2006 and 2007 of 2.6 percent and 2.4 percent , respectively , to those who were performing at a satisfactory level and who were paid within applicable competitive compensation limits , except for wage - grade employees , and gao personnel appeals board employees . this provision amended 31 u.s.c . 732 ( c ) — which required employees' pay to be adjusted at the same time and to the same extent as the general schedule . under section 3 ( b ) the comptroller general's authority to establish the annual pay adjustment is also applicable to employees in the senior executive service ( ses ) and in senior level ( sl ) positions . under both sections 3 ( a ) and 3 ( b ) an employee must be performing at a satisfactory level in order to receive an annual pay adjustment in january 2006 , we issued regulations addressing the satisfactory performance requirement for gao's analysts and attorneys . in addition to the annual adjustment , gao employees were eligible for pbc based on their performance appraisal ratings . pbc was calculated using a budget factor of 2.15 percent for both 2006 and 2007 . under section 3 ( b ) , the comptroller general is required to consider the statutory criteria set out in section 3 ( a ) in determining an annual increase for members of the gao ses and sl employees . the comptroller general considered these criteria and determined that each member performing at a satisfactory level would receive in 2006 and 2007 a 1.9 percent and 1.7 percent increase , respectively — the same increase that was provided to the executive schedule for calendar years 2006 and 2007 , respectively . in 2007 , ses and sl members were also eligible for pbc using a budget factor of 2.25 percent . in 2008 , after the comptroller general made preliminary determinations regarding pay adjustments as had been done in 2006 and 2007 , gao management negotiated with representatives of the newly established gao employees association , international federation of professional and technical engineers ( ifpte ) local 1921 to reach final agreement regarding salary adjustments . in addition to the annual adjustment , gao employees were eligible for pbc based on their performance appraisal ratings . pay adjustments for gao staff included an annual adjustment of 3.5 percent as well as performance based compensation using a budget factor of 2.75 percent . in 2008 , for the first time , gao implemented a “floor guarantee.” the 2008 floor guarantee provided that if the total increase from the annual adjustment and pbc did not equal at least 4.49 percent of salary , the employee would receive an additional increase to base pay to equal this amount regardless of geographic location . pursuant to the regulation , gao analysts and attorneys had to be performing at “meets expectations” in all competencies to be considered satisfactory . in addition , most band iib and band iii analysts , had to have a performance appraisal that was in the top 50 percent or 80 percent , respectively , of their band and team . in subsequent years this added condition was not required .