detailed information on this effort is not currently available . marine corps and army officials have said they intend to cooperate on the recapitalization effort and are sharing information on their individual plans to help maximize value for the available funding . as the services proceed to implement their new jltv and hmmwv strategies , they have identified a point in fiscal year 2015 ( see fig . 2 ) where a decision will be made on whether to pursue jltv only or both programs . by then , the technology and cost risks of both efforts should be better understood . the army continues to struggle to define and implement a variety of modernization initiatives since the future combat system program was terminated in 2009 . the most recent example of this is the termination of the ground mobile radio , which will require the army to develop new plans for relaying information to the soldier . the pending reductions in the defense budgets are having a significant impact on army acquisition programs and the army is already reprioritizing its combat vehicle investments . as plans for gcv move forward , it will be important for dod , the army , and the congress to focus attention on what gcv will deliver and at what cost and how that compares to other needs within the combat vehicle portfolio . beyond combat vehicles , dod and the services will also be facing some tough decisions in the future on the tactical wheeled vehicle programs and the affordability of both the jltv and the hmwwv recapitalization effort . over the last few years , the army has been conducting capability portfolio reviews which have proven to be very helpful in identifying overlaps and setting priorities . the reviews were highlighted in the army acquisition review and have been important in getting the army to think more broadly and to look beyond the individual program . on both jltv and gcv , as the requirements have been examined more closely , the services are finding that they can make do with less in terms of capabilities than originally anticipated and projected unit costs have been reduced significantly . it is important that the army continue to use and improve on its capability portfolio review processes going forward and to consider a broad range of alternatives . chairman bartlett , ranking member reyes , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you may have at this time . for future questions about this statement , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or martinb@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . the production decision is scheduled for late fiscal year 2013 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .