we disagree with this interpretation . construction manager at risk is not covered by the far ; and , consequently , a deviation must be authorized and justified in the contract file . we also continue to believe that establishing a guaranteed maximum price ( gmp ) prior to proceeding with work limits the government's risk of cost overruns . during the audit , we spoke with an official in the gsa office of the chief architect who advises gsa staff on construction issues . the gsa official said that a gmp should be established in order to effectively use the construction manager at risk project delivery method and a deviation from the far is required . because the kennedy center stated in its comments that it consulted with gsa and was told that it did not need a deviation for the contract , we reconfirmed the situation with gsa and were advised again that a deviation is required because of the use of the gmp . we updated the report to indicate that the kennedy center and the smithsonian office of the inspector general finalized a memorandum of understanding , in july 2006 , that establishes audits of federal funds used for capital projects . in addition , we incorporated into the report , the kennedy center's rationale for selecting a nongovernmental organization to audit the federal funds used for operations and maintenance activities . the revised , peer - reviewed modeling study concludes that smoke exhaust and sprinkler protection are not needed on the millennium stages , provided that the conditions of the revised modeling study are met . once the two conditions of the revised modeling study have been met , the kennedy center will have fully implemented our recommendation to install smoke exhaust and sprinkler protection at the millennium stages . we disagree with the kennedy center's approach to this recommendation , which is to assemble all existing as - built drawings into a single set . the kennedy center can accomplish our recommendation in a cost - efficient way by integrating the as - built drawings from each successive capital project into a master plan for the center and by updating the drawings as additional changes to the center are made . this would ensure that the kennedy center is tracking future changes to the center and using the most up - to - date drawings of site conditions . our report notes that it is important for the kennedy center to start assembling and consistently updating a comprehensive set of as - built drawings of the entire center to prevent costly unexpected site conditions . we agree that the difference between a project's original budget and the final cost does not , by itself , necessarily indicate ineffective or inefficient management . however , we do believe that the kennedy center board of trustees and congress need information on project cost overruns in order to monitor and evaluate whether federally funded capital projects have been implemented effectively and efficiently . we believe our point is accurate and have further clarified the report to indicate that the cost of the family theater project was about $9.1 million , which includes cost growth , due to change orders , that was within the amount allocated for contingency .