exit strategies . based on state's assessment , we categorized five of the 11 peacekeeping operations as having met ( two ) or partially met ( three ) the principle of having an exit strategy in their mandates . for example , we categorized minusca as having partially met the principle because , according to state's assessment , the operation's mandate has an exit strategy that will take several years to achieve given the lack of host government capacity . host country consent . based on state's assessment , we categorized all 11 peacekeeping operations as having met ( four ) or partially met ( seven ) the principle of host country consent . for example , state officials assessed that the government of the central african republic cooperates fully with the un multidimensional integrated stabilization mission in the central african republic ( minusca ) . with respect to other peacekeeping operations , officials noted that a country's consent to host an operation differs from cooperation with all aspects of a peacekeeping operation . for example , state reported that while the government of the democratic republic of the congo has consented to the un organization stabilization mission in the democratic republic of the congo's ( monusco ) presence in the country , the government has , at times , been hostile toward and actively taken steps to undermine the mission . realistic and achievable mandates . based on state's assessment , we categorized seven of the 11 peacekeeping operations as having met ( two ) or partially met ( five ) the principle of having realistic and achievable mandates . for example , we categorized the african union - united nations hybrid operation in darfur ( unamid ) as having partially met this principle because state reports that it has been able to carry out many of its mandated tasks ; however , according to state's assessments , government obstructions , a slow peace process , and mission management inefficiencies prevent the full implementation of unamid's mandate . we categorized the remaining four peacekeeping operations as not meeting this principle . we categorized the remaining six peacekeeping operations as not meeting this principle . for example , based on state's assessment , we categorized the un mission in the republic of south sudan ( unmiss ) as not meeting this principle because the operation had not considered a near - term exit strategy because of ongoing conflict and the political stalemate in south sudan . in addition to the four principles in the table , the fifth principle for effective peacekeeping reads as the security council's willingness to change the mandate . in its memoranda , state assessed the fifth principle by examining whether the mandate was achieving its objective and , if not , should be adjusted . using this method , state assessments show that the security council should adjust the mandates of nine of the 11 peacekeeping operations . for example , state assessed that the unficyp ( cyprus ) mandate should be adapted to address the stalled political process .