resources . nmfs and most of the councils identified constrained resources as a challenge to expanding climate - related data collection and analysis efforts . for instance , according to nmfs officials at one fisheries science center , developing climate science for fisheries management requires extensive new modeling to assess and project current and future fishery conditions , including how fish stock abundance and distribution may change under changing physical and chemical ocean conditions . however , the officials said that staff capacity to conduct this work is limited because of existing modeling demands for stock assessments . similarly , officials from one council told us that additional staff and resources would be required to incorporate climate - related information into their work . nmfs has developed a strategy to help it and the councils incorporate climate information — such as information on changes in ocean temperatures and acidity levels and the risks to fish stocks associated with those changes — into the fisheries management process , but is in the early stages of implementing the strategy . through our analysis , we found that nmfs and the councils have generally not incorporated climate information into the fisheries management process to date because the information they have on the effects of climate change on most fish stocks has not been sufficient . however , recognizing the importance of further developing climate information and incorporating it into the fisheries management process , nmfs published its noaa fisheries climate science strategy in august 2015 . the strategy is intended to support efforts by the agency and its partners to increase the production , delivery , and use of climate information in managing fish and other living marine resources . atlantic cod . according to the nmfs climate vulnerability assessment , the abundance of atlantic cod is likely to be negatively affected by warming ocean temperatures in the northeast . specifically , the assessment indicated that warmer ocean temperatures may be linked with a lower number of juvenile cod that survive and grow to a size sufficient to enter the fishery each year . the assessment also found that continued ocean warming could produce less - favorable habitat conditions for cod in the southern end of its range . atlantic cod have experienced a decline in abundance in recent decades , and warming ocean temperatures may have contributed to this decline , according to nmfs and council officials in the greater atlantic region . the officials further indicated , however , that the extent to which changing temperatures played a role in the cod decline is unclear because it is difficult to isolate this factor from other contributing factors , such as overfishing . black sea bass black sea bass are usually black with a slightly paler belly and a dorsal fin that is marked with a series of white spots and bands . black sea bass commonly inhabit rock bottoms near pilings , wrecks , and jetties . along the east coast , black sea bass are divided into two fish stocks for management purposes .