gao - 12-256 . washington , d.c.: march 13 , 2012 . on behalf of individuals who may be deceased . under the standards for internal control in the federal government , agencies are to clearly document internal control in the form of management directives , administrative policies , or operating manuals , and the documentation should be readily available for examination.policyholders , rma may be unable to rely on results from data mining and therefore be less likely to detect fraudulent , wasteful , or abusive crop insurance claims . since our july 2007 report and the enactment of the 2008 farm bill , fsa has taken important steps to prevent improper payments to deceased individuals . we commend the agency for exceeding the 2008 farm bill's requirement that it match its payment records against ssa's death master file twice a year — the agency performs this match quarterly — and for reviewing all payments made to deceased individuals to determine whether they were proper or improper . in addition , fsa , nrcs , and rma began working together during our review to acquire ssa's complete death master file , an effort we also commend , and they have received approval from ssa for access . fsa's quarterly review process has largely enabled the agency to identify thousands of individuals who were paid after their dates of death . nevertheless , under current procedures , fsa may not verify all improper payments to deceased individuals , and an error rate of about 9 percent in coding payments could persist . as fsa conducts its reviews , if it employs ongoing monitoring activities , such as reconciliations , to ensure that county offices' coding of payments is supported by documentation , the error rate could be reduced . furthermore , until and unless nrcs and rma develop and implement procedures to have their payment or subsidy data records matched against ssa's complete death master file , either through coordination with fsa or on their own , these agencies cannot know if they are providing payments to , or subsidies on behalf of , deceased individuals ; how often they are providing such payments or subsidies ; or in what amounts . without such procedures , nrcs and rma are not employing internal controls specified in federal standards . and without reviewing each payment to or subsidy provided on behalf of a deceased individual , the agencies do not know if each payment or subsidy is proper or improper . in addition , without accurate information on policyholders , rma may be unable to rely on results from data mining . we are making the following three recommendations to the secretary of agriculture: to further strengthen fsa's procedures for preventing improper payments to deceased individuals , we recommend that the secretary of agriculture direct the administrator of fsa to employ ongoing monitoring activities , such as reconciliations , to ensure that county offices' coding of payments is supported by documentation . we also interviewed agency officials at fsa's washington , d.c. , headquarters and at its kansas city , missouri , information technology office about agency procedures , guidance , payment processes , and the identification of improper payments .