see table 2 for a list of these details . in its country reports on terrorism , state includes a terrorist safe havens chapter with assessments of each terrorist safe haven it identifies to explain why that country or region has been classified as a terrorist safe haven . however , our analysis of the assessments in state's august 2010 report determined that , while state included information on each identified terrorist safe haven , state did not assess them with the level of detail recommended by congress . the online version of this map is interactive . hover your mouse over each text box to read state's august 2010 assessment of why each identified country or region is considered a terrorist safe haven . to view these assessments in the offline version , please see appendix ii . state has made few changes to the terrorist safe havens identified in its report since the april 2007 country reports on terrorism , which identified 15 terrorist safe havens . since that report , state has removed two terrorist safe havens — the afghan - pakistan border and indonesia — from the country reports on terrorism . state officials explained that the afghan - pakistan border was removed in 2009 , but afghanistan and pakistan are each still identified as terrorist safe havens to highlight the different safe haven issues facing each country . state officials said that indonesia was removed in 2008 because the country passed counterterrorism legislation and captured several members of the terrorist group jemaah islamiyah . irtpa includes congressional findings that the planning of complex terrorist operations requires safe haven from government and law enforcement interference and that terrorists remain focused on finding such safe havens . further , irtpa states that it is the sense of congress that it should be u.s. policy to identify foreign countries that are being used as terrorist sanctuaries and assess current u.s. tools being used to assist foreign governments to eliminate these safe havens . accordingly , irtpa requires state to include detailed assessments of terrorist safe havens in its annual country reports on terrorism . irtpa also states that these detailed assessments should include , to the extent feasible , a variety of provisions , including information regarding knowledge of and actions to address terrorist activities taken by countries whose territory is being used as a terrorist safe haven . for instance , our evaluation determined that while state generally included information on the extent of knowledge by the government of the country with respect to terrorist activities , it did not include any information in its assessments about the actions countries took to prevent the proliferation of and trafficking in weapons of mass destruction in and through their territories . we also analyzed the “country reports” chapter of state's august 2010 report and found that some of the information not included in the assessments in the terrorist safe haven chapter was contained in the country reports chapter . for instance , the country report for yemen contained information regarding the yemeni government's actions to cooperate with u.s. counterterrorism efforts .