lack of adequate instructions . our interviews with 100 cable franchises indicate that the lack of specific guidance regarding the cost change section of the survey caused considerable confusion about how to fill out the form . every franchise that we spoke with said it was unclear what fcc expected for at least one of the six factors ( 5 cost factors as well as a non - cost factor ) ; 73 of the 100 franchises said that the instructions were insufficient . in particular , several cable representatives we interviewed noted that there were no instructions or examples to show how to calculate investment , what types of cost elements should go into the other costs category , and what fcc meant by non - cost factors . this lack of guidance created considerable variation in the approaches taken to develop the cost factors . table 1 provides information on the approaches cable franchises used to complete the portion of the survey pertaining to cost and non - cost factors underlying rate changes . requirement that factors sum to the reported annual rate change . our survey of 100 cable franchises that responded to fcc's 2002 cable rates survey indicated that a second source of confusion relates to the requirement that the sum of the underlying cost and non - cost factors ( see fig . 1 lines 52-57 ) equal the change in the franchise's cable rates ( see fig . 1 line 51 ) . this portion of fcc's survey was originally designed during the 1990s when both basic and expanded - basic services were regulated . at that time , cable companies were required to justify any rate increases the cable company implemented based on cost increases that it had incurred during the year . an fcc official told us that the rate / cost factor portion of the form was designed to mirror a regulatory form that was used at that time to justify rate changes . when expanded - basic services were deregulated in march 31 , 1999 , fcc realized that cost factors would no longer necessarily equal the yearly rate change because companies were no longer required to tie rate changes to explicit cost factors for regulatory purposes . in the 1999 cable rates survey , fcc added the non - cost line in this section of the survey and continued to require that the cost factors and the non - cost factor sum to the reported annual rate change . fcc officials told us that cable operators could use the non - cost factor element to make up any difference ( positive or negative ) between their changes in costs and rates . however , based on our findings , it appears that this may not have been clearly communicated to cable franchises . we found that only 10 franchises took this approach and instead , most franchises told us that they chose to change their estimate of one or more of the cost factors . in most cases , cable representatives told us that this meant reducing other cost factors because most franchises told us that their actual annual cost increases for the year covered by the 2002 survey exceeded their rate change for expanded - basic service .