( see table 1. ) the july memorandums stated that initial estimates indicated that potential savings of between $100 million and $200 million ( it infrastructure ) and $65 million and $85 million ( business systems ) could be achieved over a 2- year period as a result of consolidating and integrating component agency investments . omb reported to congressional committees that these estimates were based primarily on best practices in the federal government and private industry . however , an omb it representative stated that these estimates were a rough approximation and that no documentation existed to support how they were derived . the july memorandums also stated that the review group would track these savings . moreover , omb reported to congressional committees that this tracking would include a breakout of the savings , the cause of the savings , and the time period in which the savings would be generated . however , a tracking process was not established because , according to an omb it representative , no budgetary savings had occurred at the time that the investment review group was in place since no investment was terminated by the group . control review schedules , or master milestone calendars , are important to ensure that dhs is reviewing its highest priority it investments in a timely manner so as to be able to affect changes to component agency approaches or even terminate a poorly managed or strategically unnecessary investment , if appropriate . dhs's cio also stated that the department's cio council is developing a peer review process for major it projects that is expected to include defining a life - cycle management process and a quarterly reporting process . the cio stated that the new process is expected to be instituted by the end of march 2004 . omb took a prudent step in issuing its july memorandums directing federal agencies that were expected to be part of the new department to temporarily cease funding for new it infrastructure and business systems investments in anticipation of the establishment of dhs . although documentation of the implementation of the memorandums was lacking , omb and dhs it officials outlined an approach that included both reviewing specific it investments and the beginning of planning for the transition to the new department . further , dhs component agencies identified actions that they took , such as putting initiatives on hold , and other benefits that resulted from the memorandums . reduce the vulnerability of the united states to terrorism . minimize the damage and assist in the recovery from terrorist attacks . carry out all functions of entities transferred to the department , including by acting as a focal point regarding natural and man - made crises and emergency planning . ensure that the functions of the agencies within the department that are not directly related to securing the homeland are not diminished or neglected . ensure that the overall economic security of the united states is not diminished by efforts aimed at securing the homeland . monitor connections between illegal drug trafficking and terrorism , coordinate efforts to sever such connections , and otherwise contribute to efforts to interdict illegal drug trafficking .