goals . gao - 05-742 . washington , d.c.: july 28 , 2005 . military transformation: clear leadership , accountability , and management tools are needed to enhance dod's efforts to transform military capabilities . gao - 05-70 . washington , d.c.: december 16 , 2004 . are units staffed with enough personnel in the right grade with the right skills and military specialties all the time , temporarily , or not at all ? gao - 04-902r . what is being done to prepare before a unit needs to deploy . afghanistan reconstruction: deteriorating security and limited resources have impeded progress ; improvements in u.s. strategy needed . gao - 04-403 . washington , d.c.: june 2 , 2004 . rebuilding iraq . gao - 03-792r . washington , d.c.: may 15 , 2003 . we disagree . as we discuss in this report , dod has made limited progress in identifying and prioritizing needed capabilities , the identification of stability operations requirements was occurring in a fragmented manner , and each service is using a different approach to improve stability operations capabilities . to date , the under secretary of defense for policy has not identified and prioritized needed stability operations capabilities and military plans do not fully reflect an integrated , interagency approach to stability operations . therefore , we continue to believe that our recommendations in these areas are still warranted , as discussed below . regarding our recommendation that dod provide comprehensive guidance , including a clear methodology and time frames for completion , to combatant commanders and the services on how to identify and address stability operations capability gaps , dod stated that existing , mandated capability assessment methodologies already effectively address stability , security , transition , and reconstruction operations capability needs at the combatant commands and the services . it also stated that under this process , the combatant commands assess and communicate to dod the capabilities required to conduct these missions just as they do for other assigned missions . however , as discussed in this report , we found that the combatant commands included in our review had made limited progress in identifying stability operations requirements because dod had not issued guidance or set specific time frames to complete this task , and there was confusion over how to define stability operations . during the course of our work , dod refined the definition of stability operations , which was a positive step , but has not clarified the guidance or set specific time frames for identifying stability operations requirements . because combatant command officials indicated to us that the absence of guidance and timeframes was a significant contributor to the lack of progress in developing requirements , we believe our recommendation would assist the department in accomplishing this task . in response to our recommendation that dod provide comprehensive guidance to dod organizations on how to develop measures of effectiveness , the department stated that it already develops measures of effectiveness in general , and a special process is not needed for stability operations .