agreed . atsdr will create a community assistance panel ( cap ) comparable to other panels it has set up for community participation at national priorities list sites . atsdr recommended that its camp lejeune cap be comprised of five or more community members and one or two scientific advisers , along with ex officio members from the navy . agreed . atsdr said it considered interaction with the community an important aspect of its on - site work and planned to continue to work closely with organized community advocacy groups . it agreed to be responsive to recommendations from the cap . establish a registry to identify groups of potentially exposed individuals to study , including exposed and unexposed individuals who had lived and / or worked at camp lejeune during the period of interest , which would serve as the population base for further studies . agreed . in order to identify various distinct groups of individuals with potential exposure , atsdr said that efforts or activities should be conducted to determine if potential databases exist that would identify these groups , such as children who lived on base and adults who lived or worked on base . however , the agency said that it believed that it had already identified as completely as possible those who may have been exposed while in utero for the years 1968-1985 . conduct various types of feasibility or pilot studies — to determine whether study individuals can be identified and tracked and what types of medical records are available — before embarking on full - scale studies of the impact on health of exposures at camp lejeune . agreed . atsdr will conduct a feasibility assessment to determine the number of adults and children that could be identified through available data sources . study additional health outcomes , such as mortality and cancer incidence . also , conduct feasibility studies of other adverse health outcomes , such as autoimmune diseases ; spontaneous abortion ; neurological effects ; organ failure ; adult heart disease ; reproductive outcomes of male and female children who were born ( or were in utero ) at camp lejeune ; birth defects beyond those considered by atsdr ; and ocular problems . agreed . atsdr agreed that mortality and cancer incidence should receive the highest priority and are the outcomes most feasible to study . the agency said that decisions concerning study period , study population , and study outcomes should be made in consultation with the cap , and said that atsdr would defer decisions about additional health studies until feasibility studies were completed and reviewed by the cap . conduct future research activities in parallel with the current study and without awaiting completion of current atsdr activities . agreed . the agency said that its highest priority is to complete the current study . development of a cap and further research activities would likely require additional staffing and resources , which atsdr said it would request from the department of defense ( dod ) . amend the 1997 public health assessment to include the possibility that adult cancers and other adverse health outcomes may be related to voc exposures .