concentration . in its 2013 fifth assessment report , the ipcc estimated that the likely range for climate sensitivity is from 1.5 to 4.5 degrees celsius . the report also indicated that a “best” estimate could not be determined . prospectus study incorporated a range of values for climate sensitivity in its analysis , and the climate change impacts and risk analysis study generally used a single value to represent the sensitivity of the climate to rising greenhouse gas concentrations . the methods rely on limited information that can be used to model the relationships between climate and society , requiring assumptions about how society will respond to future changes in the climate . for example , some sector - specific models assume that historical observed relationships between weather events and economic output variables — such as between temperature and crop production — will represent the effects of long - term climate change . however , over the long time periods under which climate change is expected to occur , individuals , businesses , and government institutions may develop new approaches or technologies to adapt to climate change , lessening its economic effect . for example , one expert said that farmers may respond by making different crop choices . on the other hand , future climate change may have effects that are not revealed in historical events . according to one study , the likelihood that the climate will produce unprecedented effects — for example , heat so extreme that it can induce heat stroke in healthy individuals — will increase as temperatures rise outside the realm of past human experience . similarly , data showing how populations will adapt to climate change are limited , so the methods use different assumptions about the extent to which society will adapt to climate change in different sectors . for instance , the climate change impacts and risk analysis study assumed that for some sectors , such as agriculture , cost - effective adaptation actions will be taken , such as adjusting the type of crops grown in a region . for the coastal sector , the study considered four adaptation strategies: beach nourishment ( adding sand ) , property elevation , shoreline armoring ( using physical structures to protect from erosion ) , and property abandonment . however , for other sectors , such as the labor sector , the study did not take into account potential adaptation measures — such as using potential technological advances to reduce exposure — that could reduce future economic effects . the american climate prospectus study generally assumed that no adaptation would occur in response to climate change . also , the methods might not incorporate potential market inefficiencies . for example , in the climate change impacts and risk analysis , the coastal sector analysis does not consider how subsidized insurance might affect adaptation actions . if insurance prices do not reflect actual risks — such as in the presence of insurance subsidies — insurance availability might disincentivize adaptation actions . the methods have not included all sectors because the u.s. economy is complex and the information available for different sectors and climate impacts varies .