we did not verify these claims . labor officials stated that its claims examiners are trained to review files and make the appropriate case - management decision on the need for a second opinion . in addition , they stated that resources associated with second opinions include significant time and effort for a claims examiner to review a file , document the need for a second opinion , and determine the specific issues to be reviewed by the physician . finally , labor officials noted that numerous requests by employing agencies for second opinions can put a strain on the limited number of physician staff it uses for these examinations . officials at multiple employing agencies covered in our work to date stated that they faced difficulties successfully investigating and prosecuting fraud . gao's fraud - prevention framework states that targeted investigations and prosecutions , though costly and resource - intensive , can help deter future fraud and ultimately save money . we plan to follow up with agency ig and united states attorney officials to gain their perspective on feca fraud cases as part of our ongoing work . details offered by employing - agency program officials included the following:  officials at dod stated that their investigative units do not normally invest resources in feca fraud cases because national defense , antiterrorism , and violent - crimes cases are higher priorities .  usps officials also stated that , in their experience , limited resources at united states attorneys offices means that those attorneys will often not prosecute cases with an alleged fraud of less than $100,000 . according to these officials , many of their strong allegations of fraud and abuse fall below this amount when estimating the cost of fraud that has already occurred . in addition to the challenges noted above related to fraud investigations , in 2008 , we recommended that owcp take steps to focus attention on recovering feca overpayments . specifically , we recommended considering reducing the dollar threshold for waiving overpayments as owcp's overpayment processing data system develops additional capabilities . with respect to reducing the waiver threshold , labor disagreed to consider reducing the dollar threshold while their current processing data system was developing additional capabilities to recover overpayments . we plan to follow up on these promising practices and potential weaknesses as part of our ongoing review of feca fraud - prevention controls . we will also attempt to develop case studies of specific examples of duplication of benefits and other problems within the feca program to determine whether these and other potential program vulnerabilities may have contributed to specific cases of fraud and abuse . in addition to our fraud - prevention work in the feca program , we are conducting two other program - related engagements . those engagements focus largely on issues related to retirement - age feca beneficiaries . the results of that work will also be reported at a later date . chairman lieberman , ranking member collins , and members of the committee , this concludes my statement for the record . for additional information regarding this statement , please contact gregory d. kutz at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or kutzg@gao.gov .