the american red cross . from challenge to action: american red cross actions to improve and enhance its disaster response and related capabilities for the 2006 hurricane season and beyond ( washington , d.c.: june 2006 ) . the aspen institute , weathering the storm: the role of local nonprofits in the hurricane katrina relief effort ( washington , d.c.: 2006 ) . department of homeland security , office of inspector general , fema's preparedness for the next catastrophic disaster , oig - 08-34 ( washington , d.c.: march 2008 ) . department of homeland security , office of inspector general , a performance review of fema's disaster management activities in response to hurricane katrina , oig - 06-32 ( washington , d.c.: march 2006 ) . what steps have these organizations taken since katrina to strengthen their capacity for service delivery ? what is known about their current capabilities for responding to mass care needs in such a large - scale disaster ? what are the remaining challenges that confront voluntary organizations in preparing for such large - scale disasters ? overall , to address these objectives , we reviewed federal and voluntary organization documents ; conducted site visits ; interviewed local , state , and national governmental and voluntary agency officials ; and reviewed relevant laws . more specifically , we reviewed governmental and other reports on the lessons learned from the response to hurricane katrina as well as key federal disaster management documents , including the 2008 national response framework ; the catastrophic incident supplement to the framework , which describes the federal government's detailed strategy for coordinating a national response to a catastrophic disaster ; and emergency support function 6 — mass care , emergency assistance , housing , and human services annex ( esf - 6 ) , which together describe the federal coordination of the delivery of federal mass care and other human services . we also interviewed officials from the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) — a federal agency within dhs that is the lead agency for responding to disasters . for five major voluntary organizations — the red cross , the salvation army , the southern baptist convention , catholic charities usa , and united way of america — we reviewed documents including their disaster response plans , memorandums of agreement , and various data , such as data on shelters and other mass care resources . we also interviewed voluntary organization officials at their national headquarters as well as the director of the national voluntary organizations active in disaster ( nvoad ) , an umbrella group of nationwide nonprofit organizations . to examine voluntary organizations' capabilities — especially in mass care — we conducted site visits to four metropolitan areas considered at high risk for different types of disasters , such as major earthquakes , hurricanes , or terrorist attacks: ( 1 ) los angeles , california ; ( 2 ) miami , florida ; ( 3 ) new york city , new york ; and ( 4 ) washington d.c. for each of these areas , we reviewed documents and obtained available data from the voluntary organizations on their sheltering and feeding capabilities .