we disagree . we believe that national standards contribute to ensuring that all high - containment laboratories meet minimum standards . national standards are valuable not only in relation to new laboratory construction but also in ensuring compliance for periodic upgrades . we agree that bmbl provides guidance on design and construction ; however , the guidance does not provide standards that must be adhered to . while sharing lessons learned can be beneficial to meeting standards , it is not an adequate substitute for the standards themselves . which federal agency is responsible for tracking the expansion of high - containment laboratories and determining the associated aggregate risks ? what lessons can be learned from highly publicized incidents at high - containment laboratories and actions taken by the regulatory agencies ? to answer these questions , we interviewed federal agency officials as well as experts in microbiology , reviewed literature , conducted site visits , and surveyed 12 federal agencies to determine if they have a mission to track high - containment laboratories in the united states . we also interviewed officials from relevant intelligence agencies to determine if they have a mission to determine insider risks in high - containment laboratories . the expert panel ( see appendix ii ) that reviewed this report comprised scientists with substantive expertise in microbiological and select agent research and the operation of high - containment laboratories . we conducted our work from september 2005 through june 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . ( see appendix i for our scope and methodology and appendix ii for a list of the experts who reviewed this report. ) in the life sciences , biosafety is a combination of the containment principles , technologies , practices , and procedures that are implemented to prevent the unintentional exposure to pathogens and toxins or their accidental release . in most countries , infectious agents are classified by risk group . agent risk group classification emphasizes the potential risk and consequences of ( 1 ) exposure and infection for the laboratory worker or ( 2 ) the release of the agent into the environment with subsequent exposure of the general population . risk group classification considers aspects of a given pathogen , in particular its infectivity ; mode and ease of transmission ; pathogenicity and virulence ( including induced morbidity and case - fatality rate ) ; susceptibility to physical or chemical agents ; and the availability or absence of countermeasures , including vaccines , therapeutic remedies , and cures . depending on the risk group classification , research on infectious agents is to be performed in facilities offering varying levels of containment , applying different types of primary containment protection ( for example , biological safety cabinets ) , and ensuring that appropriate practices and procedures are in place .