( see www.assistancecenters.net. ) sectors served by the centers include agriculture , automotive services and repair , metal finishers , printing , transportation , local governments , and federal facilities . epa manages two of the centers ( agriculture and federal facilities ) , with the other eight managed by organizations outside of epa . omb officials said that they had no comments on the draft report . we also provided federal and state agency officials with the relevant draft report sections attributed to them to ensure that we correctly characterized their systems and comments . all of the federal agencies included in our review were using some form of it to improve regulatory management and to meet legislative and executive branch mandates in this area . the applications that the agencies and others identified as innovative covered all of the dimensions of regulatory management that we examined , and most applications covered more than one dimension . most of the applications involved using it to improve traditional regulatory management approaches within their agencies . other applications were more interactive in nature and appeared to change the nature of the relationship between regulatory agencies and the relevant public . a few of the applications attempted to address issues involving interagency or intergovernmental coordination . in each of these advisors , users are interviewed about relevant issues ; asked follow - up questions that are based on the answers previously provided ; and , in most cases , provided a written report tailored to the circumstances described . in august 2000 , the ford foundation and harvard university's john f. kennedy school of government named osha's expert advisors as a finalist in the innovations in american government award , which recognizes responsive and innovative government programs . another interactive it - based application used in federal regulatory management is dot's “do it yourself” ( diy ) system . ( see http: / / diy.dot.gov. ) the diy system was developed by dot's finance office and permits regulated entities to file for required licenses and certifications and to make related payments using a credit card through a central dot web site or through the regulating agency's web site . dot agencies using the diy system as of november 2000 included , among others , ( 1 ) the federal motor carrier safety administration ( fmcsa ) ( for registration applications , insurance payments , and fine payments ) ; ( 2 ) the national highway traffic safety administration ( for import fee payments , technical information services payments , and freedom of information act request payments ) ; and ( 3 ) faa ( for aircraft registration and airman data ) . users are guided through a series of screens that ask for confirmation of transaction requests and address information . built - in error messages in the on - line forms help users complete the forms correctly , thereby eliminating rework for both the users and the agency . the final screens take the user through the credit card part of the transaction and provide the user with a transaction number that can be used to track orders . dot officials said that , in most cases , users should be able to complete the transactions in 10 minutes or less .