doj concurred with these recommendations . as of december 2017 , bop has taken steps to implement our recommendation to identify , obtain , and track data on the outcomes of rrcs and home confinement . in particular , bop reported to us that it has developed a revised statement of work for use with its rrc contractors that requires the contractors to track and report quarterly to bop on , among other things , the number of placements into and releases from rrcs and home confinement ; revocations from rrcs or home confinement ; and rrc and home confinement residents that have secured full , part - time , or temporary employment . bop plans to compile these data to track contractor performance and program outcomes . further , bop reported to us that it has developed a voluntary survey that asks rrc residents about their rrc experiences , including the amount of help they received in finding and keeping a job , and finding a place to live . these actions are in line with our recommendation and we will continue to monitor their implementation . however , as of december 2017 , bop has not provided evidence to us that it has developed performance measures by which to help assess program outcomes . we continue to believe bop should do so . chairman gowdy , ranking member cummings , and members of the committee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have . for further information about this statement , please contact diana maurer at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or maurerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . other individuals who made key contributions to this statement include brett fallavollita ( assistant director ) , david alexander , pedro almoguera , joy booth , billy commons , iii , tonnye' connor - white , jessica du , lorraine ettaro , michele fejfar , christopher hatscher , susan hsu , tom jessor , matt lowney , heather may , and jill verret . key contributors for the previous work on which this testimony is based are listed in each product . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the sentencing reform act of 1984 established the independent u.s . sentencing commission ( ussc ) within the judicial branch and charged it with , among other things , developing federal sentencing guidelines . the guidelines specify sentencing guideline ranges — a range of time ( in months ) that offenders should serve given the nature of their offense and other factors — but also permit sentences to depart upward or downward from guideline ranges because of aggravating or mitigating circumstances .