that is true . as i have noted before , this administration and this congress enter the 21st century facing new opportunities — and new challenges . you have the opportunity to respond to many of today's wants , but also the obligation to prepare for the long term . as you face budget choices in a time of projected surpluses , i'd like to hit a few points: first , as the congressional budget office ( cbo ) notes these projections are based on a set of assumptions that may or may not hold — no one should design tax or spending policy pegged to the precise numbers in any 10-year forecast . nevertheless , i believe it is important that congress and the president look at budget choices today in the context not only of today's needs and demands but also of the long - term pressures we know loom on the horizon . today's surpluses create , in effect , a unique window of opportunity to better position the government and the nation to address both current needs as well as the longer - term budget and economy we will hand to succeeding generations . our long - term model illustrates how important it is for us to use our newfound fiscal good fortune to promote a more sustainable longer - term budget and economic outlook so that future generations can more readily afford the commitments of an aging society . today's budget decisions have important consequences for the living standards of future generations . the financial burdens facing the smaller cohort of future workers in an aging society would most certainly be ameliorated if the economic pie were enlarged . this is no easy challenge , but in a very real sense , our fiscal decisions affect the longer - term economy through their effects on national saving . recent research estimated that increasing saving as a share of gdp by one percentage point each year would boost gdp enough to cover 95 percent of the increase in elderly costs between now and 2050 . simply put , we are not saving enough as a nation . personal saving is at a 40-year low . as shown in figure 5 , the reduction of federal deficits and the emergence of budget surpluses in recent years have slowed the long - term decline in national saving . while investment needed to promote growth has been supported by foreign capital in recent years , the profits due to foreign investment go abroad . what would happen if in the future foreign investors found more attractive opportunities elsewhere ? the most viable strategy for expanded growth in the long run is to increase saving from our own economy . since expanding the nation's productive capacity through saving and investment is a long - term process , increasing saving now is vital since labor force growth is expected to slow significantly over the next 20 years . traditionally , the most direct way for the federal government to increase saving has been to reduce the deficit or — more recently — to run a surplus . although the government may try to increase personal saving , results of these efforts have been mixed .