also , the overall methodology used for both reports is the same . in addition to passengers who are included on one of the tsa pretm lists , in october 2013 , tsa began implementing the tsa pretm risk assessment program , which evaluates passenger risk using data available to tsa to determine a certain likelihood that passengers will be designated as eligible to receive expedited screening through tsa pretm . how did tsa collaborate with stakeholders when developing and expanding expedited screening programs ? how does tsa assess the risk of passengers to determine their eligibility to receive expedited screening , and to what extent has tsa determined the effectiveness of its managed inclusion process ? to what extent does tsa assess progress towards achieving expedited screening program goals and estimate cost savings as a result of expedited screening programs ? this report is a public version of the prior sensitive report that we provided to you . the department of homeland security deemed some of the information in our prior report as sensitive security information , which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits this sensitive information , which includes information about the tsa pretm risk assessment program and managed inclusion process . although the information provided in this report is more limited in scope , it addresses the same questions as the sensitive report . to determine how the development of tsa pretm , managed inclusion , and other tsa programs affected the availability and use of expedited screening , we analyzed tsa documentation including expedited screening and managed inclusion procedures developed in october 2011 and revised through september 2013 , expedited screening and managed inclusion implementation plans and time frames developed in october 2011 and revised through march 2014 , memorandums of agreement , and decision memorandums , among other documents . we also reviewed tsa's december 2013 screening procedures for standard screening lanes to understand the differences between expedited screening and standard screening . to determine how the use of expedited screening has changed over time for both the number of passengers eligible for and using expedited screening , we analyzed tsa data available from tsa's secure flight system and performance management information system to determine how many boarding passes with the tsa pretm designation were issued and compared the number of boarding passes issued with the number of boarding passes that were scanned in a dedicated tsa pretm expedited screening lane from october 2011 through january 2014 ( the most recent data available ) . we assessed the reliability of the data collected by reviewing secure flight and performance management information system documents and interviewing tsa officials and determined that data for the number of passengers eligible for and using expedited screening were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to further clarify our understanding of how expedited screening and managed inclusion operate , we visited six airports to observe expedited screening and managed inclusion and interviewed tsa federal security directors ( fsd ) about how expedited screening and managed inclusion were implemented at these airports .