well . the dante b. fascell port of miami - dade is owned and managed by the local government , miami - dade county . engineers , and the maritime administration . despite these complexities , ports have various forums in which these maritime stakeholders can coordinate on issues that affect the port as a whole . for terrorism concerns , for example , major u.s. ports have a area maritime security committee ( amsc ) that provides a venue for discussing security concerns . for disaster relief concerns , u.s. ports would work with the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) regarding disaster assistance . since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , much of the focus on emergency preparedness has been on preparedness for preventing , mitigating the effects of , and responding to terrorist attacks . through legislation and presidential directives , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) is the primary federal organization responsible for preparing the nation both for terrorist attacks and for major disasters . homeland security presidential directives 5 and 8 require that dhs establish a single , comprehensive approach to and plans for the management of emergency events whether the result of terrorist attacks or large - scale natural or accidental disasters . as we have previously reported , the capabilities needed to respond to major disasters , whether the result of a terrorist attack or nature , are similar in many ways . the devastating hurricane season of 2005 , which included hurricanes katrina , rita , and wilma , focused renewed attention on the potential effects that natural disasters could pose to port operations . the numerous vulnerabilities port operations face , together with the limited resources available to deal with them , have also initiated a renewed look at how to protect ports from a variety of threats . in light of the continued attention both to port security and to federal natural disaster response , we are providing a comprehensive view of steps ports have taken to prepare and mitigate the impacts of natural disasters . consequently , we conducted this review , initiated under the comptroller general's authority , to examine port disaster preparedness measures and to examine the federal role in helping ports plan and recover from natural disaster impacts . more specifically , this report examines ( 1 ) the challenges port authorities have experienced as a result of recent natural disasters , ( 2 ) the efforts under way to address challenges from these disasters , and ( 3 ) the manner in which port authorities plan for natural disasters and the effect of this approach on their ability to share information with port stakeholders and access federal resources . to address the challenges port authorities experience as a result of recent disasters and the efforts to address these challenges , we selected 17 u.s. ports for review ( see fig . we focused primarily on commercial ports and various commercial aspects of these ports . the criteria we used included selecting ports that ( 1 ) varied in size ( based on cargo value ) and ( 2 ) varied in the degree to which they had experienced some type of natural disaster since 1998 .