gao - 05-909r . washington , d.c.: july 19 , 2005 . the first stage is cio review . during this review , the agency is to publish a notice of the collection in the federal register . the public must be given a 60-day period in which to submit comments , and the agency is to otherwise consult with interested or affected parties about the proposed collection . at the conclusion of the agency review , the cio submits the proposal to omb for review . the agency submissions to omb typically include a copy of the data collection instrument ( eg , a form or survey ) and an omb submission form providing information ( with supporting documentation ) about the proposed information collection , including why the collection is necessary , whether it is new or an extension of a currently approved collection , whether it is voluntary or mandatory , and the estimated burden hours . included in the submission is the certification by the cio or the cio's designee that the collection satisfies the 10 standards . the omb review is the second stage in the clearance process . this review may involve consultation between omb and agency staff . during the review , a second notice is published in the federal register , this time with a 30-day period for soliciting public comment . at the end of this period , omb makes its decision and informs the agency . omb maintains on its web site a list of all approved collections and their currently valid control numbers , including the form numbers approved under each collection . the 1995 pra amendments also require omb to set specific goals for reducing burden from the level it had reached in 1995: at least a 10 percent reduction in the governmentwide burden - hour estimate for each of fiscal years 1996 and 1997 , a 5 percent governmentwide burden reduction goal in each of the next 4 fiscal years , and annual agency goals that reduce burden to the “maximum practicable opportunity.” at the end of fiscal year 1995 , federal agencies estimated that their information collections imposed about 7 billion burden hours on the public . thus , for these reduction goals to be met , the burden - hour estimate would have had to decrease by about 35 percent , to about 4.6 billion hours , by september 30 , 2001 . in fact , on that date , the federal paperwork estimate had increased by about 9 percent , to 7.6 billion burden hours . as of march 2006 , omb's estimate for governmentwide burden is about 10.5 billion hours — about 2.5 billion hours more than the estimate of 7.971 billion hours at the end of fiscal year 2004 . over the years , we have reported on the implementation of pra many times . in a succession of reports and testimonies , we noted that federal paperwork burden estimates generally continued to increase , rather than decrease as envisioned by the burden reduction goals in pra . further , we reported that some burden reduction claims were overstated .