each regional cac is hosted by a local cac . the current hosts are the philadelphia children's alliance ( northeast regional cac ) , the national children's advocacy center ( southern regional cac ) , cac of the pikes peak region ( western regional cac ) , and children's health care ( midwest regional cac ) , although the hosts have changed since the program began in 1995 . primarily , these subawards took the form of annual chapter support grants to the state cac chapters . state chapters — forty - nine states have chapters that are accredited by nca . ojp also noted that ojjdp will make modifications to these processes as appropriate . regarding the second recommendation , ojp concurred and stated that ojjdp will consider the results from the study it has planned in response to our first recommendation in determining whether the current 12-month project period is realistic . if ojjdp determines that a longer project period is warranted , it has agreed to make the change prospectively . ojp further stated that in the interim , beginning in fiscal year 2015 , ojjdp will modify its approach to providing supplemental awards . policies and procedures , as appropriate , and communicate all changes during periodically scheduled ojjdp staff meetings . finally , for the fourth recommendation , ojp concurred and stated that ojjdp will add the performance measures outlined in the voca grant solicitations to the dctat system by fiscal year 2016 . additionally , ojp stated that ojjdp will contact all the voca grantees in fiscal year 2015 to clarify their requirement to submit performance measurement data . ojp also stated that ojdp will provide voca grantees with training on the collection and reporting of performance measures data . we are sending copies of this report to the attorney general of the united states , the assistant attorney general for the office of justice programs , the administrator for the office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention , and interested congressional committees as appropriate . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about our work , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9627 or maurerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . this appendix provides information on grantees' executive compensation from fiscal years 2010 through 2013 for five grant programs established in response to the victims of child abuse act ( voca ) . however , ojjdp's administrative requirements have contributed to voca grantees' challenges in fully expending their grant awards within the original 12-month project period . additionally , ojjdp's inconsistent and irregularly enforced extension guidance has resulted in grantees' spending down a backlog of voca funding , even while accumulating new grant awards . further , ojjdp does not have complete information by which to evaluate the performance of voca grantees against established performance measures to ensure that voca grant funds are being used effectively to support improvements in the investigation and prosecution of child abuse .