technical assistance . all of the federal banking regulators told us that they provided their minority banks with technical assistance if requested , but only fdic and ots have specific procedures for offering this assistance . more specifically , fdic and ots officials told us that they proactively seek to make minority banks aware of such assistance through established outreach procedures outside of their customary examination and supervision processes . fdic also has a policy that requires its regional coordinators to ensure that examination case managers contact minority banks from 90 to 120 days after an examination to offer technical assistance in any problem areas that were identified during the examination . this policy is unique to minority banks . occ and the federal reserve provide technical assistance to all of their banks , but had not established outreach procedures for all their minority banks outside of the customary examination and supervision processes . however , occ officials told us that they were in the process of developing an outreach plan for all minority banks regulated by the agency . federal reserve officials told us that federal reserve districts conduct informal outreach to their minority banks and consult with other districts on minority bank issues as needed . policies to preserve the minority character of troubled banks . fdic has developed policies for failing banks that are consistent with firrea's requirement that the agency work to preserve the minority character of minority banks in cases of mergers and acquisitions . for example , fdic maintains a list of qualified minority banks or minority investors that may be asked to bid on the assets of troubled minority banks that are expected to fail . however , fdic is required to accept the bids on failing banks that pose the lowest expected cost to the deposit insurance fund . as a result , all bidders , including minority bidders , are subject to competition . ots and occ have developed written policies that describe how the agencies will work with fdic to identify qualified minority banks or investors to acquire minority banks that are failing . while the federal reserve does not have a similar written policy , agency officials say that they also work with fdic to identify qualified minority banks or investors . all four agencies also said that they try to assist troubled minority banks improve their financial condition before it deteriorates to the point that a resolution through fdic becomes necessary . for example , agencies may provide technical assistance in such situations or try to identify other minority banks willing to acquire or merge with the troubled institutions . while fdic was proactive in assessing its support efforts for minority banks , none of the regulators routinely and comprehensively surveyed their minority banks on all issues affecting the institutions , nor have the regulators established outcome - oriented performance measures . evaluating the effectiveness of federal programs is vitally important to manage programs successfully and improve program results . to this end , in 1993 congress enacted the government performance and results act , which instituted a governmentwide requirement that agencies report on their results in achieving their agency and program goals .