surety bonds . va generally requires staff to obtain a surety bond from fiduciaries overseeing estates with a value of $20,000 or more that is attributable to va funds . a bond ensures that the beneficiary's estate will be reimbursed in the event of fiduciary mismanagement or abuse of beneficiary funds . our nationwide sample showed that program staff sometimes failed to obtain proof that a fiduciary purchased a bond , when required , or did not adequately document in the beneficiary case files that the bond requirement was waived . of the 52 case files in our sample for which fiduciaries were required to purchase a bond , 8 case files lacked adequate documentation to indicate whether a bond was purchased or that the bond requirement was waived because the fiduciary met conditions for an exception . some of the 8 cases involved substantial benefit amounts . for example , 2 cases which contained no documentation that bonds were purchased had va estate values of approximately $82,000 and $62,000 — leaving these beneficiaries and va vulnerable to a substantial loss if funds were misused . some staff in regional offices we visited said that they were often uncertain about what types of bonds are required for certain types of fiduciaries , and this was confirmed by our site visit file reviews . for example , in one case , a fiduciary program staff member was told by a fiduciary who was an attorney that an individual bond was unnecessary because the fiduciary had a “blanket” bond that covered all va responsibilities . although this staff member documented in the case file that he was unsure if this was correct , he took the fiduciary's word that an additional bond was not required . however , we were told by managers and staff that a blanket bond was most likely not acceptable in this case , and the staff person should have required the fiduciary to obtain an individual bond . in regard to the above findings , we recommended that va ensure that staff understand and carry out policies regarding file documentation , follow - up with fiduciaries for late financial reports , and bond acquisition . va concurred and , in its comments to our report , outlined several planned actions . for example , va stated that it would roll out additional training for staff in march of this year and expects to hold a manager's training conference later in the year . the agency also intends to revise the program's policy manual this year to clarify existing guidance , establish new policies and procedures , and enhance oversight of fiduciary activities . in addition to compliance issues , we identified weaknesses in va's policy for conducting periodic on - site reviews of professional fiduciaries who manage funds for multiple beneficiaries . cumulatively , such benefits can be a substantial amount of money . on - site reviews examine the financial records across all beneficiaries that a professional fiduciary manages to detect discrepancies among accounts , which may not be detected by examining annual financial reports for a single beneficiary . we found two weaknesses associated with the on - site review policy va developed .