gao - 08-981r . washington , d.c.: august 15 , 2008 . this case exceeded the deadline by 2 days . because of the small number of inaccuracies , we found doj's fiscal year 2009 second through fourth quarter and fiscal year 2010 first quarter reports to be generally consistent with our analysis . osc: we recreated osc's report by including cases where the 60-day deadline occurred within the quarter , or the 60-day deadline occurred in a later quarter but osc completed processing the referral within the quarter . we did not find any discrepancies between our analysis and the data contained in osc's quarterly reports . we conducted this performance audit from january 2010 through september 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . laurie e. ekstrand at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or ekstrandl@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , individuals making key contributions to this report were bill reinsberg , assistant director ; jim ashley ; gerard burke ; karin fangman ; donna miller ; wesley sholtes ; tamara stenzel ; jessica thomsen ; and greg wilmoth . military personnel: improvements needed to increase effectiveness of dod's programs to promote positive working relationships between reservists and their employers . the longest case , which was delayed because osc discovered it needed to gather more information in the case , took 240 days to reach a decision on representation . vbia 2008 requires that dol , doj , and osc submit quarterly reports to congress within 30 days of the end of each quarter . based on our review of the transmittal letters for quarterly reports submitted between october 10 , 2008 , and december 31 , 2009 , dol was late in submitting all five of its quarterly reports , ranging from 4 to 46 days late . doj was late in submitting its quarterly reports in four of five quarters of our review by a range of 11 to 40 days . during the period covered by our review , osc consistently submitted its quarterly userra reports on time or before the statutory deadline , from 1 to 3 days early . table 1 below shows the extent to which each agency was timely in submitting its quarterly report to congress . dol officials said that to ensure data accuracy and avoid having to regularly adjust previously - submitted quarterly reports in future reports , dol reserves 2 weeks after the end of each quarter for staff to finalize database entries on all investigations and referral actions taken through the last day of that quarter . the quarterly report is then drafted and reviewed by the responsible officials . although recent reports have been late , dol expects to improve its timeliness in submitting them as it gains more experience in preparing these reports . dol officials said that it had not communicated with congress in advance of late submissions .