if so , which activity and why ? financial accountability goes beyond an agency's obtaining an unqualified opinion on its annual financial statements . the key to financial accountability is obtaining accurate and useful information on a timely and ongoing basis to support day - to - day managerial decisions and oversight . as a critical part of its new delphi financial management system installation , faa's cost accounting system ( cas ) draws upon accounting information in delphi to provide financial information that can be used to monitor ongoing operations as well to plan for the future . cas has been principally implemented in the ato and commercial space transportation , which together comprise over 80 percent of faa's budget . faa's other two lines of business , aviation safety and airports are expected to implement cas in fiscal year 2006 . cas takes direct cost data from dot's financial management system and allocates those costs from the organization that incurred the costs to the organization , product , or service that benefited from the costs . the system allows analysis of costs aggregated within a program , activity , location or strategic goal . allocated costs can also be used in an analysis of comparative operating efficiency for different operating periods or different locations . an example is a ratio of costs to a nonfinancial activity measure , such as cost per day , per employee , or per flight . apparent abnormalities in trends or at particular locations may then be investigated . for example , at faa the direct cost of an air traffic controller at a terminal would be allocated to airport operations , in proportion to takeoffs and landings , which are a major “driver” of those costs . similarly , the indirect cost of a maintenance technician would be allocated to the lines of business that benefited from those costs using an appropriate allocation base . a financial scoreboard in use at faa regularly tracks trends in these unit costs , overhead rates , and other performance measures . tracking these trends is key to identifying operating inefficiencies and , when projected to anticipated operating volumes , can help determine future financing needs . according to faa , cas provided labor and overhead cost data which were used in the preparation of a competitive sourcing study for ato flight service stations . the cost data were used as a basis to estimate the future cost of those existing in - house flight services . comparison of those projected in - house costs to the costs of procuring the services from bidders in the private sector resulted in contracting out ato flight service stations in fiscal year 2005 at a projected contract savings of about $2.2 billion through fiscal year 2015 . faa has also reported that cas data led to cancellation of a $27 million airport weather program and to savings of $7 million from modification of an airport radar surveillance program . cas can break down the full costs for the individual activities undertaken to provide each of ato's services — en route , oceanic , flight services , and terminal services — by location , program and function .