ii. ) we provided a draft of this report to dod and education . we are sending copies of this report to relevant congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the secretary of education , and other interested parties . we also reviewed education's monitoring and compliance data . finally , we interviewed representatives from an association of colleges and universities and selected accrediting agencies in order to obtain information about the extent to which they coordinate and provide information to dod and its military services for monitoring schools . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . soc addresses various administrative matters such as answering questions from schools and service members about the ta program . while dod monitors default rates through soc , it does not formally monitor 90 / 10 information . military education center staff we spoke with at two military installations indicated that ensuring the consumer protection of service members amidst sometimes deceptive recruiting practices of some schools can be a challenge . education's monitoring results in these areas could provide relevant information to help dod and its military services to better target their oversight and provide additional consumer protection for service members . education has recently developed additional provisions to better address oversight in distance education . education has developed a review process and guidance for its staff to assess the integrity of distance learning programs , such as whether schools have a process to verify student attendance . dod has proposed that distance education schools be subject to mver reviews , but currently does not generally evaluate these courses . dod may be able to leverage information from education's ongoing efforts in this area . in part because of inconsistencies in states' authorization requirements for schools , education recently clarified what is required for institutions of higher education to be considered legally authorized by a state . under new regulations that will generally take effect in july 2011 , states must , among other things , have a process to review and address complaints about institutions authorized by the state . in addition the new regulations require that if an institution is offering postsecondary education through distance or correspondence education in a state in which it is not physically located , the institution must meet any state requirements for it to be legally offering distance or correspondence education in that state . unlike education , dod does not verify that all schools receiving ta funds have state authorization ; it only verifies state authorization for on - installation schools . since dod reported that it has not had the opportunity to fully review education's new rule regarding state authorization , it is unclear whether it will follow those requirements . education has partnerships with a number of other federal agencies , including the department of justice and the federal trade commission . education partners with these two agencies to share information on complaints and college scholarship and financial aid fraud . additionally , education has a federal agency advisory working group to facilitate its coordination with other federal agencies and told us that it is willing to share information and provide guidance to dod in real time .