registries . some groups submitted data for quality measures via qualified registries — independent organizations , typically serving a particular medical specialty , that collect and report these data to cms . cms required groups reporting to a qualified registry to submit at least three measures — such as whether cardiac rehabilitation patients were referred to a prevention program — for at least 80 percent of patients . administrative claims . as a default , if a group did not report via web interface or qualified registry , cms calculated quality measures using claims data . in september 2013 , the majority of groups with 25 or more eps — nearly 90 percent — received quality scores based on claims data . cms calculated performance on a set of 17 quality indicators , including several composite measures . for example , the diabetes composite measure included several different measures of diabetes control . regardless of the method a group selected to submit quality - of - care data , cms used claims to calculate three outcomes measures — two ambulatory care composite measures and hospital readmission . one ambulatory care composite included hospitalization rates for three acute conditions: bacterial pneumonia , urinary tract infections , and dehydration . another composite included hospitalization rates for three chronic conditions: diabetes , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( copd ) , and heart failure . cms included cost measures — several of which differed from the measures private entities in our study reported to physicians — in all 2013 feedback reports ( see fig . using claims data , cms calculated an overall measure of the cost of care as the total per capita costs for all beneficiaries attributed to each physician group.separately reported total per capita costs for attributed beneficiaries with any of four chronic conditions: diabetes , heart failure , copd , or coronary artery disease . this contrasts with the private entities that typically measured a more limited set of measures focused on physicians' generic drug prescribing rates and hospital utilization . cms's report generation process took longer than that of most private entities in our study because it required more steps . while most health insurers generated performance reports in 4 to 6 months , cms issued reports about 9 months after the end of the january to december 2012 reporting period . to produce its 2013 physician feedback reports using administrative claims , cms began with the standard claims run - out period followed by intervals for provider attribution , measure calculation , risk - adjustment , and quality assurance . ( see fig . cms officials said they allowed a 3-month run - out interval to account for providers' late - year claims submissions . after the run - out period , cms required 5 to 6 months for a series of additional tasks needed to prepare the data for reporting . for groups that submitted data to cms via the web interface or registry options , cms gave these groups 3 months to submit such data after the end of the 12-month performance period . cms then calculated the measures for these options over a period of the next several months .