such public reporting can enhance transparency . in 2004 , we reported that incomplete and inconsistent fsis inspection records made it difficult to determine the frequency and scope of humane handling and slaughter violations . available fsis records showed that during the 28 months between january 2001 and march 2003 , inspectors wrote 553 noncompliance records to document violations of hmsa and the implementing regulations at 272 facilities across the united states . according to these inspection records , ineffective stunning , which does not quickly render animals insensible to pain , and in many cases results in a conscious animal reaching slaughter , was the most prevalent type of noncompliance . to a lesser extent , the records showed incidents of , in declining order of prevalence: poor facility conditions , failure to provide water to animals awaiting slaughter , excessive force , and excessive use of electric prods . however , in conducting this analysis , we found internal control problems that call into question the reliability of fsis records regarding compliance with the act . fsis is responsible for ensuring compliance with hmsa . fsis is also responsible for ensuring the safety of most meat , poultry , and processed egg products at federally inspected facilities . currently , fsis employs in - plant about 7,800 inspectors — that is , public health veterinarians , food inspectors , and consumer safety inspectors . these inspectors work collaboratively , and are responsible for inspecting animals prior to slaughter , as well as the carcasses after slaughter , in order to ensure the food is safe for human consumption . we also reported fsis took inconsistent enforcement actions to address noncompliance with hmsa . inspectors stationed in slaughter plants had not consistently issued reject tags , which temporarily halt operations in all or part of a plant . several of the dvmss we interviewed attributed the inconsistent enforcement actions to inspectors' inexperience , lack of clarity regarding their authority , or the misperception that certain violations were minor . we found similar inconsistencies at the district management level . district managers can decide to take the more serious enforcement action of withdrawing inspectors from the plant , most likely suspending a plant's operations , when they are notified of serious violations . however , they lacked clear criteria on when to do so , which can lead to inconsistent enforcement . we found , for example , one case in which a district manager did not suspend inspections after inspectors had issued 16 noncompliance records to a slaughter facility documenting the plant's failure to properly stun animals . in contrast , another facility's failure to provide access to water and to maintain acceptable pen conditions led to a suspension of operations . as a result , fsis could not ensure that humane slaughter requirements are consistently enforced across districts , a fact that undermines fsis efforts to enforce the act .