while sas no . 57 does state that the process for preparing accounting estimates may not be documented , it also states that auditors should assess whether there are additional key factors or alternative assumptions that need to be included in the estimate and assess the factors that management used in developing the assumptions . further , sas no . 57 states that auditors should concentrate on key factors and assumptions that are subjective and susceptible to misstatement and bias . we believe this includes the selection and rejection of variables that can be included in the model . without adequate documentation on the credit subsidy model development process , it is difficult for auditors to fulfill their responsibilities to assess these areas . omb also commented that sba fulfilled the management responsibilities described in sas no . 57 regarding internal controls for accounting estimates . we disagree with this statement and point out that sas no . 57 provides guidance for auditing accounting estimates as part of conducting financial statement audits rather than directing agency management's actions . management's responsibility for internal controls are contained in our “standards for internal control in the federal government,” which states , among other things , that “internal control and all transactions and other significant events need to be clearly documented , and the documentation should be readily available for examination.” further , as previously stated , cotton and company also identified the lack of adequate model documentation as an internal control weakness . moreover , sba's cfo generally agreed with the independent public accountant's report's findings , including the deficiencies in sba's model documentation , and stated that the internal control report presented “fundamentals of good financial management and sba is committed to accomplishing as many of these items as possible in the coming year.” omb also stated that requiring agencies to prepare additional documentation of the variables tested and rejected would be unduly burdensome . we disagree with this statement and note that this documentation would only need to be prepared when a model is developed or when significant updates are implemented . further , this requirement would be consistent with other segments of omb circular a - 11 that require agencies to provide supporting documentation for their budget submissions . however , as we mentioned in the report , there is currently no explicit guidance for agencies to document the development of the models that are used to generate credit subsidy estimates . omb also commented that we received sufficient information to test alternative variables to measure the reasonableness of the final sba credit subsidy model . we note that our work demonstrated that using additional variables that were also reasonable changed the subsidy estimate . we believe that this work highlights the need for agencies to document their basis for rejecting variables or combinations of variables from their final credit subsidy models . by documenting this work , agencies will be able to demonstrate to independent reviewers that a bias from variable selection does not exist in the final model . both agencies provided technical comments that we incorporated into the report as appropriate . the written comments of both agencies are reprinted in appendixes iii and iv .