we are not making any new recommendations in this report . internal control standard: transactions should be promptly recorded to maintain their relevance and value to management in controlling operations and making decisions . this applies to the entire process or life cycle of a transaction or event from the initiation and authorization through its final classification in summary records . in addition , control activities help to ensure that all transactions are completely and accurately recorded . irs has stewardship responsibility for maintaining sensitive records of tens of millions of taxpayers in addition to its responsibility for maintaining its own financial records . to maintain these records , irs often has to rely on outdated computer systems or manual work - arounds . unfortunately , some of irs's recordkeeping difficulties we have reported on over the years will not be fully addressed until it can replace its aging systems ; an effort that is long term and , in part , dependent on obtaining future funding . implementation of the following 16 recommendations in table 6 would strengthen irs's recordkeeping abilities . fifteen of these recommendations are short term , and one is long term regarding requirements for new systems for maintaining taxpayer records . irs is responsible for managing a large , complex organization . it employs and must oversee the activities of over 100,000 full - time and seasonal employees , which includes managing related personnel actions . irs is also responsible for overseeing lockbox banks that process tens of thousands of individual receipts totaling hundreds of billions of dollars , monitoring the work of hundreds of contractors and numerous off - site processing facilities , issuing tax refunds , managing tax liens , and preparing financial records . effective management oversight of such large , complex operations is imperative for irs to effectively and efficiently accomplish its mission . implementing the following 17 short term and 1 long term recommendations in table 8 would improve irs's management oversight of its operations . one of these recommendations has remained open for over 10 years , reflecting the complexities of the deficiencies involved in ensuring that tax liens are released timely . internal control standard: activities need to be established to monitor performance measures and indicators . these controls could call for comparisons and assessments relating different sets of data to one another so that analyses of the relationships can be made and appropriate actions taken . controls should also be aimed at validating the propriety and integrity of both organizational and individual performance measures and indicators . irs's operations include a wide range of activities , including educating taxpayers , processing taxpayer receipts and data , disbursing hundreds of billions of dollars in refunds to millions of taxpayers , maintaining extensive information on tens of millions of taxpayers , and seeking collection from individuals and businesses that fail to comply with the nation's tax laws . within its compliance function , irs has numerous activities , including identifying businesses and individuals that underreport income , collecting from taxpayers who do not pay taxes , and collecting from those receiving refunds to which they are not entitled .