attrition modeling . to understand the degree to which attrition is a problem , an agency can estimate the attrition rates it expects in the future , providing a baseline against which to measure the actual attrition it experiences . this allows officials to determine if attrition rates are higher or lower than expected . labor market analysis . to understand the degree to which its attrition is a problem , an agency can evaluate labor market conditions in locations where it operates . such an evaluation can provide context for understanding if an attrition rate is higher than might be expected in those locations . using general labor market data , vba has identified several locations where it faces significant competition from other employers , both public and private . this information could be used to better understand its attrition rate in those locations in the future . however , this information is not based on the actual employment plans of separating employees , and vba does not routinely collect or document this information . according to a vba official , collecting data on where vba's separating employees find employment after vba would be useful for developing a more accurate understanding of the employers with whom vba is competing . vba is taking steps to ensure that attrition data will be available to guide workforce planning . these include the following: comparisons . to understand the degree to which its attrition is a problem , an agency can compare its own attrition to the attrition of other federal agencies , especially to the attrition of agencies with employees who do similar work . while one of vba's special reports did some broad comparisons of vba's attrition to the attrition at other federal agencies , vba has not compared , as we have done , the attrition of newly hired examiners to the attrition of employees in other parts of the federal government with comparable job series . while vba has projected retirement rates for planning purposes , according to vba officials , there was no formal or informal process to estimate the expected attrition rates of the examiners who joined the agency since 1998 . in 2002 , va projected future attrition trends for examiners in a restructuring plan submitted to the office of management and budget , and officials expect to compare these projections to actual attrition rates for examiners in the future . cost analysis . to understand the degree to which attrition is a problem , an agency can estimate the cost of recruiting and training new employees who leave and their replacements . while vba's human resources office conducted a partial estimate of attrition costs in 2001 , this estimate did not include all associated costs ( including one of the most important and potentially expensive , the investment lost when a trained employee leaves ) . first , vba intends to develop a workforce plan , following a workforce policy approved by va in january 2003 . in a related document , va stated its expectation that , in the current economy , attrition among examiners may stabilize . continued monitoring of attrition rates and improved data on reasons for attrition would allow vba to test that assumption .