in its comments ( see app . ii ) , va generally agreed with our conclusions , and either concurred or concurred in principle or in part with our recommendations , as discussed more fully below . va concurred in principle with our first recommendation to ensure accreditation has appropriate staffing and it resources , noting that efforts to increase staff and obtain it resources must be considered within the existing ogc budget . an ogc decision can be appealed to the board of veteran's appeals . attorneys and agents are not allowed to charge or receive a fee for the preparation or initial filing of a claim , but are allowed to charge a fee for services provided after va has decided the claim and a notice of disagreement has been filed initiating an appeal of that decision . va stated that it believes that existing initial knowledge requirements for attorneys and agents adequately ensure that va claimants have qualified representation . acknowledged that additional background information , particularly on agents who are also financial planners , would be useful in informing va's judgment of their character . additional information on our scope and methodology is provided in appendix i . although va is required by law to assist claimants in obtaining the evidence necessary to substantiate a claim for benefits , accreditation helps ensure that claimants have access to qualified representation . by law , only individuals accredited by va can represent claimants in the va claims process . table 1 below describes the three types of individuals that va recognizes as accredited representatives . ogc is required to inform representatives of the nature of their alleged violation and representatives may request a hearing on the matter . for four of these individuals , va received complaints alleging these same individuals charged non - allowable fees for filing claims . of the 21 individuals we conducted background checks on , 10 of them had complaints against them on file with va . the remaining 11 individuals were selected from our sample of 92 attorneys and agents accredited in 2012 . we were able to obtain information on 20 of the 21 individuals in our sample . to this end , ogc staff review accreditation applications and make approval decisions , monitor whether accredited representatives meet ongoing program requirements , and investigate issues and complaints that could lead to a representative having his or her accreditation cancelled or suspended . table 2 describes the initial and ongoing requirements for these representatives . not consistently following up on references: va may be missing opportunities to obtain additional information about applicants by not consistently following up on character references . while attorneys and agents are required to provide references in their accreditation applications , the official who oversees accreditation told us that va contacts references only for agents , which we verified in our review of applications . further , the value of reference letters va receives is questionable as va did not use a standard set of questions or guidance to obtain specific information that should be included in reference letters , such as requesting information on the agents' criminal or employment history . several reference letters we reviewed did not provide substantial information on applicants' ability to assist veterans .