ii. ) funding for the initial implementation of a cloud service can be a significant cost to agencies . for example , officials at state said that the cost of migrating an application to a cloud service poses a challenge in the current budget environment where it budgets are declining . in addition , gsa officials stated that initial implementation requires additional funding that has not been made available . fedramp is a governmentwide program initiated by the office of management and budget to provide joint authorizations and continuous security monitoring services for cloud computing services . fedramp is intended to ( 1 ) ensure that cloud computing services have adequate information security ; ( 2 ) eliminate duplication of effort and reduce risk management costs ; and ( 3 ) enable rapid and cost - effective procurement of information systems / services for federal agencies . dhs reported this service as not being fedramp approved / compliant and said it did not need to be so because the service required a higher level of security — which dhs referred to as a federal information security management act high baseline — than that provided by fedramp . description of service to be provided provide a tool to be used for budget planning and formulation , and performance reporting . the tool also is to provide the means to generate reports to respond to ad hoc queries from congress and other stakeholders about the use of foreign assistance resources . fedramp approved / compliant ? allow program managers of the nonproliferation and disarmament fund access to agency data from any staff work location . provide domestic and overseas agency staff with direct access to information in over 50 databases . the service is also to provide additional functionality including an integrated electronic catalog with other online libraries . support a collaboration and knowledge management environment for the department which includes hosting for servers and applications , and an environment for application development and product testing . provide a grants management system for the department which supports the full life cycle of the federal assistance process . enable the hosting of public web sites for the department of state , including its embassies . provide a web - based travel management service for the department . enable unclassified documents to be available worldwide regarding the history of the department , diplomacy , and foreign relations . provide application services for the department , including application integration . support the department's centralized electronic forms program . provide support for a key departmental financial management system's ( the joint financial management system ) continuity of operations component . description of service to be provided support the executive secretariat's continuity of operations planning . provide departmental personnel with the capability to remotely access e - mail worldwide . provide the department's bureau of diplomatic security with an enterprise service operations center . description of service to be provided provide financial management services to the department via a web - enabled , integrated , accounting , budgeting , procurement , and reporting commercial off - the - shelf system .