we will report on the results of these reviews later this year . although tsa successfully met its mandate to establish a federal screener workforce by november 2002 , it continues to face challenges in hiring and deploying passenger and baggage screeners . to accomplish its security mission , tsa needs a sufficient number of passenger and baggage screeners trained and certified in tsa security procedures and technologies . tsa has acknowledged that its initial staffing efforts created imbalances in the screener workforce and is taking steps to address these imbalances . however , staffing shortages at some airports and tsa's hiring process have hindered the ability of some fsds to fully staff screening checkpoints without using additional measures , such as overtime and the use of a national screening force . tsa accomplished a significant goal by hiring and deploying more than 55,000 passenger and baggage screeners by november 19 , 2002 . however , tsa continues to struggle to maintain an adequate number of screeners at airport checkpoints , and has not yet achieved a stable screener workforce . recognizing these difficulties , tsa has taken several steps to address staffing imbalances — including enhancing its workforce planning efforts , and deploying a national screening force to airports with pressing screening needs . after meeting its deadline of deploying over 55,000 screeners by november 19 , 2002 , tsa recognized that its initial efforts created imbalances in the screener workforce , as some airports had too many screeners while others had too few . to address these imbalances , as well as congressional concerns regarding screener - staffing levels , tsa began attempting to right - size its screener workforce . specifically , tsa established a goal to reduce its screener workforce by 3,000 screeners by june 1 , 2003 , and an additional 3,000 screeners by september 30 , 2003 . these reductions were achieved through attrition , voluntary transfers from full to part - time , and involuntary transfers to part - time or terminations based on screeners' scores on competency - based examinations . currently , a congressionally imposed staffing cap prohibits tsa from exceeding a screener staffing level of 45,000 full - time equivalents ( fte ) . figure 1 shows that based on annualized fte data , tsa is currently below the 45,000 cap . according to tsa officials , tsa has experienced an average annual attrition rate of 14 percent for screeners . however , attrition among the nation's more than 440 commercial airports is sometimes considerably higher . for example , at 8 category x airports visited during our review , fsds reported that average annual attrition ranged from 15 to 36 percent . the goal of these efforts is to make the hiring process more responsive to the wide range of airports' needs while ensuring efficiency and quality . we will continue to review these initiatives as part of our ongoing review of tsa's process for hiring and deploying passenger and baggage screeners . tsa has taken steps to enhance its training programs for passenger and baggage screeners . however , staffing shortages and lack of high - speed connectivity at airport training facilities have made it difficult for screeners to fully utilize these programs .