( see fig . 6 for an example of an in - store counter card featuring the semipostals. ) in contrast , although the design of the stop family violence stamp won an international award , and the story behind the design was described as inspiring by some advocacy groups , advocates with such organizations as the family violence prevention fund and the national network to end domestic violence questioned how likely postal customers would be to buy the stamp to use on their mail , given the image of a crying child . in addition , the semipostal's design and information provided by the service on in - store materials are less clear regarding how semipostal proceeds are to be used,referring to both domestic and family violence , which are viewed by some as separate causes . both the breast cancer research and heroes of 2001 stamps had extensive service advertising campaigns . the service spent nearly $900,000 to advertise the breast cancer research stamp and more than $1.1 million for the heroes of 2001 stamp . this advertising included a billboard in times square for the breast cancer research stamp and a national print advertising campaign for the heroes of 2001 stamp . the service also received the gold “reggie” award from the promotion marketing association for the service's efforts in promoting the breast cancer research stamp . as the result of an overall reduction in the service's budget , advertising for all stamps , including semipostals , has been limited to in - store messaging since 2003 . as a consequence , service officials determined that all funds spent to advertise semipostals would be deducted from the totals raised through their sales . this policy change had a marked impact on promotional activities for the stop family violence stamp , which was issued in october 2003 . while advertising costs associated with the breast cancer research and heroes of 2001 stamps had been paid by the service , all advertising costs for the stop family violence stamp were to be deducted from the stamp's proceeds . in light of these limitations , the service met with hhs before the stop family violence stamp was issued . at this meeting the service proposed spending $1.5 million or more on an advertising campaign that would be funded by the future semipostal proceeds . because of uncertainty about how much money would be raised through sales of the stop family violence stamp , hhs decided that the proposed advertising campaign not be pursued . in lieu of such a campaign , the service and hhs looked to the advocacy groups to promote the semipostal . the service and hhs officials met with advocacy group representatives and provided them with examples of the types of promotional activities that breast cancer advocacy groups had done to help publicize the breast cancer research stamp and a poster for use in promotional activities . through march 31 , 2005 , the service spent about $77,000 to advertise the stop family violence stamp , and this amount was recovered from semipostal proceeds . table 3 provides examples of service promotional efforts and partnerships in support of the semipostals .