bonding . a number of bonding strategies — including tax - exempt bonds , private activity bonds , grant anticipation revenue vehicles ( garvee ) bonds , and grant anticipation notes ( gan ) — offer flexibility to bridge funding gaps when traditional revenue sources are scarce . for example , state - issued garvee or gan bonds provide capital in advance of expected federal funds , allowing states to accelerate highway and transit project construction and thus potentially reduce construction costs . to what extent is funding linked to performance ? to what extent does the proposal include provisions for holding stakeholders accountable for achieving results ? we have previously reported that the effectiveness of any overall federal program design can be increased by promoting and facilitating the use of the best tools and approaches to improve results and emphasize return on investment . importantly , given the projected growth in federal deficits , constrained state and local budgets , and looming social security and medicare spending commitments , the resources available for discretionary programs will be more limited — making it imperative to maximize the national public benefits of any federal investment through a rigorous examination of the use of such funds . a number of specific tools and approaches can be used to improve results and return on investment including using economic analysis , such as benefit - cost analysis , in project selection ; requiring grantees to conduct post - project evaluations ; creating incentives to better utilize existing infrastructure ; providing states and localities with greater flexibility to use certain tools , such as tolling and congestion pricing ; and requiring maintenance - of - effort provisions in grants . using these tools and approaches could help surface transportation programs more directly address national transportation priorities . the following illustrative questions can be used to determine the extent to which proposals to restructure and fund surface transportation programs employ the best tools and approaches to improve results and emphasize return on investment . to what extent do the proposals consider how costs and revenues will be shared among federal , state , local , and private stakeholders ? to what extent do the proposals address the need better to align fees and taxes with use and benefits ? to what extent are trade - offs between efficiency and equity considered ? do the tools and approaches align with the level of federal involvement in a given policy area ? to what extent do the proposals provide flexibility and incentives for state and local governments to choose the most appropriate tool in the toolbox ? our previous work has shown that transportation funding , and the highway trust fund in particular , faces an imbalance of revenues and expenditures and other threats to its long term sustainability . furthermore , the sustainability of transportation funding should also be seen in the context of the broader , governmentwide problem of fiscal imbalance . the federal role in transportation funding must be reexamined to ensure that it is sustainable in this new fiscal reality . a sustainable surface transportation program will require targeted investment , with adequate return on investment , from not only the federal government but also state and local governments and the private sector .