the restructuring was not the only major modification to the fcs program . because of congressional concerns that the army's contracting approach incorporated insufficient safeguards to protect the government's interests , the army is preparing a new contract that is to be completed and finalized in late march 2006 and is based on the federal acquisition regulation , which governs acquisitions within the federal government . the new contract will incorporate standard federal acquisition regulation clauses such as those relating to procurement integrity , truth in negotiations , and cost accounting standards . previously , the lead systems integrator had been performing fcs work for the army under a contractual instrument called an “other transaction agreement” that was not subject to the federal acquisition regulation . the other transaction agreement gave the army considerable flexibility to negotiate the terms and conditions for contractors involved in fcs development . the army's purpose for using such an agreement was to encourage innovation and to use its wide latitude in tailoring business , organizational , and technical relationships to achieve the program goals . in april 2005 , the army decided to incorporate into its agreement the procurement integrity , truth in negotiations , and cost accounting standards clauses from the regulation . after congress raised questions about the army using an other transaction agreement for the development of a program as large and risky as fcs and about the army's choice not to include standard federal acquisition regulation clauses in the agreement , the secretary of the army directed that the other transaction agreement be converted to a federal acquisition regulation - based contract . i would be happy to answer any questions you or members of the subcommittee may have . for future questions about this statement , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 4841 . individuals making key contributions to this statement include robert l. ackley , noah b. bleicher , lily j. chin , randolfo e. deleon , marcus c. ferguson , william r. graveline , michael j. hesse , guisseli reyes , john p. swain , and carrie r. wilson . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the fcs acquisition schedule indicates several key issues: the program did not have the basic knowledge needed for program start in 2003 . while the preliminary design review normally occurs at or near the start of product development , the army has scheduled it in fiscal year 2008 , about 5 years after the start of product development . we attended or reviewed the results of the fcs system - of - systems functional review , in - process reviews , board of directors reviews , and multiple system demonstrations . in our assessment of the fcs , we used the knowledge - based acquisition practices drawn from our large body of past work as well as dod's acquisition policy and the experiences of other programs .