individual accounts . these fully funded accounts are administered either by employers or the government or designated third parties . the level of retirement benefits depends largely on the amount of each person's contributions into the account during their working life , investment earnings , and the amount of fees they are required to pay . we are applying gao's social security reform criteria to the experiences of countries that are members of the oecd as well as chile , which pioneered individual accounts in 1981 . we are assessing both the extent to which another country's circumstances are similar enough to those in the u.s. to provide a useful example and the extent to which particular approaches to pension reform were considered to be successful . countries have different starting points , including unique economic and political environments . moreover availability of other sources of retirement income , such as occupation - based pensions , varies greatly . recognizing this , gao uses three criteria for evaluating pension reforms: financing sustainable solvency . we are looking at the extent to which particular reforms influence the funds available to pay benefits and how the reforms affect the ability of the economy , the government's budget , and national savings to support the program on a continuing basis . balancing equity and adequacy . we are examining the relative balance struck between the goals of allowing individuals to receive a fair return on their contributions and ensuring an adequate level of benefits to prevent dependency and poverty . implementing and administering reforms . we are considering how easily a reform is implemented and administered and how the public is educated concerning the reform . because each country is introducing reforms in a unique demographic , economic , and political context these factors will likely affect reform choices and outcomes . for instance , several european countries we are reviewing have strong occupation - based pension programs that contribute to retirement income security . in addition , some countries had more generous national pensions and other programs supporting the elderly than others . all countries also provide benefits for survivors and the disabled ; often these are funded separately from old age benefit programs . some countries are carrying out reforms against a backdrop of broader national change . for example , hungary and poland were undergoing large political and economic transformations as they reformed their national pension systems . all of these issues should be considered when drawing lessons . in addition to the adjustments that countries have made to their existing payg systems , many countries have undergone other changes as well , indicating that change may not be a one - time experience . ( see table 1. ) understanding the outcomes of a country's reform requires us to look at all of the changes a country has made . the experiences of the countries that have adjusted their existing payg national pension programs highlight the importance of considering how modifications will affect the program's financial sustainability , its distribution of benefits , the incentives it creates , and the extent to which the public understands the new provisions .