economic mobility varies by location . one study found that areas within the united states offer disparate opportunities , with some localities supporting higher rates of economic mobility than others ( see fig . in particular , counties in the southeastern united states were found to have lower levels of economic mobility than counties in the rural midwest . another study found that a child's neighborhood has a statistically significant effect on life chances , and that growing up in a low - income , metropolitan neighborhood has a strong negative effect on future earnings . conversely , growing up in an affluent neighborhood can have almost as large an impact on future earnings as completing a bachelor's degree . specific neighborhood characteristics drive differing rates of economic mobility . several researchers linked economic mobility to certain area and neighborhood characteristics , including rates of poverty , racial segregation , economic inequality , the proportion of single - parent households , and school quality . researchers identified racial segregation as a neighborhood characteristic broadly associated with lower mobility . one study found that economic segregation is also negatively associated with economic mobility . one study identified three neighborhood characteristics that are correlated with a weaker relationship between race and mobility: low poverty rates , a high percentage of low - income black fathers present , and low levels of racial bias among whites . according to this study , neighborhoods with these characteristics had higher mobility for black boys and a relatively small black - white mobility gap . the effects of geography on future earnings vary by race , socioeconomic status , and gender . the effects of race and neighborhood characteristics on economic mobility are related and hard to disentangle . for example , one study found that black boys have lower incomes in adulthood than white boys who grow up in the same neighborhood in 99 percent of census tracts , even when accounting for income . this highlights the effect of race on economic mobility when children face the same neighborhood conditions . conversely , the same study also found that 4.2 percent of black children grow up in neighborhoods with the characteristics associated with higher levels of mobility , compared to 62.5 percent of white children . this is in line with another study that found that neighborhoods can amplify racial inequality across generations . another study notes that hispanic and black children tend to live in neighborhoods with low mobility for those of their racial group , whereas white children tend to live in neighborhoods with higher mobility rates for whites . neighborhood effects can also vary by socioeconomic status and gender . regarding socioeconomic status , one study found that place may matter less for children from higher - income families , as they may be better able to insulate themselves from the effects of local conditions ( eg , by switching to private schools if public schools are weak. ) regarding gender , the same study finds that neighborhood matters more for boys than girls . across studies , common themes emerged that suggest millennials might not have the same level of economic mobility enjoyed by their parents' generation .