these changes will not be easy to make . they require dod to reexamine the entirety of its acquisition process — what we think of as the “big a” . this includes making deep - seated changes to program requirements setting , funding , and execution . it also involves changing how dod views success , and what is necessary to achieve success . the first , and most important , step is implementing a revised dod - wide investment strategy for weapons systems . in a recent study on program management best practices , we recommended that dod determine the priority order of needed capabilities based on assessments of the resources — that is dollars , technologies , time , and people needed to achieve these capabilities . we also recommended that capabilities not designated as a priority should be set out separately as desirable but not funded unless resources were both available and sustainable . dod's under secretary of defense for acquisition technology and logistics — dod's corporate leader for acquisition — should develop this strategy in concert with other senior leaders , for example , combatant commanders who would provide input on user needs ; dod's comptroller ; science and technology leaders , who would provide input on available resources ; and acquisition executives from the military services , who could propose solutions . finally , once priority decisions are made , congress will need to enforce discipline through various authorization and appropriation decisions . once dod has prioritized capabilities , it should work vigorously to make sure each new program is executable before the acquisition begins . this is the “little a.” more specifically , this means assuring requirements are clearly defined and achievable given available resources and that all alternatives have been considered . today we are at a key crossroad . in the next few decades , the nation will be struggling with a large and growing structural deficit . at the same time , however , weapons programs are commanding larger budgets as dod undertakes increasingly ambitious efforts to transform its ability to address current and potential future conflicts . these costly current and planned acquisitions are running head - on into the nation's unsustainable fiscal path . in the past 5 years , dod has doubled its planned investments in weapons systems , but this huge increase has not been accompanied by more stability , better outcomes , or more buying power for the acquisition dollar . rather than showing appreciable improvement , programs are experiencing recurring problems with cost overruns , missed deadlines , and performance shortfalls . as i have testified previously , our nation is on an imprudent and unsustainable fiscal path . budget simulations by gao , the congressional budget office , and others show that , over the long term , we face a large and growing structural deficit due primarily to known demographic trends , rising health care costs , and lower federal revenues as a percentage of the economy . continuing on this path will gradually erode , if not suddenly damage , our economy , our standard of living , and ultimately our national security .