( see fig . according to rrb's guidance , factors such as age and work experience may also affect how and when rrb classifies a beneficiary as mine , or whether it should schedule ( or “diary” ) a cdr . rrb maintains a list of scheduled cdrs in its cdr call - up program . it uses this program to both identify cdrs that require completion and to schedule cdrs based on the likelihood of medical improvement . rrb also started conducting cdrs in 2015 that target cases at high risk of potential fraud and which officials said could result in the termination of benefits . in addition to medical reviews , rrb conducts earnings cdrs for beneficiaries detected with earnings that exceed disability program limits . most earnings cdrs are triggered by unreported earnings detected through rrb's policing operation . policing for earnings involves an annual data match by ssa in which it uses rrb's disability beneficiary database and internal revenue service ( irs ) earnings data to detect unreported earnings . ( see fig . in this process , rrb provides ssa with a record of all disability beneficiaries , and ssa matches these beneficiaries against irs earnings data . for those cases in which earnings are identified , rrb has an earnings reconciliation process to determine which beneficiaries may be excluded from an earnings cdr and which should receive one . for example , rrb considers whether a beneficiary has any disability - related work expenses , such as the cost of special transportation or medication , which are deducted from any earnings , or if the beneficiary has reached full retirement age . ( see fig . in addition , a beneficiary who returns to work or has earnings from employment is required to report that information to rrb , and the agency may initiate a cdr depending on the circumstances . if a potential overpayment is identified as a result of a cdr , the disability benefits division refers the case to another division within rrb to calculate the overpayment amount . over the 3 years for which rrb was able to provide us with complete data , the agency completed 427 cdrs . this number represents cdrs for slightly more than 1 percent of the railroad workers who received disability benefits during that period , an average of about 35,000 , including both occupational and t&p beneficiaries . most of the reviews it completed from fiscal years 2014 through 2016 were medical cdrs , but earnings cdrs identified most of the ineligible beneficiaries and overpayments . however , earnings cdrs that were conducted may identify additional overpayments but rrb is slow to calculate overpayments . we determined that the overpayment data rrb provided for cdrs completed during 2014-2016 were incomplete . for example , a case file review of six randomly selected earnings cdrs completed in fiscal year 2016 found that in three of the cases , the retirement and survivor benefits division ( rsbd ) , the office responsible for calculating overpayments , had not calculated the overpayments identified by those 2016 reviews as of july 2017 .