evasion . some taxpayers may use virtual economies and currencies as a way to evade taxes . because transactions can be difficult to trace and many virtual economies and currencies offer some level of anonymity , taxpayers may use them to hide taxable income . because of the limited reliable data available on their size , it is difficult to determine how significant virtual economy and currency markets may be or how much tax revenue is at risk through their usage . some experts with whom we spoke indicated that there is potential for growth in the use of virtual currencies . additionally , the european central bank recently issued a report on virtual currencies , acknowledging their potential for future growth and interaction with the real economy . if the use of virtual economies and currencies expands , it can be expected that associated revenue at risk of tax noncompliance will grow . ยง 6050w and applicable regulations define third - party payment networks . 14european central bank , virtual currency schemes ( frankfurt am main , germany: october 2012 ) . irs has assessed the tax compliance risks from virtual economies and virtual currencies used within those economies , and developed a plan to address them in a manner consistent with internal control standards . beginning in 2007 , irs's electronic business and emerging issues ( ebei ) policy group identified and surveyed internal and external information sources , gathered data on the industry , and collect trend information , among other efforts . ebei determined that virtual economies presented opportunities for income underreporting and developed ( 1 ) a potential compliance strategy , including initiating a compliance improvement project to gather research data and analyze compliance trends , and ( 2 ) a potential action plan for specific compliance activities . according to irs compliance officials , irs ultimately decided not to pursue these actions in light of available irs resources and other higher priority needs . also , irs did not find strong evidence of the potential for tax noncompliance related to virtual economies , such as the number of u.s. taxpayers involved in such activity or the amount of federal tax revenue at risk . however , in november 2009 , based on ebei having determined the need , irs posted information on its website on the tax consequences of virtual economy transactions . the web page points out that , in general , taxpayers can receive income in the form of money , property , or services from a virtual economy , and that if taxpayers receive more income than they spend , they may be required to report their gains as taxable income . the page further states that irs has provided guidance on the tax treatment of issues similar to online gaming activities , including bartering , gambling , business , and hobby income , and provides links to irs publications on those topics . irs officials who were involved in issuing this guidance reported it cost less to make an online statement pointing taxpayers to existing guidance than it would have cost to develop and publish new guidance specific to virtual economies .