gao - 06-15 . washington , d.c.: october 21 , 2005 . ( see fig . the clinical facility would house operating rooms , imaging , and pathology laboratories , among other things , that would be shared by va , uch , and dod . with this concept in hand , va , uch , and dod began discussions about the availability of land adjacent to the uch inpatient pavilion for the federal tower . in august 2004 , the uch president estimated that 18 acres of land was available adjacent to the uch facility for the federal tower . however , soon thereafter , a survey of the land indicated that approximately 12 acres were available for the federal tower once easements and setbacks were taken into account . in december 2004 , in a letter to uch , the secretary stated that the approximate 12 acres would be insufficient to meet va's space requirements for a new medical center . specifically , the secretary stated that predesign planning for the new facility revealed that va needed approximately 1.46 million square feet to meet the specialized needs of veterans and dod patients . to accommodate these space requirements , va's architectural firm outlined three design options — ranging from a 6- story va hospital on 38 acres to a 8- to 10-story va hospital on 20 acres . based on this analysis and other considerations , the secretary concluded that va needed about 38 acres on the fitzsimons campus for the joint va - dod facility . this decision ended negotiations over building the federal tower on uch - leased land and connecting it to uch's inpatient pavilion with a clinical facility . uch subsequently decided to use the land adjacent to the inpatient pavilion for other purposes . after land negotiations with uch ended , va officials began looking for a new location on the fitzsimons site for a stand - alone va medical center . the conference report accompanying va's appropriation act for fiscal year 2004 directed va to continue efforts to “co - locate the denver va medical center with … at the fitzsimons campus.”while there is no statutory requirement to locate the va medical center at fitzsimons , va considers this language in the conference report to express the will of congress and , as a result , has gone forward with efforts to purchase property from fra for such a purpose . in july 2005 , va signed a memorandum of understanding with fra to set forth the conditions under which va and fra will proceed with discussions that may lead to the purchase and conveyance of about 40 acres located on the southeast corner of the fitzsimons campus . ( see fig . according to fra officials , this piece of land is currently owned by fra and three other entities . according to a va official , in february 2006 , va offered fra $16.50 per square foot for the fra - owned portion of the land . ( va is in the process of surveying the land to determine the total square footage. )