dod identified strategic airlift as an example of an excess . while the mcrs - 16 showed that there was unused capacity associated with strategic airlift , it was not clear from the study whether this unused capacity could serve as an operational reserve . if the study had clearly identified an excess in strategic lift capabilities , decision makers may have chosen to retire aircraft and reallocate resources to other priorities or to keep an operational reserve to militate against unforeseen events . similarly , if the study had identified a shortfall in strategic lift capabilities , decision makers may have chosen to accept the operational risk or sought to address the shortfall by increasing capabilities . dod has not taken action based on our recommendation , but we continue to believe that explicitly identifying the shortfalls and excesses in mobility systems is useful to decision makers in making programmatic decisions . the mcrs - 16 also did not clearly achieve its study objective to provide assessing risk related to shortfalls and excesses is risk assessments.important — the risk associated with shortfalls is that the mission might not be accomplished , while the risk associated with excesses is that resources may be expended unnecessarily on a mobility capability . however , the mcrs - 16 did not include risk assessments of airlift systems . for example , the mcrs - 16 showed potential excesses in strategic and intratheater aircraft but did not identify the risk associated with these potential excesses . furthermore , the mcrs - 16 identified a reduced intratheater airlift fleet ( 401 c - 130s ) in comparison with the previous fleet ( a maximum of 674 c - 130s ) , but it did not describe the level of risk associated with this reduced fleet size . the study was driven by strategy current at the time . the study scope included , among other things , the way changes in mobility systems affect the outcomes of major operations and an assessment of the associated risks . mcrs - 16 had several objectives , including to determine capability shortfalls ( gaps ) and excessesmobility force structure , provide a risk assessment , and identify the capabilities and requirements to support national strategy . ( overlaps ) associated with programmed in order to assess mobility capabilities , dod officials responsible for the mcrs - 16 used three cases to evaluate a broad spectrum of military operations that could be used to inform decisions regarding future mobility capabilities . global leadership: priorities for 21st century defense . in the past , dod has translated strategic guidance into specific planning scenarios , which it has used in studies ( such as the mcrs - 16 ) to generate requirements that inform force structure decisions . campaign and respond to a case 3: u.s. forces conduct a large land campaign against the backdrop of an ongoing long - term irregular warfare respond to three nearly simultaneous homeland defense events . irregular warfare is a violent struggle among state and nonstate actors for legitimacy and influence over the relevant population ( s ) . required , a potential shortfall would exist and there could be a risk that the mission might not be accomplished .