in the remaining areas , a network is not required . dod requires that contractors have a sufficient number and mix of providers , both primary care and specialists , necessary to satisfy the needs of beneficiaries enrolled in the prime option . specifically , it is the responsibility of the contractors to ensure that the network has at least one full - time equivalent pcm for every 2,000 tricare prime enrollees and one full - time equivalent provider ( both pcms and specialists ) for every 1,200 tricare prime enrollees . in addition , dod has access - to - care standards that are designed to ensure that prime beneficiaries receive timely care . mtfs supply most of the health care services tricare beneficiaries receive . tricare faces new challenges in ensuring that its civilian network can provide adequate access to care that complements the capabilities of mtfs . in 2003 , dod will award new contracts for the delivery of care in the civilian network . as a result , the providers who choose to participate may change , while those who remain will operate under new policies and procedures . during this time , tricare is still responsible for ensuring that its civilian network provides adequate access to care , even if the provider for some beneficiaries' care is changed . tricare also faces beneficiary and provider dissatisfaction with its existing civilian network . during april 2002 , testimony before the house armed services committee , subcommittee on personnel , beneficiary groups described problems with access to care from tricare's civilian providers . we found that out of the 2,156 providers who left one contractor's network during a 1-year period , 900 providers cited reasons for leaving . only 10 percent of these providers identified low reimbursement rates as a factor and only 1 percent cited administrative burdens . also , providers testified about their dissatisfaction with the tricare program , specifying low reimbursement rates and administrative burdens . additionally , in some instances , tricare officials and contractors have reported difficulties in recruiting providers into the tricare prime network because in some areas providers will not join managed care programs . for example , contractor network data indicate that there have been long - standing provider shortages in tricare in areas such as eastern new mexico , where the lead agent stated that the providers in that area have repeatedly refused to join any network . finally , dod does not systematically collect and analyze beneficiary complaints , which might assist in identifying inadequacies in the tricare civilian provider network . dod and its contractors have reported three factors that may contribute to potential network inadequacy: geographic location , low reimbursement rates , and administrative requirements . however , the information the contractors provide to dod is not sufficient to measure the extent to which the tricare civilian provider network is inadequate . while reimbursement rates and administrative requirements may have created dissatisfaction among providers , it is not clear that these factors have resulted in insufficient numbers of providers in the network . the new contracts , which are expected to be awarded in june 2003 , may result in improved network participation by addressing some network providers' concerns about administrative requirements .