this project is being terminated . a new performance measurement baseline with associated cost and schedule variances will be submitted for omb approval . ii ) . in these comments , omb stated that it appreciated our careful review of omb's process for identifying and overseeing high risk projects . however , the agency disagreed with our recommendations and made other observations . in its comments , omb stated that it is concerned about our interpretation of the goals and intent of the high risk process in comparison to gao's high risk list . we contacted agency officials when necessary for follow - up information . we then analyzed the agencies' responses . moreover , we identified and reviewed prior gao reports on projects with weaknesses that met omb's high risk definition . finally , to gain insight into omb's processes and procedures to oversee the high risk list , we reviewed related policy guidance , including its memorandum on improving it project planning and execution ( m - 05-23 , dated august 4 , 2005 ) , and the clinger - cohen act . we also interviewed omb staff including the chief of the information technology and policy branch . to address the third objective , we interviewed omb staff who are responsible for developing and monitoring the high risk list and management watch list , including the chief of the information technology and policy branch . in addition , we reviewed our prior work on omb's management watch list , ( gao - 05-276 ) , to better understand the processes for placing projects on the management watch list and following up on their corrective actions . finally , we requested information from the 24 cfo agencies on which of their high risk projects were also on the management watch list . two of the 24 agencies did not identify how many of their high risk projects were also on the management watch list . we conducted our work in washington , d.c. , from october 2005 through may 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . fy2005 actuals ( in millions ) millions ) millions ) unclear baselines , schedule variance not within 10 percent , and qualified project manager is not in place . component agency has 20 people currently enrolled in project management training and revising business case . the investment has been elevated to the undersecretary level to address management issues . fy2005 actuals ( in millions ) millions ) millions ) unclear baselines , schedule variance not within 10 percent , and qualified project manager is not in place . revising business case and addressing project management issues . component agency has signed agreements for conversion to enterprise human resource integration . a=the agency has not consistently demonstrated the ability to manage complex projects . b=the project has exceptionally high development , operating , or maintenance costs , either in absolute terms or as a percentage of the agency's total it portfolio . c=the project is being undertaken to correct recognized deficiencies in the adequate performance of an essential mission program or function of the agency , a component of the agency , or another organization .