● it investment management . an agency should establish and follow a portfolio - based approach to investment management in which it investments are selected , controlled , and monitored from an agencywide perspective . in this way , investment decisions are linked to an organization's strategic objectives and business plans . such an approach helps ensure that agencies allocate their resources effectively . in 2008 , we evaluated ssa's investment management approach and found that it was largely consistent with leading investment management practices . ssa had established most practices needed to manage its projects as investments ; however it had not applied its process to all of its investments . for example , ssa had not applied its investment management process to a major portion of its it budget . we recommended that for full accountability , ssa should manage its full it development and acquisitions budget through its investment management board . specific access controls could include means to verify personnel identification and authorization . further , because a data center is the backbone of an organization's operations and service delivery , continuity of operations is a key concern . data centers need to be designed with the ability to efficiently provide consistent processing of operations . ● it strategic planning . a foundation for effective modernization , strategic planning is vital to create an agency's it vision or roadmap and help align its information resources with its business strategies and investment decisions . an it strategic plan , which might include the mission of the agency , key business processes , it challenges , and guiding principles , is important to enable an agency to consider the resources , including human , infrastructure , and funding , that are needed to manage , support , and pay for projects . for example , a strategic plan that identifies interdependencies within and across modernization projects helps ensure that these are understood and managed , so that projects — and thus system solutions — are effectively integrated . given that the new data center is to form the backbone of ssa's automated operations , it is important that the agency identify goals , resources , and dependencies in the context of its strategic vision . ● enterprise architecture . an enterprise architecture consists of models that describe ( in both business and technology terms ) how an entity operates today and how it intends to operate in the future ; it also includes a plan for transitioning to this future state . more specifically , it describes the enterprise in logical terms ( such as interrelated business processes and business rules , information needs and flows , and work locations and users ) as well as in technical terms ( such as hardware , software , data , communications , and security attributes and performance standards ) . it provides these perspectives both for the enterprise's current environment and for its target environment , as well as a transition plan for moving from one to the other . in short , it is a blueprint for organizational change . for example , projects funded under the act are to avoid unnecessary delays and cost overruns and are to achieve specific program outcomes and improved results on broader economic indicators .