cost sharing . mortgage holders and investors will be required to take the first loss in reducing the borrower's monthly payments to no more than 38 percent of the borrower's income . for non - gse loans , treasury will then use tarp funds to match further reductions on a dollar - for - dollar basis , down to the target of 31 percent of the borrower's gross monthly income . the modified monthly payment is fixed for 5 years or until the loan is paid off , whichever is earlier , as long as the borrower remains in good standing with the program . after 5 years , investors no longer receive payments for cost sharing , and the borrowers' interest rate may increase by 1 percent a year to a cap of the freddie mac rate for 30-year fixed rate loans as of the date that the modification agreement was prepared , and the borrower's payments would increase to accommodate the increase in interest rate . the interest rate and monthly payments are then fixed for the remainder of the loan . standardized net present value ( npv ) model . the npv model compares expected cash flows from a modified loan to the same loan with no modification , based on certain assumptions . if the expected investor cash flow with a modification is greater than the expected cash flow without a modification , the loan servicer is required to modify the loan . according to treasury , the npv model increases mortgage investors' confidence that modifications under hamp are in their best financial interests and helps ensure that borrowers are treated consistently under the program by providing a transparent and externally derived objective standard for all loan servicers to follow . standardized waterfall . servicers must follow a sequential modification process to reduce payments as close to 31 percent of gross monthly income as possible . servicers must first capitalize accrued interest and certain expenses paid to third parties and add this amount to the loan balance ( principal ) amount . next , interest rates must be reduced in increments of one - eighth percent until the 31 percent debt - to - income target is reached , but servicers may not reduce interest rates below 2 percent . if the interest rate reduction does not result in a debt - to - income ratio of 31 percent , servicers must then extend the maturity and / or amortization period of the loan in 1-month increments up to 40 years . finally , if the debt - to - income ratio is still over 31 percent , the servicer must forbear , or defer , principal until the payment is reduced to the 31-percent target . servicers may also forgive mortgage principal at any step of the process to achieve the target monthly payment ratio of 31 percent , provided that principal reduction is allowed by the investor . incentive payment structure .