b . executive branch reporting and information — summary annual report and statement of fiscal sustainability summary annual report: one of the things i am proudest of from my tenure as a public trustee for social security and medicare is the creation of a summary report to accompany the annual trustees report . this summary report presents key information in a way more accessible to the press and lay reader . i believe it has contributed to improved understanding about the condition of these programs . then why should we consider restoration of statutory paygo ? the obvious answer ties to enforcement and duration: it may be easier to waive a rule than ignore a law , and a law can carry a penalty designed to encourage compliance . i will defer to director orszag and some of the technical experts on the next panel as to the details of how any sequester or enforcement mechanism should be designed . however , i will note that it should be unpleasant enough to encourage compliance but not so draconian as to be implausible . the goal of any penalty should be to encourage compliance , not to encourage avoidance or merely impose the penalty . as i have said before , when you are in a hole , the first thing to do is stop digging . discretionary caps and paygo are designed to stop the digging . there are two reasons to impose paygo on both the direct spending and the revenue side of the budget . the first is obvious — both affect the bottom line . the second — and perhaps as important — is that applying paygo only to spending is likely to lead to more programs being designed as tax preferences . tax preferences are like a form of back door spending . as a result , they need to be subject to additional transparency and controls as well . we have previously reported on these tax expenditures , which are often aimed at policy goals similar to those of federal spending programs . revenues forgone through tax expenditures — unless offset by increased taxes or lower spending — increase the unified budget deficit and federal borrowing from the public ( or reduce the unified budget surplus available to reduce debt held by the public ) . unlike discretionary spending programs , which are subject to periodic reauthorization and annual appropriation , tax expenditures are — like entitlement programs — permanent law and generally not subject to a recurring legislative process that would ensure systematic annual or periodic review . bea's statutory paygo regime applied to both mandatory spending and revenues — and so limited the ability to create or expand either spending entitlements or tax expenditures unless offsetting funds could be raised . since tax provisions are not as visible in the budget as spending programs , there is already some incentive to use tax provisions rather than spending programs to accomplish programmatic ends ; imposing controls on spending programs but not on tax provisions would only increase this incentive . it would be an unfortunate consequence if the restoration of the paygo rule were to lead to an increase in the portion of the budget on automatic pilot and therefore reduce both transparency and control .