, received benefits from injury until death ) . we have identified several weaknesses in these areas . most recently , in april 2013 , we found examples of improper payments and indicators of potential fraud in the feca program , which could be attributed , in part , to oversight and data - access issues . we also found that feca program requirements allow claimants to receive earnings , and earnings increases , without necessarily resulting in adjustment of feca compensation . we recommended that the secretary of labor assess the feasibility of developing a cost - effective mechanism to share feca compensation information with states . labor agreed with the recommendation and stated that it will undertake a review to determine whether such data sharing and reporting is feasible . our simulations of the effects of compensating non - usps and usps total - disability beneficiaries at the single rate ( regardless of the presence of dependents ) of either 66-2 / 3 or 70 percent of wages at injury , reduced the median wage replacement rates . median wage replacement rates overall , and within the subgroups we examined , were generally lower under the 66-2 / 3 percent compensation proposal . compared to the current feca program , both proposals reduced 2010 median wage replacement rates for total - disability non - usps and usps beneficiaries , as shown in figure 1 . the decreases in the overall median wage replacement rates were due to the greater proportion of beneficiaries who had a dependent — 73 percent of non - usps beneficiaries and 71 percent of usps beneficiaries . beneficiaries with a dependent received lower compensation under both proposals whereas beneficiaries without a dependent saw their compensation increase or stay the same . as shown in the middle group of bars in figure 1 , the results of our simulation indicate that median wage replacement rates for usps beneficiaries were generally higher than those for non - usps beneficiaries . in both cases , the wage replacement rates account for missed income growth , as they are simulated based on 2010 take - home pay . all else equal , feca beneficiaries who would have experienced more income growth — from the time of injury through 2010 — had lower wage replacement rates than did those beneficiaries who would have experienced less income growth absent their injury . in general , usps beneficiaries missed less income growth due to their injury than did non - usps beneficiaries . consequentially , usps beneficiaries had higher wage replacement rates than non - usps beneficiaries . for example , 4 out of 5 usps beneficiaries in our analysis would have had less than 10 percent income growth had they never been injured . in contrast , 2 out of 5 non - usps beneficiaries would have had less than 10 percent income growth , absent an injury . under our simulations , both proposals increased the difference in wage replacement rates between beneficiaries with and without a dependent , increasing the magnitude and reversing the direction of the difference in median wage replacement rates , as shown in figure 2 .