in no way have we questioned the merits of top . at the same time , we identified basic data limitations in fms's barring delinquent debtors program that limit fms's ability to fully meet the dcia debtor bar provision . fms's response to our draft report indicates it is not willing to invest in efforts to improve the capability of an initiative that could address the specific legislative requirement and concurrently help upgrade the overall federal internal control environment for minimizing abuses stemming from delinquent federal debtors applying for and receiving additional federal financial assistance . with regard to its three main arguments for not pursuing the enhancement of data availability through the top system , fms did not present an alternative that would fully achieve what the law requires . we believe that a first step in deciding the scope of an enhancement effort would reasonably entail assessing the costs and benefits of factors such as those fms used in commenting on our recommendations . among these would be changes , if any , to current data collection methods ; systems review and redesign ; and resources required . also , there would need to be consideration of the anticipated benefits of having stronger repayment incentives for delinquent debtors and of ultimately avoiding additional loans to already delinquent debtors , which logically would carry added risk of additional losses . fms's comments do not address these potential benefits . as stated in our report , the federal government does not yet have an effective data source for adequately implementing dcia's debtor bar provision . we will then make copies available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3406 or kenneth r. rupar , assistant director , at ( 214 ) 777-5714 if you or your staff have any questions about this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix vi . a total of nine agencies participated in our debt - reporting practices survey . because debt - reporting activities typically vary within these agencies , we provided a survey for each treasury report on receivables submitted by the agencies and requested a response that would account for all debts contained in that report . as such , we obtained responses from a total of 90 reporting entities within these agencies . the following is a list of the agencies , by bureau within each agency . the number in parentheses following each bureau or agency represents the number of reporting entities within that bureau or agency .