wise . who are the scorekeepers ? guidelines are established by the omb , the cbo , and the senate and house budget committees . scorekeepers have an ongoing dialogue and may revise rules as required . budget committees and cbo apply the rules to estimate the costs associated with proposed legislation . omb uses the rules to determine amounts to be recognized in the budget when an agency signs a contract or enters into a lease . the house and senate budget committees make available monthly summary scorekeeping reports . we have previously found that upfront funding is the best way to ensure recognition of commitments embodied in budgeting decisions and maintain government - wide fiscal control . as shown below , under scorekeeping rules , for a purchase or a capital lease the full cost of the project must be recorded in the budget in the year in which the budget authority is to be made available . in contrast , operating leases are intended for short - term needs , and under the scorekeeping rules , only the amount needed to cover the first year's lease payments plus cancellation costs need to be recorded in the budget in that year . summary of scorekeeping guidelines for purchases and leases when an agency is granted the authority to enter into a contract for the purchase , lease - purchase , capital lease , or operating lease of an asset , budget authority and outlays may be scored as follows: lease - purchases and capital leases: budget authority will be scored against the legislation in the year in which the budget authority is first made available in the amount of the estimated net present value of the government's total estimated legal obligations over the life of the contract , except for imputed interest and identifiable operating expenses . operating leases: budget authority will be scored against the legislation in the year in which the budget authority is first made available in the amount necessary to cover the government's legal obligation . the amount scored will include the estimated total payments expected to arise under the full term of the lease contract , or , if a cancellation clause is included in the lease , for the first fiscal year and the amount of cancellation costs . purchases: no special rules apply to scoring purchases of assets ( whether the asset is existing or is to be manufactured or constructed ) . budget authority is scored in the year in which the authority to purchase is first made available in the amount of the government's estimated legal obligations . to distinguish lease purchases and capital leases from operating leases , the following criteria will be used for defining an operating lease: ownership of the asset remains with the lessor during the term of the lease and is not transferred to the government at or shortly after the end of the lease period . the lease does not contain a bargain - price purchase option . the lease term does not exceed 75 percent of the estimated economic lifetime of the asset .