( see fig . dod , state , and un reports attribute the reduction in violence to ( 1 ) the increase in u.s. combat forces that allowed a change in tactics ; ( 2 ) the creation of nongovernmental security forces , such as sons of iraq ; and ( 3 ) the mahdi army's declaration of a cease - fire . dod had planned to withdraw u.s. surge forces and draw down u.s. forces to 140,000 by the end of july 2008 . dod reported that the number of u.s. forces in iraq was about 153,300 as of june 1 , 2008 . the new way forward also set the goal of developing capable iraqi security forces and transferring security responsibilities to the iraqi government . since 2003 , the united states has provided more than $20 billion to develop iraqi security forces . the number of trained iraqi forces increased from about 323,000 in january 2007 to about 478,500 as of april 30 , 2008 . dod reports that about 65 percent of iraqi army battalions are leading counterinsurgency operations . however , the number of units at the highest readiness level , as assessed by dod , accounts for less than 10 percent of total units ( see fig . the development of independent iraqi security forces was a benchmark established by congress and derived from commitments made by the iraqi government . the number of independent iraqi security forces as measured by operational readiness assessments ( ora ) level 1 continues to be an important measure of the capabilities of iraqi security forces . in late june 2008 , dod reported that 12 iraqi army battalions were capable of planning , executing , and sustaining counterinsurgency operations ( ora level 1 ) in january 2007 and april 2008 . several factors have complicated the development of capable iraqi security forces , including the lack of a single unified force , sectarian and militia influences , continued dependence on u.s. and coalition forces for logistics and combat support , and training and leadership shortages . the new way forward also stated that the iraqi government would take responsibility for security in all 18 provinces by november 2007 . however , as of mid - july 2008 , 8 provincial governments do not yet have lead responsibility for security in their provinces . according to the mnf - i commanding general , the coalition continues to provide planning , logistics , and other assistance even after security responsibilities have transferred to provincial iraqi control . security conditions remain volatile and dangerous . in june 2008 , dod reported that the influence and areas of operation of al qaeda in iraq have been degraded , but the terrorist group remains a dangerous and adaptable enemy capable of carrying out high - profile attacks . thus , the united states has not achieved its goal of defeating al qaeda in iraq and ensuring that no terrorist safe haven exists in iraq . in addition , sons of iraq have not reconciled with the iraqi government and the cease - fire agreement with the mahdi army is tenuous .