 dfs reports . as we noted in our draft report , nrc considers the formula to be the minimum amount needed by licensees to decommission their reactors ; we believe that this meets the definition of a cost estimate . nrc further commented that the agency believes that it achieves the characteristics of comprehensiveness and accuracy by requiring a licensee to provide an updated , plant - specific cost estimate late in a plant's life . nrc requires licensees to submit dfs reports at least every 2 years while a reactor is operating , and every year once a reactor is within 5 years of permanent shutdown through license termination . licensees may report the amount of funds estimated to be needed for decommissioning using the decommissioning funding formula or a licensee - generated site - specific cost estimate if it is greater than the formula amount . according to nrc guidance , nrc staff compare two things in reviewing these reports: ( 1 ) the licensee's accumulated funds plus amounts provided by any other methods in the licensee's plans to accumulate funds as described above and ( 2 ) the amount estimated to be needed for decommissioning , which is the greater of an nrc - generated formula estimate or the licensee - generated site specific cost estimate . if the licensee's balance is greater than or equal to the estimated amount needed for decommissioning , an nrc reviewer makes a determination of reasonable assurance . if the balance is less than the estimated amount needed for decommissioning , the reviewer projects the licensee's accumulated funds through the decommissioning period to account for any anticipated growth . if the projected amount plus amounts provided by other methods is less than the estimated amount needed for decommissioning and a second reviewer verifies this finding , then nrc may request additional information from the licensee and repeat the process . according to agency guidance , licensees are expected to make adjustments to correct shortfalls in 2 or 5 years , depending on the type of licensee , from when the dfs report in question is submitted . an nrc official told us that the agency determines on a case - by - case basis if additional actions should be taken to assure the agency that the licensee will have adequate decommissioning funds when needed .  preliminary decommissioning cost estimate . about 5 years prior to a reactor's projected permanent shutdown , nrc requires licensees to submit a preliminary decommissioning cost estimate that is more detailed than nrc's decommissioning funding formula . this cost estimate provides nrc with an up - to - date estimate of expected decommissioning costs and an assessment of the major factors that could affect such costs , as well as the licensee's plans for adjusting decommissioning funding levels if necessary . major factors include , but are not limited to , the potential for contamination of the site and the decommissioning method the licensee plans to use . nrc guidance calls for staff to compare the preliminary cost estimate with the decommissioning cost estimate generated by the nrc formula . the licensee's preliminary cost estimate is deemed acceptable if it is equal to or greater than the formula amount .