tsa had not developed such a plan . as discussed earlier , tsa said that faa's aip was the agency's effort to meet this provision . however , this was an faa plan and did not fully meet the requirement . more importantly , because the amount of money coming from the aip for security - related projects will be significantly reduced , and thereby tsa's continuing in involvement with faa in administering the program , the aip cannot continue to serve as tsa's plan for providing technical assistance to small - and medium - sized airports . without a plan , tsa could be less able to document , measure , and improve the effectiveness of the agency's efforts to provide technical support for enhancing perimeter and access control security . ( see app . ii for a description of risk management principles and tsa's tools for implementing these principles. ) tsa uses various threat scenarios that describe potentially dangerous situations as a basis for conducting its vulnerabilities assessments . during the assessments , tsa and airport operators review the scenarios and rank them according to the risk each poses to the individual airport . as part of each vulnerability assessment , tsa provided airport operators with a report on the results and recommended short - and long - term countermeasures to reduce the threats identified . according to tsa , however , the twic card is intended to be compatible with all airports' card readers . nonetheless , tsa has not yet conducted an analysis of the cost and operational impacts of implementing the program at airports nationwide . tsa said it intends to gather additional information needed to conduct such an analysis at some point in the future . the third provision of atsa related to technology ( sec . 106 ( b ) ) requires that tsa develop a plan to provide technical ( and funding ) support to small - and medium - sized airports . we contacted airport operator officials responsible for security at the nation's 21 largest and busiest u.s. commercial airports to obtain their views on the need for technical guidance from tsa to enhance the security of perimeters and access controls . some airport operators said they were waiting for tsa to complete its technology assessments before enhancing perimeter and access control security , while other airport operators were independently testing and deploying security technologies . officials at these airports said they are waiting for tsa to provide guidance before proceeding with security upgrades . these airport operators also said that security technology is very costly , and they cannot afford to pay for testing technology prior to purchasing and installing such technology at their airports . they said that information or guidance from tsa about what technologies are available or most effective to safeguard airport perimeters would be beneficial . conversely , officials at other airports also said they were assessing what is needed to improve their perimeter security and access controls by independently testing and installing security technologies . several of these officials said that the trial - and - error approach to improving security would not be necessary if tsa would act as a clearinghouse for information on the most effective security technologies and how they can be applied .