some examples follow . one - stop partners jointly financed a separate staff person to perform shared support services , such as initial intake , to allow partners to provide shared services without violating their program requirements . a state board decided to classify expenses associated with running the one - stop as programmatic rather than administrative as a way to lessen the impact of a cap on certain spending . a state board gave the education community approval to use existing perkins' outcome data for the purposes of wia data collection and reporting until the state is able to fully implement other outcome data measures . this was intended to lessen the burden posed by similar , yet different , data collection and reporting requirements . a community college enrolled wia - funded training participants in a “separate” college . this college exists in name only and stands in for the community college where wia - funded training participants actually take classes . this was done to avoid collecting data on non - wia - funded students . several local areas required that all committees have private - sector leadership and a private - sector majority and that quorums have a private - sector majority . state and local implementers we contacted also identified a number of actions they believed could enhance their ability to implement wia in these areas and move closer to the vision of full integration . however , there was no consensus on which of these ideas had the greatest potential to address these concerns while preserving the local flexibility key to wia . some of the ideas included providing more specific guidance at the federal level , while others could require legislative and / or regulatory action . for example , amending the enabling legislation to more explicitly detail the level or type of one - stop participation partners should achieve ; leaving partners' authorizing legislation as is but providing incentives for participation ( for example , not requiring partners to financially support the one - stops or expanding the scope of activities allowable at the one - stop ) ; giving training providers additional funds to offset the cost of data appointing board staff either from private - sector - oriented entities ( for example , economic development agencies ) or nonprofit entities that reflect employers' outlook . the workforce development system envisioned under wia represents a sea change from prior systems , not only because of wia's new requirements and the additional partners involved , but also because of the flexibility allowed to state and local implementers to determine how to implement these new requirements . given this , it is understandable that skepticism and resistance to change continue to affect the speed and caliber of implementation efforts . state and local implementers agreed that the issues we highlighted need to be addressed to enhance wia implementation , but there was no consensus on which efforts would best achieve wia's goals while maintaining state and local flexibility . as a result , more specific guidance to address these concerns , in addition to time , may be what is required .