hhs did not agree . it stated that , in contrast to ppaca , the demonstration establishes immediate incentives for quality improvement throughout the range of quality ratings . regarding their proposed evaluation of the demonstration , hhs did not consider the timing of data collection to be a problem and said that the comparison group it would use would enable them to determine the demonstration's impact . we continue to believe that , given the problems we cited , the demonstration should be canceled . in addition to our march 2012 report , we sent a letter on july 11 , 2012 , to hhs regarding cms's authority to conduct the demonstration . in our letter , we stated that cms had not established that the demonstration met the criteria set forth in the social security amendments of 1967 , as amended — the statute under which cms is conducting the demonstration . specifically , the statute authorizes the secretary to conduct demonstration projects to determine whether changes in payment methods would increase the efficiency and economy of medicare services through the creation of additional incentives , without adversely affecting quality . however , features of the demonstration , particularly those regarding the timing of data collection for plan star ratings , call into question whether the demonstration includes additional incentives to increase the efficiency and economy of medicare services and raise concerns about the agency's ability to determine whether the payment changes under the demonstration result in increased efficiency and economy compared to the payment methods in place under ppaca . in 2003 , congress authorized the establishment of three types of ma coordinated care plans for individuals with special needs: dual - eligible special needs plans ( d - snp ) , which are exclusively for beneficiaries eligible for both medicare and medicaid ; institutional special needs plans for individuals in nursing homes , and chronic condition special needs plans for individuals with severe or disabling chronic conditions . of the three types of snps , d - snps are by far the most common , accounting for about 80 percent of snp enrollment as of september 2012 . the approximately 9 million dual - eligible beneficiaries are particularly costly to both medicare and medicaid in part because they are more likely than other medicare beneficiaries to be disabled , report poor health status , and have limitations in activities of daily living . furthermore , their care must be coordinated across medicare and medicaid , and each program has its own set of covered services and requirements . in september 2012 , we reported that the 2012 d - snp contracts with state medicaid agencies that we reviewed varied considerably in their provisions for integration of benefits . two - thirds of the 124 contracts between d - snps and state medicaid agencies that were submitted to cms for 2012 did not expressly provide for the integration of any benefits .