representation . gao - 01-839 . washington , d.c.: july 27 , 2001 . united nations: planning for headquarters renovation is reasonable ; united states needs to decide whether to support work . gao - 01-788 . washington , d.c.: june 15 , 2001 . united nations: reform initiatives have strengthened operations , but overall objectives have not yet been achieved . gao / nsiad - 00-150 . washington , d.c.: may 10 , 2000 . other international organizations . according to usaid data , from january 2004 to july 2009 , usaid issued approximately $8.1 billion in grants or cooperative agreements to 50 different pios . usaid's data showed that the majority — 60 percent — of usaid's grants to pios had been awarded to un organizations and specialized un agencies . unops has taken actions to implement reforms in areas including its documentation system ; internal oversight , including internal audits and investigations ; and ethics . the current unops management team has continued to develop atlas , its centralized project management system , to address previously identified deficiencies in unops's documentation . in 2007 , unops established an internal oversight office , including an internal audit program modeled after institute for internal auditors standards . as part of its effort to address previously identified deficiencies through internal oversight , unops management proposed investigations into allegations of wrongdoing by unops employees . in addition , the management team established an ethics office in 2006 according to un guidance on the roles of un ethics offices . the current unops management team has continued to develop atlas , its centralized electronic project management system , to address previously identified deficiencies and thereby ensure that its design reduces the risk of fraud , waste , and abuse and strengthens internal and financial controls . atlas has been in use at unops since 2004 and is designed to systematically consolidate and track project data worldwide , including financial transactions . prior to atlas , unops field offices used the field administrative support service ( fass ) . fass , which is not a common platform , required unops offices to each maintain their own database for tracking projects . headquarters management did not have real - time capability for tracking project or field office expenditures and , therefore , had limited capacity to identify either poor performance or other problems with grants or contracts . according to a unops official , most countries' data systems before atlas were unsatisfactory and were not integrated for centralized use or oversight . in addition , fass provided no systematic way to include electronic documentation for every disbursement made by officials in the field . under the new system , project managers enter financial transaction data and atlas creates and documents vouchers used to make payments . information is now more readily accessible to management in headquarters and in the field offices . in july 2007 unops management established the internal audit office . before unops established this office , it had only minimal internal audit capacity . undp provided internal audit coverage to unops until the office was established , but its capacity to audit unops was limited .