contract management . the bureau is relying on contractor support in many key areas of the 2020 census , including for integrating all of the key systems and infrastructure and developing many of the key data collection systems . in august 2016 , the bureau hired a contractor to integrate the 2020 census systems and infrastructure . the contractor's work was to include evaluating the systems and infrastructure and acquiring the infrastructure ( eg , cloud or data center ) to meet the bureau's scalability and performance needs . it was also to include integrating all of the systems , supporting technical testing activities , and developing plans for ensuring the continuity of operations . since the contract was awarded , the scope has grown to also include assisting with operational testing activities , conducting performance testing for two internet self - response systems , and technical support for the implementation of the paper data capture system . in addition , the bureau is relying on contractors to develop a number of key systems and components of the it infrastructure . these activities include ( 1 ) developing the it platform that is to be used to collect data from a majority of respondents — those using the internet , telephone , and non - response follow - up activities ; ( 2 ) procuring the mobile devices and cellular service to be used for non - response follow - up ; and ( 3 ) developing the it infrastructure in the field offices . as we reported in november 2016 , a greater reliance on contractors for these key components of the 2020 census requires the bureau to focus on sound management and oversight of the key contracts , projects , and systems . time is running out before the 2018 end - to - end test begins , so it will be important for the bureau to make these decisions with enough time to implement the chosen solutions . it cost growth . the bureau has identified at least $2 billion in it costs for the 2020 program . these costs are associated with ( among other things ) contracts for the integration of 50 systems into a “system of systems,” the infrastructure on which these systems reside , the call centers for phone responses , the mobile devices and cellular service for field staff who conduct the door - to - door enumeration , and a portion of the costs for the cedcap program . however , our ongoing work suggests that it costs are likely to rise . for example , the scope of work for the integration contract has increased since the contract was awarded in august 2016 , and the corresponding costs are likely to rise as well . also , the bureau recently reported that the overall costs for the cedcap program are expected to increase by at least 10 percent . in addition , the program is still trying to determine the full complement of systems for the 2018 test and 2020 operations , so these costs may also change . bureau officials reported that the agency is developing a new cost estimate for the entire 2020 census program , which they expect to publish later in the spring of 2017 .