 formaldehyde . formaldehyde is a gas widely used in such products as pressed wood , paper , pharmaceuticals , leather goods , and textiles . the iris database currently lists formaldehyde as a “probable human carcinogen” ; however , the international agency for research on cancer classifies it as “carcinogenic to humans.” in june 2011 , the department of health and human services' national toxicology program classified formaldehyde as “known to be a human carcinogen” in its report on carcinogens . the report stated that epidemiological studies “have demonstrated a causal relationship between exposure to formaldehyde and cancer in humans” — specifically , nasopharyngeal cancer , sinonasal cancer , and myeloid leukemia . the current iris assessment of formaldehyde dates to 1989 , when the cancer portion of the assessment was issued , and 1990 , when the noncancer portion was added . the last significant revision of the formaldehyde assessment dates to 1991 . as we have reported previously , epa began efforts to update the iris assessment of formaldehyde in 1997 . in 2004 , epa received a congressional directive to await the results of a national cancer institute study that was expected to take , at most , 18 months before finalizing the draft assessment . that study was completed in may 2009 , and in june 2010 , epa released the draft assessment , which assessed both cancer and noncancer health effects , to the national academies for peer review . in may 2011 , the national academies published its peer review report . as of september 30 , 2011 — 14 years after epa began work to update the iris formaldehyde assessment — the agency had indicated no timetable for finalizing the assessment . continued delays in the revision of the iris assessment of formaldehyde have the potential to affect the quality of epa's regulatory actions . for example , in august 2011 , epa announced a proposed rule under the clean air act related to certain emissions from natural gas processing plants . because a newer iris assessment of formaldehyde has not been completed , the proposed rule relies on the existing iris value for formaldehyde , last updated in 1991 . epa had expected to complete the formaldehyde assessment by the end of fiscal year 2011 , but withdrew the projected completion date from the iris website after the publication of the national academies' peer review report on the draft assessment . as of april 2011 , epa expected to complete the formaldehyde assessment in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2011 . however , as of september 30 , 2011 , the iris website provided no projected completion date for the assessment .  tetrachloroethylene ( perc ) . tetrachloroethylene — also called perchloroethylene or perc — is a manufactured chemical used in , for example , dry cleaning , metal degreasing , and textile production . perc is a widespread groundwater contaminant and the national toxicology program has determined that it is “reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen.” currently , the iris database contains only a noncancer assessment based on oral exposure to perc , posted in 1988 ; it gives no information on potential cancer effects or potential noncancer effects associated with inhalation of perc .