noted it as completed . however , according to the for this project , two control documents were required by ssa's project management directive and three were conditionally required . ssa developed the two required documents , and both had limitations . table 4 describes the two required documents , whether or not they were developed , and any limitations that we identified . medicare annual project . the medicare annual project was a cyclical project that identified up to 400,000 medicare beneficiaries to request information to verify continued eligibility or any changes in benefits . the project was part of a larger effort to update the medicare part d systems . the medicare annual project was a 0.83 work - year project completed in fiscal year 2010 . six control documents were relevant for the medicare annual project — five required and one conditionally required . ssa developed four of the six documents but did not develop two . moreover , three of the four control documents that were developed had limitations . table 5 describes the six documents , and whether or not they were developed and any limitations with the documents . ecms release 3 . ecms release 3 is a planning and analysis only project that was performed by ssa in fiscal year 2011 . planning and analysis only projects are defined by the agency as projects that entail planning and analysis activities to determine the feasibility of the project , from both a business and technical perspective . as such , according to project officials , this particular release focused on assessing the existing ssa business processes related to updating the master earnings file . ecms release 3 was a part of a larger earnings redesign initiative intended to improve data integrity by reconciling earnings posted to ssa's master earnings file with earnings reported to the internal revenue service by fiscal year 2015 . for this project , five control documents were required by ssa's project management directive , and one was conditionally required . ssa developed three of the control documents but did not develop the other three . further , the three control documents that were developed had limitations . table 6 describes the control documents , whether or not they were developed , and any limitations . help desk activities . the help desk activities is an active , ongoing national computer center project . as discussed earlier , this type of project is one of five major ssa categories for it investments . in fiscal year 2012 , approximately 100 work years were devoted to the project . internet 3441 . the internet 3441 project is a maintenance type project . the project was focused on maintaining a web application that electronically gathered ssa form 3441public , and was a 4.74 work - year project that was completed in fiscal year 2010 . the system development for this project was intended to , in part , provide the form's information electronically and online and was started in october 2002 . the maintenance efforts began in october 2003 and continued until september 2010 , when agency information from the documentationproject manager , this effort was combined with another similar maintenance project .