internal checklist . we found that 2 of the 6 field offices employed an internal checklist for processing exceptions , though an official in 1 of the offices stated that staff used it inconsistently . in 1 of these offices , the checklist details a sequential review process where signatures and comments are made by the relevant decision makers . specifically , the form requires input from blm's project lead and wildlife biologist , state fish and game officials , and the blm field office manager . in completing the checklist , officials are to identify the applicable criteria for considering the request and describe whether there is any biological benefit for the proposed action . the field office manager receives the checklist after relevant input has been made by blm staff and then completes a signature box on the form for granting , denying , partially granting , or not concurring . space is also provided for the field office manager to provide an explanation of the decision . in contrast , other offices did not have a standardized form for considering the request and approved or denied the request via sundry notice without an explanation . in these instances , blm's actual process for considering the request was unclear . compensatory mitigation . we found that 1 of the 6 field offices frequently requires compensatory mitigation when approving an exception . this means that if the field office grants an exception , it requires the operator to take some other action to mitigate the environmental impacts of the exception . according to blm officials , the office has developed a standard practice of requiring operators to improve 25 acres of habitat for each approved month of an exception to a wildlife - related seasonal drilling limitation . according to these officials , this practice was developed over time . blm officials also told us that allowing year - round drilling for certain projects could minimize disturbance to wildlife by allowing drilling to be completed sooner . for example , a project might have taken 3 years to complete if seasonal permit drilling requirements were in effect , whereas it might take 1 1 / 2 years to complete if blm approves an exception to seasonal drilling permit requirements . resource management plan exception criteria . we found that the primary resource management plan for all 6 blm field offices we visited had generally identified criteria for granting exceptions , in accordance with blm's november 2007 policy . however , the specificity of the criteria varied . one of the resource management plans we reviewed included very specific exception criteria for a number of lease and permit requirements . for example , the plan describes lease requirements related to a type of habitat used by birds for mating . it specifically states that surface disturbance is prohibited or restricted within a 1 / 4 mile perimeter of the habitat , if occupied . the plan then identifies the particular conditions under which blm may approve an exception request .