we have provided additional information on this in the report . for our recommendation on increasing efforts to obtain stakeholder input as transparency initiatives are developed , omb staff agreed that increasing efforts to obtain stakeholder input was important and pointed to their outreach to date particularly in seeking stakeholder comments on the grants reform process , which they said included discussions on standardizing financial information collected from recipients during the pre - award and post - award phases of the grant process . this approach relies on the development of data standards . it will provide a set of analytic tools for fraud detection to be shared across the federal government . reporting has continued for each quarter since then . more recently , in june 2011 , the administration issued executive order 13576 “delivering an efficient , effective , and accountable government.” the order , among other things , established the gat board to provide strategic direction for enhancing transparency of federal spending data . the gat board was also charged with advancing efforts to detect fraud , waste , and abuse of federal programs . its 11 members include agency inspectors general , agency chief financial officers , a senior omb official and other such members as the president shall designate . the gat board is mandated to work with the recovery board to build on lessons learned from the recovery act's implementation . usaspending.gov and recovery.gov rely on different sources of information , and make different types of data available to the public . usaspending.gov provides information on federal award obligations , including the recipient's name , funding agency , amount of award , and descriptive title . it relies primarily on data submitted by federal agencies and , to some extent , by recipients . in addition , agencies use different reporting platforms to submit information about contract and grant awards . in contrast , recovery.gov , which relies primarily on information submitted by recipients , provides information on federal award expenditures , including information on each project or activity funded , the amount and use of funds , and an estimate of the jobs funded . the usaspending.gov website draws data from different data sources , as shown in figure 2 . the federal procurement data system - next generation: procurement data are imported from this system , which collects information on contract actions , procurement trends , and achievement of socioeconomic goals , such as small business participation . omb was responsible for establishing the system , and gsa administers it . since 1980 , fpds - ng and its predecessor fpds have been the primary government - wide databases for contracting information . federal agencies are responsible for ensuring the information reported in this database is complete and accurate . the data submission and validation tool: data on financial assistance awards ( grants , loans , loan guarantees , cooperative agreements and other assistance ) are provided by federal agencies and are transmitted directly to gsa via this tool . as with fpds - ng , federal agencies are responsible for ensuring the information reported in this database is complete and accurate .