, policies and programs ) . ( see app . i for a description of our scope and methodology. ) dod's civilian workforce has undergone a sizeable reduction but remains critical to dod's mission success . strategic human capital management provides a framework for maximizing the value added by the civilian workforce through aligning its civilian human capital initiatives to support dod's overarching mission . since the end of the cold war , dod has undergone sizable reductions in its civilian workforce . in 1992 , during the initial stages of downsizing , dod officials voiced concerns about what they perceived to be a lack of attention to identifying and maintaining a balanced basic level of skills needed to maintain in - house capabilities as part of the defense industrial base . in our 2000 testimony , strategic approach should guide dod civilian workforce management , we testified that dod's approach to civilian force reductions was less oriented toward shaping the makeup of the workforce than was the approach it used to manage its military downsizing . in its approach to civilian workforce downsizing , the department focused on mitigating adverse effects ( such as nonvoluntary reductions - in - force ) through retirements , attrition , hiring freezes , and base closures . ( see app . ii for a time line of key events related to dod's civilian workforce downsizing. ) dod initiated a more strategic approach when it published its first strategic plan for civilian personnel ( civilian human resources strategic plan , 2002-2008 ) in april 2002 . in developing the departmentwide plan , the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness made efforts to work in conjunction with defense components' civilian human capital communities by inviting their leaders to contribute to working groups and special meetings and reviewing the services' civilian human capital strategic plans . however , dod has yet to provide guidance on how to integrate component - level civilian human capital strategic plans with its departmentwide civilian strategic plan . dod officials said that full integration would be difficult because of the wide array of human capital services and mission support provided at the component level . however , one of the lessons learned in our previous work on strategic planning in the defense acquisition workforce was the need for leadership to provide guidance for planning efforts . without guidance , defense components may not be able to effectively function together in support of the departmentwide plan . for example , dod's goal to provide management systems and departmentwide force planning tools may not be fully or efficiently achieved without a coordinated effort among all defense components . the component - level plans we reviewed included goals , objectives , or initiatives to improve analysis or forecasting of workforce requirements , but they did not indicate coordination with the departmentwide effort or with one another . civilian human capital planning has emerged as an issue in another dod - related forum for top leaders .