the results vary . for example , one post in the former soviet union conducted a study of its 2004 summer work travel season that showed that , as of january 20 , 2005 , 26 percent of the 2004 participants from that country remained in the united states . this post reported overstay rates of 29 percent for 2003 , 25.6 percent for 2002 , and 27 percent for 2001 . other posts have reported lower overstay rates . for example , a post in a western european country conducted a validation study of its 2004 summer work travel program that showed that all of the visa applicants in the sample who were issued j - 1 visas returned home , as required . the posts can use the results of such studies to guide their decision making when they adjudicate visas . for example , the post with a 26 percent overstay rate in 2004 developed additional selection factors for the 2005 summer work travel season to assess the potential for individuals to return to their country after their programs are completed . however , these studies are not always statistically valid . moreover , the acting director of exchange coordination and designation said the post validation studies are not useful to program officials because the posts do not follow a standardized methodology . dhs also found that only one of the dairies reported having a structured training plan . j - 1 visitors who remain in the united states beyond their program do not necessarily stay for long periods of time , and not all of them remain in the united states illegally . according to consular officials we talked with at one post , some participants in the summer work travel program from their country who remain in the united states beyond their program date might typically overstay anywhere from a few days to no more than a few months . the consular officials said the participants sometimes remain in the united states longer if they have not earned sufficient money to cover their expenses . others change their visa status to another nonimmigrant category . for example , the 2004 validation study by one post in the former soviet union country showed that 39 percent of those who had remained in the united states beyond the completion of the program had either changed their visa status , got married , or were seeking asylum . changing status from a j - 1 visa to another visa category is permitted under u.s. immigration laws in certain circumstances , but bureau of consular affairs and other officials have stated that it is not the intent of the program . the regulations should include a separate category for interns . a past oig report also cited problems with the regulations and recommended in particular that , for the trainee program , the training regulations should more clearly define what is not considered training . six of the sponsors we met with and the representative of an association of sponsors expressed concern with state's interpretation of certain provisions of the regulations , while seven sponsors and the association representative also said that state does not consistently disseminate its interpretations or guidance on the regulations to the sponsors .