gao - 02-747 . a description of each of these programs is presented below . we reviewed an army contract ( contract number daah01-98-c - 0093 ) with lockheed martin vought systems corporation concerning the army tactical missile system . this missile system is one of a family of complementary weapons initially developed by the army and air force for engaging enemy forces deep behind the front battle lines . the missile system was designed to attack those forces that are in a position to have an immediate or directly supporting impact on the close - in battle , but are beyond the range of cannon and rocket artillery systems . it is intended to delay , disrupt , neutralize , or destroy targets , such as second echelon maneuver units , missile sites , and forward command posts . the army tactical missile system consists of a surface - to - surface ballistic missile that can be launched from and controlled by the army's multiple launch rocket system . the missile system was initially fielded with an “antipersonnel / antimaterial warhead” for attacking stationary targets . since the weapon system was first fielded , the missile system has been modified to increase its range , improve its guidance systems , and reduce collateral damage . this missile system was used in the recent war in iraq . figure 3 is a photograph of the missile system . we reviewed an air force contract ( contract number f09604-00-c - 0090 ) with l - 3 communications to maintain the army portion of the army data link system . the army and air force developed the army data link system to transfer near - real - time targeting information collected by aircraft , satellites , and ground stations and provides this information to aircraft and tactical commanders on the ground in - theater . the system consists of three major components — the army interoperable data link , the direct air to satellite relay , and the reach back relay . the army interoperable data link provides two - way secure direct communications between aircraft and aircraft - to - ground stations . the direct air to satellite relay communicates data gathered by aircraft through a secure satellite link to an in - theater ground processing facility . the reach back relay communicates data gathered through a secure satellite link to ground processing facilities in the continental united states . the data link system was also used in the recent war in iraq . figure 4 shows how the communications system transfers data . for fiscal year 2002 , our analysis of dfas columbus data showed that about $1 of every $4 in contract payment transactions in mocas was for adjustments to previously recorded payments — $49 billion of adjustments out of $198 billion in disbursement , collection , and adjustment transactions . this is an improvement over fiscal year 1999 when dfas columbus data showed that about $1 of every $3 in contract payment transactions ( transactions for disbursements , collections , and adjustments ) in mocas was for adjustments to previously recorded payments — $51 billion of adjustments out of $157 billion in transactions .