for this reason , trades should be confirmed as soon as possible . having unconfirmed trades could allow errors to go undetected that might subsequently lead to losses and other problems . errors could be made at any time — for example , counterparties could miscommunicate when making a trade or dealers could enter the wrong trade data into their systems . if such errors go undetected , a dealer could make an incorrect premium payment to a counterparty or inaccurately measure and manage risk exposures , notably market and counterparty credit risks . appendix i provides a detailed description of our scope and methodology . introduced in the early 1990s , credit derivatives have been widely adopted as a tool for allowing market participants to take on or reduce their exposure to credit risk . first used primarily by banks to reduce credit exposures stemming from loans made to clients , credit derivatives have evolved to include an array of different products ( table 1 ) . according to regulators and others , credit derivatives have the potential to improve the overall efficiency and resiliency of the financial markets by spreading credit risk more widely across a large and diverse pool of investors . according to the british bankers' association , single - name credit default swaps remain the most common type of credit derivative , comprising about 33 percent of the market in 2006 , though their share of the market has decreased since 2004 . these swaps allow the buyer of protection to transfer the credit risk associated with default on debt issued by a single corporation or sovereign entity — called the reference entity . with a standard credit default swap , the buyer of credit risk protection pays a quarterly premium payment to the seller of credit risk protection over the life of the contract , typically 5 or more years . should a defined credit event occur , such as a default by the specified corporation on the referenced debt , the protection seller would assume the losses . as table 1 shows , other commonly traded products include full index trades , synthetic collateralized debt obligations , and tranched index trades . in the credit derivatives market , banks and securities broker - dealers generally serve as the product dealers , acting as the buyer or seller in credit derivative trades with end - users or other dealers . the top five dealers in 2005 , ranked by total trading volumes as estimated by fitch ratings , were morgan stanley , deutsche bank , goldman sachs , jp morgan chase , and ubs . end - users of credit derivatives include hedge funds , insurance companies , pension funds , and mutual funds . according to isda , which conducts periodic surveys of market participants , the credit derivatives market has grown dramatically in recent years , increasing from an estimated total notional amount of nearly $1 trillion outstanding at year - end 2001 to over $34 trillion at year - end 2006 ( see fig . part of this rapid growth has been attributed to product innovation and an increasing number of market participants , particularly hedge funds .