the agency allocates the funds to the area through the cooperative agreement . as proposed , s. 2543 would establish a systematic process for determining the suitability of proposed sites as national heritage areas and for designating those areas found to be qualified . in our march 2004 testimony , we stated that no systematic process exists for identifying qualified candidate sites and designating them as national heritage areas . we noted that , while the congress generally has made designation decisions with the advice of the park service , it has , in some instances , designated heritage areas before the agency has fully evaluated them . specifically , the congress designated 10 of the 24 existing heritage areas without a thorough park service review of their qualifications and , in 6 of the 10 cases , the agency had recommended deferring action . s. 2543 , however , would create a more systematic process that would make the congress' designation of a heritage area contingent on the prior completion of a suitability - feasibility study and the secretary's determination that the area meets certain criteria . in addition , under s. 2543 , the secretary could recommend against designation of a proposed heritage area based on the potential budgetary impact of the designation or other factors . provisions in s. 2543 identify a number of criteria for the secretary to use in determining a site's suitability and feasibility as a national heritage area , including its national significance to the nation's heritage and whether it provides outstanding recreational or educational opportunities . while provisions contained in s. 2543 address some of the issues we raised in our march testimony , they do not require that the park service consistently review areas' financial audit reports or develop results - oriented goals and measures for the agency's heritage area activities as we recommended in march . we continue to believe that these are important management controls that are necessary to ensure effective oversight and accountability . s. 2543 includes provisions to ensure that property owners' rights and land use are not restricted by the establishment of national heritage areas . in our march testimony , we stated that national heritage areas do not appear to have affected property owners' rights . in fact , the designating legislation of 13 areas and the management plans of at least 6 provide assurances that such rights will be protected . however , property rights advocates are concerned about the effects of provisions in some management plans that encourage local governments to implement land use policies that are consistent with the heritage areas' plans . some advocates are concerned that these provisions may allow the heritage areas to indirectly influence zoning and land use planning in ways that could restrict owners' use of their property . s. 2543 provides property owners the right to refrain from participating in any planned project or activity conducted within the national heritage area . furthermore , it does not require any property owner to permit public access , nor does it modify public access under any other federal , state , or local law .