can the alternatives be supported ? what are the risks ( technical , operational , programmatic ) for each alternative ? what are the life - cycle costs for each alternative ? how do the alternatives compare to one another ? the office of the secretary of defense , program analysis and evaluation ( osd pa&e ) , plays a central role in the aoa process because it is responsible for providing initial guidance to the aoa study team , reviewing the proposed aoa study plan , and assessing the completed aoa . in carrying out these functions , osd pa&e provides a dod enterprise - level perspective to aoas and encourages service sponsors to consider all viable concepts to fill a capability need , even if they were not initially considered by the service sponsors , and to assess technical risks and costs of each alternative . the aoa is one of several inputs required for a program's initiation at ms b , and it is a key element in planning and establishing a sound business case for a weapon system program . we have frequently reported on the importance of using a solid , executable business case before committing resources to a new product development effort . the business case in its simplest form is demonstrated evidence that ( 1 ) the warfighter's needs are valid and that they can best be met with the chosen concept , and ( 2 ) the chosen concept can be developed and produced within existing resources — that is , proven technologies , design knowledge , adequate funding , and adequate time to deliver the product when it is needed . the aoa addresses the first point of a business case by providing a foundation for developing and refining the operational requirements for a weapon system program . an aoa also addresses the second point of a business case by providing insight into the technical feasibility and costs of alternatives . by contributing to business cases , aoas should provide programs with a sound basis for program initiation . most of the programs we reviewed either did not conduct an aoa or conducted an aoa that focused on a narrow scope of alternatives and did not adequately assess and compare technical and other risks of each alternative . ten of the 32 programs did not conduct aoas and focused on an already selected weapon system solution . of the 22 programs that had aoas , 13 of them examined a limited number of alternatives within a single weapon system concept such as helicopters or specific classes of ships , while 9 considered a relatively broad range of alternatives , by assessing many alternatives within a single weapon concept or alternatives across multiple concepts , such as comparing ships to aircraft . are the alternatives operationally suitable and effective ? while many factors can affect program cost and schedule outcomes , we found that programs that conducted a limited assessment of alternatives before the start of system development tended to experience poorer outcomes than the programs that conducted more robust aoas .