native americans are a vulnerable population . for example , according to u.s. census bureau statistics , in 2010 , 28 percent of native americans were living in poverty , compared to 15 percent of the general population . also , according to the 2010 national intimate partner and sexual violence survey , conducted by the centers for disease control and prevention , an estimated 27 percent of native american women had been raped in their lifetime compared to 18 percent of american women , overall . in addition , indian children enter foster care at twice the rate of all american children . my testimony today summarizes our research on human trafficking in indian country and of native americans , including federal efforts to address this issue and perspectives from tribal and local law enforcement agencies and victim service providers . specifically , my statement addresses the extent to which: ( 1 ) federal agencies collect and maintain data on investigations and prosecutions of human trafficking in indian country or of native americans regardless of location ; ( 2 ) tribal and major city law enforcement agencies ( lea ) have encountered human trafficking in indian country or of native americans , as well as the factors that affect their ability to investigate and prosecute such activities ; and ( 3 ) federal grant programs are available to help address human trafficking in indian country or of native americans , and how well positioned agencies are to know the number of native american trafficking victims served . this statement is based on a report that we issued in march 2017 and another report that we issued in july 2017 . for the purposes of our reviews , our discussion of human trafficking relates to: ( a ) human trafficking that occurs in indian country ( regardless of whether the victim is native american ) ; and ( b ) human trafficking of individuals who are native american ( regardless of whether they were trafficked in indian country or elsewhere ) . for our march 2017 work on federal agencies' data collection , we obtained and reviewed data from federal investigative and prosecutorial agencies on the number of human trafficking investigations and prosecutions they conducted for which the crime occurred in indian country or at least one of the victims was native american . we obtained data for fiscal years 2013 through 2016 , the most recently available data . we determined that the data , when available , were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives . if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact gretta l. goodwin , director , homeland security and justice at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or goodwing@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . also , considering that human trafficking is known to be an underreported crime , it is unlikely that these figures , or any other investigative or prosecutorial data , represent the full extent to which human trafficking is occurring in indian country .