we briefed state officials on the results of our investigation . they agreed that our findings expose a major vulnerability in state's passport issuance process . according to state officials , the department's ability to verify the information submitted as part of a passport application is hampered by limitations to its information sharing and data access with other agencies at the federal and state levels . they said that some federal agencies limit state's access to their records due to privacy concerns or the fact that state is not a law enforcement agency . in addition , they said that state does not currently have the ability to conduct real - time verification of the authenticity of birth certificates presented by passport applicants . figure 1 below shows the boarding pass . after our investigator successfully passed through the checkpoint , he left the airport and cancelled his airline ticket . our first test found that usps did not detect the counterfeit west virginia driver's license our undercover investigator presented as proof of his identity during the passport application process . further , state issued our investigator a genuine u.s. passport despite the counterfeit new york birth certificate he used as proof of his u.s. citizenship . in july 2008 , our investigator entered a usps office in virginia and approached a usps employee to apply for a passport . the usps employee greeted the investigator and took his application form , counterfeit new york birth certificate , and counterfeit west virginia driver's license . on these documents , we used a fictitious identity and a ssn that we had previously obtained from ssa for the purpose of conducting undercover tests . the usps employee reviewed the application materials line by line to make sure that the information on the application form matched the information on the birth certificate and driver's license . after she completed her review of the application materials , the usps employee took the investigator's birth certificate and funds to pay for the application fee . she administered an oath , and then told the investigator that he should receive the passport within 1 to 4 weeks . state issued a genuine u.s. passport to our undercover investigator 8 days after he submitted his application . about a week after state issued the passport , it arrived at the mailing address indicated on the application materials . our second test found that state did not detect a counterfeit new york birth certificate our undercover investigator presented to prove his u.s. citizenship in support of a passport application . in july 2008 , our investigator — the same investigator as in the first test above — obtained a genuine identification card from the washington , d.c. , department of motor vehicles using counterfeit documents , which he then used to apply for a u.s. passport . in august 2008 , the same investigator entered state's regional washington , d.c. , passport - issuing office with a completed passport application form , a counterfeit new york birth certificate , the genuine d.c. identification card , two passport photographs , sufficient funds to pay for the application fee , and an electronic ticket ( e - ticket ) confirming that he had a flight to germany .