limited funding . according to state officials , making improvements to one data system can cost tens of millions of dollars . therefore , obtaining funding necessary to make improvements to six state traffic safety data systems is a challenge . as we previously reported , while traffic safety data grants have provided states with funding to improve traffic safety data systems and complete associated projects , the cost of developing and maintaining data systems can exceed section 408 program grant amounts . while state officials reported that state funding supports most of the cost of traffic safety data projects , nhtsa and officials in five out of eight states we visited indicated that traffic safety data system improvements are not among the highest state priorities due to budgetary constraints or limited interest . the recent economic recession has amplified state funding limitations for data projects . moreover , a state's legislative process may delay funding for traffic safety data projects . even in instances where funding is available , some traffic safety data improvements require state legislative action or approval to move forward on contracting , design , and implementation processes . infrequent state legislative sessions can heighten delays in receiving approval to spend awarded federal funding . for example , according to state officials , the legislature in one state we visited meets every other year , which can delay approval of spending of federal grant and other funding on traffic safety data projects and contribute to carry over of funds . in another state , major technology projects must first be approved by the state's information technology authority . the project planning involved to obtain state approval can make some projects cost prohibitive . for example , the state wanted to update the injury surveillance system 4 years prior , but had to obtain approval first , which resulted in delays in implementation and a doubling of the project's costs . limited human capital resources . states that rely on paper crash and citation forms require manual , time - consuming data entry , which can strain resources and lead to backlogs in data . for example , the texas department of transportation assumed responsibility for the state's crash data system in 2007 from another state department , and also assumed responsibility of a backlog of some 3 million crash reports over a 5-year period that needed to be entered into the data system ( see fig . the accumulated backlog was the result of the state's use of a manual crash data system designed in the 1970s prior to implementing the state's electronic crash data system in 2008 . according to a texas department of transportation briefing report , the manual process was inefficient , resource intensive , and not conducive to the timely dissemination of data . in some states , there are only a few staff that manage a state's traffic safety data programs and grants . this is significant because state officials reported that grant applications are time consuming and difficult to balance with other key job responsibilities . in one instance , a state we visited had to return federal grant funding because it did not have available staff resources to effectively manage the grant and associated project .