legitimacy of investment entity . the amount of investment required to participate in the eb - 5 program , coupled with the fact that investors are making an investment in order to obtain an immigration benefit ( i.e. , green card ) , can create fraud risks tied to regional center operators and intermediaries . for example , sec officials noted that immigrant investors may be vulnerable to fraud schemes because they may be primarily focused on obtaining their visas . as of may 2015 , fdns documentation tracking investigations by program stakeholders such as the sec and hsi showed that over half ( 35 ) of the 59 open investigations were primarily focused on securities fraud . moreover , in january 2016 , the sec's office of inspections and examinations identified the eb - 5 program in its examination priorities for 2016 . given these identified fraud risks , and the constantly evolving nature of risks to the program , we recommended in our august 2015 report that uscis plan and conduct regular fraud risk assessments of the eb - 5 program to better position it to identify , address , and mitigate emerging fraud risks to the program . dhs concurred , stating that the eb - 5 branch of uscis's fdns would continue to conduct a minimum of one fraud , national security , or intelligence assessment on an aspect of the program annually . in february 2016 , uscis officials stated that they had completed the data collection for their first review , which they estimated completing by september 2016 . this review will focus on all identified national security concern cases initiated in the fraud detection and national security detection system from fiscal years 2011 through 2015 . they also provided draft policy documents demonstrating their intention to require a minimum of one fraud assessment annually ; however , these documents had not yet been finalized . to fully address the intent of our recommendation , uscis needs to conduct at least one review , as planned , and document plans for future assessments . in august 2015 , we reported that uscis had taken some steps to enhance its fraud risk management efforts . these included establishing a dedicated entity to design and oversee its fraud risk management activities , creating an organizational structure conducive to fraud risk management , conducting fraud - awareness training , and establishing collaborative relationships with external stakeholders , including law enforcement agencies . in november 2013 , uscis established a fraud specialist unit for the eb - 5 program within fdns . as of may 2015 , fdns was in the process of hiring an additional 8 dedicated staff with specialized fraud expertise to enhance its eb - 5 program fraud detection capabilities and oversight , bringing the total fdns eb - 5 program staff to 21 . according to fdns officials , as of january 2016 , the fdns eb - 5 division included 22 full - time equivalent staff , of which 18 positions were currently occupied .