this report focuses on these activities . our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) the nature and extent of u.s. persons' involvement with ugland house registered entities , and what business , if any , these entities carry on in ugland house and in the cayman islands ; ( 2 ) what reasons attract u.s. persons to conduct business in the cayman islands ; ( 3 ) what information is available to the u.s. government regarding u.s. persons' cayman islands activities , including which are associated with u.s. taxpayers ; and ( 4 ) for tax noncompliance and other related illegal activities , the u.s. government's compliance and enforcement efforts , and any related activity on the part of the cayman islands government . to address our objectives , we reviewed and analyzed u.s. government and private sector documents and reports related to international finance , offshore jurisdictions and tax havens , tax evasion and money laundering , and the tax gap . states in the united states have similar statutory requirements . registered office services include activities such as accepting any service of process or notices , maintenance of certain entity records , and filing of statutory forms , resolutions , notices , returns , or fees . as is the case with many u.s. states' laws , cayman islands law does not require or presume that any other business activity of the corporation occurs at the registered office . cayman islands law requires company service providers that establish entities and provide registered office services to adhere to specific anti - money laundering ( aml ) and know - your - customer ( kyc ) requirements . for example , as a company service provider , maples must verify and keep records on the beneficial owners of entities to which they provide services , the purpose of the entities , and the sources of the funds involved . if suspicion arises in relation to any of these types of inquiries , the company service provider is required to make a suspicious activity report ( sar ) to the cayman islands financial reporting authority ( cayfin ) . cayman islands law allows for nominee shareholders and the provision of officers and directors . the use of nominees , though , does not relieve the company service provider from its obligation under cayman islands law to know the beneficial owner under aml - kyc rules . in contrast , state laws which govern the creation of corporations in the united states generally do not require company formation agents to collect ownership information on the entities they register . the cayman islands has taken steps to restrict the use of bearer shares to obscure ownership or control of an entity . use of bearer shares in the cayman islands is restricted to cases where they are immobilized through deposit with an authorized or recognized custodian who must keep a register of owners and perform the required beneficial ownership verification . according to the cayman islands registrar , as of march 6 , 2008 , 18,857 active entities used ugland house as a registered office , and based on the nature of these entities very few have a significant physical presence in the cayman islands .