all funds in the account are discretionary . what factors affect the size or composition of the carryover balance ? what programs are funded by the account and how much does each contribute , if at all , to the carryover balance ( i.e. , does a large portion of the balance result from any particular programs ) ? is it a new account or program or have the program goals and objectives changed ? how has this affected the agency's ability to obligate funds ? detailed information on our analysis of each of the eight accounts is presented in appendix iii . the accounts in our review contained carryover balances so that they could support the agency's ability to carry out its mission . the eight accounts we reviewed received multi - year or no - year funds and supported a wide variety of missions , such as homeless assistance , aquatic ecosystem restoration , disaster recovery , financial market stability , and military readiness . accordingly , the specific types of activities funded through the accounts varied as well , including construction projects , procurement , grants , and emergency preparedness . over the fiscal year 2007 through 2012 period , each of the accounts had a carryover balance that was tied to the manner in which the agency went about fulfilling its related mission responsibilities . for example , the mutual mortgage insurance capital reserve account maintains a balance for unexpected insurance claim expenses and was established to hold reserve funds to meet federal housing administration's ( fha ) mutual mortgage insurance fund ( mmi fund ) statutory capital reserve requirement . in accounts or programs that receive both mandatory and discretionary funds , what portion of each are unobligated each year ? for unobligated funds , what is the expected period over which funds will be obligated and liquidated ( i.e. , multiple years versus single year ) ? if over multiple years , what drives the timing of the obligation and liquidation of funds ( eg , contract award period , grant cycle ) ? did the account receive supplemental appropriations ? if so , when were the supplemental appropriations acts enacted ? how much of the balance is attributed to supplemental appropriations ? to what extent is the activity funded by fees or taxes ( eg , fuel taxes ) versus general revenues ? does the account or program have the authority to use the fees or taxes without additional congressional action ? o what is the spendout rate after funds have been obligated ? has the agency followed its own procedures for ensuring fiscally responsible management of balances ? to provide context and perspective in terms of an individual account or program , we selected a nongeneralizable sample of eight accounts and conducted further analysis of their carryover balances ( see table 2 ) . our analysis is framed in the context of the four key overarching questions presented in the previous section . for the purpose of this report , we did not seek to identify specific savings related to the selected accounts . under the mmi fund , fha insures a variety of mortgages for home purchases and refinancing to meet the housing needs of traditionally underserved borrowers .