( see fig . 1 for a timeline of events. ) the events selected , listed below , did not provide a representative sample of all va - funded adaptive sports activities . february 2015 goalball camp conducted by the u.s. association of blind athletes in fort wayne , indiana ; march 2015 archery camp conducted by the rehabilitation institute of chicago , in chicago , illinois ; and may 2015 multi - sport event conducted by bridge ii sports in chapel hill and durham , north carolina . at each event , we interviewed event organizers , coaches and trainers and event participants ; and observed the events . we also interviewed event organizers prior to or during their events . regarding the second recommendation , va stated that the agency plans to systematically gather and disseminate techniques from a variety of sources to reduce no - show rates . va also provided several technical comments which we incorporated as appropriate . we selected grants based on type of organization , amount of grant funding and geography . we selected grants to ensure that we obtained eight from national , four from regional and four from community - based organizations . we selected all grants valued at $250,000 or more — seven from national organizations , three from regional organizations . we then selected the remaining six sample grants randomly — one from a national organization , one from a regional organization , and all four from community - based organizations . proposed program based in facts , good reasoning , sound judgment ( 20 points ) considerations: likelihood of success in aiding rehabilitation ; appropriateness of funding requested ; measurability of objectives ; benefits for disabled veterans . low risk and high potential return . for example , it sought to ensure that proposed activities were occurring in areas with a large population of veterans with disabilities . in some cases , some aspects of a proposal were accepted and others rejected to make the proposed grant amount smaller . at the end of this process , va selected 69 applications to which the $8 million allocated for the program in fiscal year 2014 was awarded . sufficiency of management structure ( 20 points ) considerations: sufficient experience in providing activity ; certification of key personnel ; evidence of community outreach ; clear description of infrastructure to support planned activities . geographic coverage ( 15 points ) considerations: cost - effective filling of adaptive sports needs in area ; appropriate for region and potential participants . conformance with va program goals and objectives ( 15 points ) considerations: proposed activities advance program goals , fall within spectrum of adaptive sports , and have positive impacts . strength of program concept and objectives ( 10 points ) considerations: concepts clearly linked to objectives ; likely to benefit health of disabled veterans . va officials told us that completing all tasks necessary to award the grants before the end of fiscal year 2014 was very challenging — in part because of the limited time frame and because managing the solicitation and selection of grant applicants was a new experience for the responsible va unit .