borders . gao - 13-414t . washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2013 . tois . cbp collects and tracks information on tois identified by deos at amoc using information from tars . as of november 2016 , cbp is currently developing a small uas program to support the u.s. border patrol ( border patrol ) , see appendix i . to address both questions , we reviewed department of homeland security ( dhs ) and cbp strategic plans , such as dhs's fiscal years 2014 to 2018 strategic plan , cbp's fiscal years 2015 to 2020 strategic plan , border patrol's fiscal years 2012 through 2016 strategic plan , and air and marine operation's ( amo ) strategic plan . we also reviewed dhs strategies for border security , such as its campaign plan for securing the u.s. southern border and approaches 2015 to 2018 and northern border strategy . in addition , we reviewed dhs and cbp documents related to uas , aerostats , and surveillance technology , for example: plans , reports , concepts of operation , operational requirements , and standard operating procedures . we also reviewed relevant laws ; federal aviation administration ( faa ) procedures , requirements and regulations for operation of uas and aerostats in the national airspace system ; and past gao work related to uas , aerostats , and surveillance technologies used for border security activities . we also conducted site visits to observe cbp's use of predator b uas and aerostats in arizona , texas , north dakota , and california and interviewed cbp officials responsible for their operation . specifically: arizona: we visited amo's national air security operations center ( nasoc ) in sierra vista , arizona to observe predator b operations ; tars site at fort huachuca , arizona ; and met with cbp officials responsible for their operation . texas: we visited amo's nasoc in corpus christi , texas to observe predator b operations ; three , of six total , tactical aerostat sites in south texas to observe their use ; and met with cbp officials responsible for their operations . the three tactical aerostat sites we visited included one of each type of tactical aerostat used by cbp . north dakota: we visited amo's nasoc in grand forks , north dakota to observe predator b operations and met with responsible cbp officials . california: we visited cbp's air and marine operations center in riverside , california to observe use of the air and marine operations surveillance system which includes radar information from tars sites used to detect border incursions and met with responsible cbp officials . findings from our observations and interviews during our site visits cannot be generalized to all occurrences of cbp's use of predator b uas and aerostats , but provided useful insights about the operations of these assets . to determine how cbp uses predator b uas and aerostats , we reviewed and analyzed cbp data and information and interviewed responsible cbp program officials .