these will include several components . first , tsa will conduct a security threat assessment that may include , for example , terrorism databases or terrorism watch lists , such as tsa's no - fly and selectee lists . second , a federal bureau of investigation criminal history records check will be conducted to identify if the worker has any disqualifying criminal offenses . third , workers' immigration status and mental capacity will be checked . workers will have the opportunity to appeal the results of the threat assessment or request a waiver in certain limited circumstances . twic card production: after tsa determines that a worker has passed the background check , the worker's information is provided to a federal card production facility where the twic card will be personalized for the worker , manufactured , and then sent back to the enrollment center . card issuance: transportation workers will be informed when their cards are ready to be picked up at enrollment centers . once a card has been issued , workers will present their twic cards to security officials when they seek to enter a secure area and in the future will enter secure areas through biometric card readers . since we issued our report on the twic program in september 2006 , tsa has made progress toward implementing the twic program and addressing several of the problems that we previously identified regarding contract oversight and planning and coordination with stakeholders . in january 2007 , tsa and the coast guard issued a twic rule that sets forth the requirements for enrolling workers and issuing twic cards to workers in the maritime sector and awarded a $70 million contract for enrolling workers in the twic program . tsa is also taking steps designed to address requirements in the safe port act regarding the twic program , such as establishing a rollout schedule for enrolling workers and issuing twic cards at ports and conducting a pilot program to test twic access control technologies . tsa has also taken steps to strengthen twic contract planning and oversight and improve communication and coordination with its maritime stakeholders . since september 2006 , tsa reported that it has added staff with program and contract management expertise to help oversee the twic enrollment contract and taken additional steps to help ensure that contract requirements are met . in addition , tsa has also focused on improving communication and coordination with maritime stakeholders , such as developing plans for conducting public outreach and education efforts . on january 25 , 2007 , tsa and the coast guard issued a rule that sets forth the regulatory requirements for enrolling workers and issuing twic cards to workers in the maritime sector . specifically , the twic rule provides that workers and merchant mariners requiring unescorted access to secure areas of maritime facilities and vessels must enroll in the twic program , undergo a background check , and obtain a twic card before such access is granted . an attack would also be costly . according to testimony by a port of los angeles official , a 2002 labor dispute led to a 10-day shutdown of west coast port operations , costing the nation's economy an estimated $1.5 billion per day .