improve funding of shutdown benefits . shutdown benefits provide significant early retirement benefit subsidies or other benefits offered to participants affected by a plant closing or a permanent layoff . such benefits are primarily found in the pension plans of large unionized companies in the auto , steel , and tire industries . in general , shutdown benefits cannot be adequately funded before a shutdown occurs . rules could mandate accelerated funding of shutdown benefits after they go into effect . however , if a plant shutdown coincides with the bankruptcy of a company and the termination of the pension plan , it may be impossible for the bankrupt sponsor to fund these benefits . in addition to funding rules , plan sponsors need an accurate funding “target” that provides enough funding to pay promised current and future benefits while not leading sponsors to “overfund” their pension plans , siphoning resources from other productive firm specific activities . the interest rate sponsors use to determine plan liabilities can affect this target and , therefore , plan funding . in 1987 , when the 30-year treasury bond rate was adopted for use in certain pension calculations , the congress intended that the interest rate used for current liability calculations would , within certain parameters , reflect the price an insurance company would charge to take responsibility for the plan's pension payments . however , selecting a replacement rate that will provide an accurate funding target may be difficult because little information exists on which to base the selection . in taking action to replace the 30-year treasury bond rate , it is important to consider the impact that any change may have on funding . if congress mandates the use of a rate that is “too high,” plans are more likely to appear better funded , but minimum and maximum employer contributions would decrease , possibly increasing the likelihood of plan underfunding . in addition , some plans would reach full - funding limitations and avoid having to pay variable - rate premiums , and pbgc would receive less revenue . conversely , a rate that is “too low” would make plans appear worse funded , with more plans likely to increase contributions and possibly pay variable - rate premiums . ( see fig . in fiscal year 1996 , the program had its first accumulated surplus , and by fiscal year 2000 , the accumulated surplus had increased to about $10 billion , in 2002 dollars . however , the program's finances reversed direction in 2001 , and at the end of fiscal year 2002 , its accumulated deficit was about $3.6 billion . pbgc estimates that this deficit grew to $8.8 billion by august 31 , 2003 , its largest deficit in the program's history both in real and nominal terms . from less than $50 billion as of december 31 , 2000 , the total underfunding in single - employer plans grew to more than $400 billion as of december 31 , 2002 , and still exceeds $350 billion according to recent estimates by pbgc . ( see fig 2. )