this report presents information on all of these programs . we made changes to the content and format of the questionnaire after each pretest , based on the feedback received . when we analyzed the data , an independent analyst checked all computer programs to reduce risk of error . since this was a web - based questionnaire , respondents entered their answers directly into the electronic questionnaire , eliminating the need to key data into a database , minimizing error . we did not validate the data provided by the program offices , but reviewed the data and performed various checks to determine that the data were reliable enough for our purposes . where we discovered discrepancies from reviewing responses and interviewing program offices , we clarified the data with the program office and made changes to the questionnaire data accordingly . in addition to the contact named above , ronald e. schwenn , assistant director ; noah b. bleicher ; mackenzie cooper ; morgan delaney ramaker ; j. kristopher keener ; jean mcsween ; kenneth e. patton ; and brian schwartz made key contributions to this report . the comments are reprinted in appendix ii . dod also provided technical comments , which we addressed in the report , as appropriate . in concurring with our recommendation that the navy amend its policy on csbs to include all statutorily required participants , dod stated that the navy has already issued two policy memorandums that do so . dod also stated that the navy will continue to issue policy guidance consistent with our recommendation . this will be particularly important as the navy is currently in the process of revising its primary acquisition instruction . dod also concurred with our recommendations to amend its acquisition instruction to ensure that all statutorily required participants are included in csbs and that meetings occur for programs in development as well as those in production . dod did not address the portion of our recommendation to coordinate with the military departments and the congress to evaluate the effectiveness of csb meetings for programs well into production . given our mixed findings on the utility of csb meetings late in production , we continue to believe it would be in the interest of the department to study this issue . dod partially concurred with our recommendation that mda amend its policy to ensure that all statutorily required participants for military department csbs , in particular the joint staff , are included in mda's program change board , if it is to serve as an equivalent review . in its comments , dod stated that joint staff participation would provide little value because of the role of the joint staff in the acquisition of bmds . in addition , dod pointed out that the joint staff participates in the missile defense executive board , a forum in which strategic direction and funding priorities are established . however , we continue to believe that if the program change board is to act as the forum for discussing configuration and requirements changes , it is important that the user communities , as represented by the joint staff , participate in these discussions .