gao - 08-313 . washington , d.c.: february 28 , 2008 . ( see fig . in our survey , 33 of the 48 states from which we received responses reported that high rates of poverty in african american communities and issues related to living in poverty may increase the proportion of african american children entering foster care compared to that of children of other races and ethnicities . across the nation , african american families were nearly four times more likely to live in poverty than white families , according to u.s. census data . since foster care programs primarily serve children from low - income families , this could account for some of the disproportionate number of african american children in the foster care system . in addition , child welfare directors in 25 states reported that the greater number of african american single - parent households contributed to african american children's entry into foster care . according to the most recent national incidence study , children of single parents , who are also more likely than married couples to be poor , had a 77 to 87 percent greater risk of harm than children from two - parent families . across the nation , 34 percent of african american family households with children under 18 years of age were headed by single females compared to 9 percent for whites and 19 percent for hispanics , according to u.s. census data . moreover , families living in impoverished neighborhoods often do not have access to the kinds of supports and services that can prevent problems in the home from leading to abuse or neglect , according to states we surveyed and other research . such supports and services include affordable and adequate housing ; substance abuse treatment ; access to family services such as parenting skills workshops and counseling ; and adequate legal representation . also , there is some evidence that african american families , in particular , are not offered the same amount of support services when they are brought to the attention of the child welfare system . coupled with african american parents' greater distrust of the child welfare system , racial bias or cultural misunderstanding among decision makers also emerged in our survey as major factors contributing to the disproportionate number of african american children entering foster care . according to state child welfare officials and some researchers we interviewed , african american families' distrust of the child welfare system stems from their perception that the system is unresponsive to their needs and racially biased against them . this perception can shape the families' dynamics in their initial contacts with mandated reporters , caseworkers , and judges , which can increase the risk the child will be removed from the home . in our survey , state child welfare directors also reported that they considered racial bias or cultural misunderstanding on the part of those reporting abuse or neglect - - - such as teachers , medical professionals , or police officers , as well as among caseworkers - - - as factors in the disproportionate representation of african american children entering foster care .