table 1 summarizes the key requirements . finally , another district told us the annual reviews have affected its ability to provide developmental assistance and services to address the 8 ( a ) firm's needs . according to a senior sba official , these changes are intended to help sba administer the program more effectively . the proposed rules would introduce more detailed guidance and allow for less staff judgment , particularly for the standards that appeared to be associated with the inconsistencies in the annual review procedures in our review of 8 ( a ) case files . for example , the proposed regulations define more specific thresholds for considering an individual's personal assets and compensation , and whether a firm has exceeded size standards . however , the proposed regulations do not introduce more specific requirements relating to exceeding industry averages , and would increase staff flexibility to make judgments relating to excessive withdrawals . participation in the 8 ( a ) program lasts 9 years , and once it is completed , a firm and the individual cannot reapply . the 9-year program tenure is divided into two stages — a developmental stage covering years 1 through 4 , and a transitional stage covering years 5 through 9 . during the transitional years , firms are required to meet certain activity targets for non - 8 ( a ) contracts to ensure they do not develop an unreasonable reliance on the program . additionally , firms in the 8 ( a ) program are eligible to receive sole - source and competitively awarded set - aside federal contracts . as part of the 8 ( a ) program , sba developed the mentor - protégé program , in which experienced firms mentor 8 ( a ) firms to enhance the capabilities of the protégé , provide various forms of business developmental assistance , and improve the protégé's ability to successfully compete for contracts . to qualify initially as a protégé , an 8 ( a ) firm must meet one of three conditions: ( 1 ) be in the developmental stage of the 8 ( a ) program , or ( 2 ) never have received an 8 ( a ) contract , or ( 3 ) be of a size that is less than half the size standard corresponding to its primary standard industry code . appendix i discusses our scope and methodology in further detail . we conducted our work in boston , massachusetts ; denver , colorado ; san antonio , texas ; san francisco , california ; and washington , d.c. , between may 2009 and march 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . a firm must meet several initial eligibility requirements to qualify for the 8 ( a ) program ( a process known as certification ) , and then meet other requirements to continue participation .