the database is incomplete . it does not include all firms subject to the feed ban . fda officials relied on the personal knowledge of state and fda field staff and on membership lists from industry groups to identify and locate firms . however , our review of membership records for the national renderers association — for the years 1998 to 2001 — disclosed 21 rendering firms that were not in fda's database . according to association records , those firms process meat and bone meal and other products that could contain proteins subject to the feed ban . fda did not count data entries with blanks — no responses — in the selected data fields it uses when it reports on compliance . therefore , when fda provided compliance information to the congress — and when it publishes that information electronically — the data are misleading and the number of firms identified as out of compliance are undercounted . for example , for the 364 firms identified as out of compliance in fda's october 2001 update — the source for information in table 1 above — fda assumed that all entries with blanks in the compliance fields were in compliance . however , we found entries where firms had blanks in the data fields fda used , yet contained inspector comments in other fields showing that the firms were not in compliance . fda also did not include these firms on published lists of noncompliant firms . about half of the inspection records contain inspector comments . on those entries where blanks also existed , the inspector comments showed that firms were in compliance in some instances and out of compliance in others . an fda official told us that the database was not originally intended to track compliance of individual firms , but rather to guide the agency's efforts to educate firms subject to the ban by illustrating particular states or practices that needed more intensive focus . however , fda has no information system other than the inspection database to track compliance with the feed ban . fda has not placed a priority on oversight of the feed ban . from the implementation of the feed ban in august 1997 until early 2001 , one person in fda's center for veterinary medicine was responsible for feed ban management . although state and fda district office inspectors conducted the inspections , this individual designed the inspection form , compiled inspection data , and made enforcement decisions — in addition to that individual's other duties . furthermore , the inspection form had not been pretested — a standard practice to ensure that questions are interpreted and answered consistently . in the course of our review , fda attempted to clean up the database so that it could serve as an accurate management tool .