limited availability of training . officials in five of six selected states told us that the limited availability of classroom , clinical , or continuing education training is a barrier to maintaining a supply of trained examiners . regarding classroom training , some officials told us that training may only be offered once per year in their states . additionally , officials from both florida and iafn told us that there is a need for qualified instructors to run training sessions . experts and officials from colorado , nebraska , and oregon also told us that medical professionals in rural areas may have difficulty completing the clinical training necessary to become an examiner . obtaining clinical experience , such as performing exams under the supervision of a trained examiner , is a particular challenge in rural areas where hospitals may treat only a few sexual assault cases per year . one official in nebraska told us that trained examiners in rural areas might not feel competent to perform exams due to the low number of cases they treat . a lack of continuing education opportunities may also pose a challenge for examiners in maintaining the skills necessary to perform exams . for example , the national sexual violence resource center ( nsvrc ) reported that , based on common challenges identified through a survey of and group discussions among examiner program coordinators , maintaining competency may be difficult for nurses in rural areas due to a low volume of patients presenting in need of exams and limited access to ongoing and advanced training . officials told us that they have been able to increase the availability of examiner training through alternative training methods such as web - based training courses and simulated clinical training . for example , officials in colorado told us that their state's web - based examiner training program has made training less expensive and has increased examiner recruitment . officials in wisconsin told us that they developed a clinical training lab that allows examiners to gain hands - on experience by performing elements of exams on models who are experienced teaching assistants and hired for the purpose of training new examiners . further , in 2014 , a doj - funded evaluation of examiner training programs found that a web - based training course may help increase the availability of trained examiners ; the study also found that implementing web - based training had benefits such as decreasing the costs associated with attending in - person training , expanding training opportunities to remote areas , and allowing examiners to be trained by national experts . lack of technical assistance and other supportive resources . officials in four of six selected states told us that the limited availability of technical assistance and other supportive resources for examiners poses a challenge to maintaining a supply of trained examiners . for example , officials in florida , nebraska , oregon , and wisconsin explained that , in general , there is a lack of mentorship opportunities and leadership within the examiner community . officials also noted that the sustainability of examiner programs may be threatened by a lack of internal capacity , such as not having a full - time , paid examiner program coordinator available .