figure 1 illustrates this process . once biometrics data are in abis , they can be shared or sent to another biometrics database , such as the fbi's iafis , for additional matching attempts against non - dod records . dod has established agreements with the fbi and dhs that allow it to share its biometrics data with them , both to assist dod in identifying the individuals it encounters during its military activities and to inform other federal agencies of dod's interactions with non - u.s. persons who might be of interest . for example , dod uses the biometric identification system for access to collect biometrics from a non - u.s. person seeking access to a u.s. facility in iraq and sends that information back to dod's abis database to see if the new data match any biometrics data currently stored in abis . while abis is being searched , dod forwards the biometrics data to the fbi's iafis database to see if there is a u.s. criminal history for the individual seeking access to u.s. facilities in iraq . once the fbi conducts its search , it sends the results back to dod and does not keep noncriminal biometrics data collected using the biometric identification system for access . in other cases , for example , when an individual is detained in iraq or afghanistan by dod , the process is the same until dod sends the biometrics data to the fbi . in most of these cases , the fbi stores the biometrics data in iafis , a criminal database , for potential future use . during field activities , dod personnel collecting biometrics data may not know if the person is a non - u.s. person until the data are collected and then matched with already existing data . for example , dod personnel collecting latent fingerprints during and after combat operations may not know until the fingerprints are matched with existing data if the person is a non - u.s. person . we have indicated those changes with footnotes within the report . our objectives in this report were to determine to what extent ( 1 ) dod has guidance that establishes the biometrics data to be collected to support military activities and ( 2 ) there may be gaps in biometrics information shared between dod and dhs . to answer the first objective , we examined dod's policies and procedures for the collection of biometrics data during field operations . u.s. forces collect , match , and share biometrics data , and dod has developed a number of policies and procedures to govern these activities . however , guidance for the collection and use of biometrics data is still evolving . historically , the fbi has been the dominant federal government user of biometrics , with a long - established fingerprint database — iafis — as its primary biometrics data repository . for example , military personnel may be unable to identify someone who has harmed or attempted to harm u.s. or coalition forces . the collection of similar or baseline data by dod and departments or agencies involved in national security activities , such as counterterrorism , could enable them to use the same biometrics data across a wide range of national security missions .