performance . however , the guidance does not have a process for providing enhanced management oversight for services that closely support inherently governmental functions . through several efforts that address agencies' multisector workforce of federal employees and contractor personnel , omb addresses professional and management support service risks , including recent guidance that establishes agency management responsibilities for services that closely support inherently governmental functions . the five agencies we reviewed have responded to these efforts to varying degrees , but only dhs has taken steps to incorporate all of these efforts . in recent initiatives , omb may have missed opportunities to address risks associated with two specific codes for professional and management support services . omb has initiated a number of interrelated efforts that address agencies' use of service contractors , including contractors for professional and management support services , in the context of maintaining a balanced workforce with the appropriate mix of federal employees and contractors . primarily in response to congressional requirements , since 2009 omb has developed guidance and facilitated efforts to improve how agencies manage their multisector workforce , which includes addressing the risks that overreliance on contractors can pose to government control and accountability . through these efforts , congress and omb have emphasized the need to examine contracted functions where agencies risk becoming overreliant on contractors , such as professional and management support service contracts . by focusing on the role that both government and contractor employees have in performing work that supports agency missions , these efforts emphasize the need to consider how contracted functions fit into agency goals and priorities as part of strategic planning processes . the resulting multisector workforce efforts seek to broaden decisions about the use of contractors from primarily a procurement office function , or a series of individual , program - office - level decisions , to a shared agency responsibility that requires the involvement of human capital , budget , and program , as well as procurement offices . recent efforts that address professional and management support services are described in table 4 . omb established criteria to help agencies respond to the statutory requirement to develop a process for reviewing service contractor activities to consider if contractor performance is appropriate , referred to as insourcing guidance . omb's guidance identifies professional services as an area of risk , thus requiring increased agency monitoring . in 2009 , omb also required agencies to conduct multisector workforce planning pilots in one office or unit to gain experience with determining optimal workforce balance and submit summary reports on their workforce analysis . more recently , in 2010 , omb issued guidance to help agencies conduct inventories of their fiscal year 2010 service contracts and an analysis of the inventory , which provides a more detailed list of professional and management support service codes , including program management support and intelligence services that require increased attention from agencies . technical assistance . sows requested services including support to foreign governments , such as support for security and governance in nepal and local government capacity building in unstable areas of afghanistan , as well as contracts to update information technology systems and manuals and provide technical and administrative support to meet information technology security requirements .