most of the work is for the navy . operating under the working capital fund concept , these frcs are intended to ( 1 ) generate sufficient resources to cover the full costs of their operations and ( 2 ) operate on a break - even basis over time . customers , such as the navy , use appropriated funds ( typically operation and maintenance or procurement appropriations ) to finance orders placed with the frcs . the frcs provide the navy an in - house industrial capability to conduct depot - level maintenance , repair , and upgrade of aircraft , engines , and aircraft components . table 1 describes the locations and principal work for each frc . when navy frc work has been ordered and funded ( obligated ) by customers but has not been completed at the end of a fiscal year , it is referred to as carryover . some carryover is appropriate in order for working capital fund activities , such as the frcs , to ensure the continuity of operations from one fiscal year to the next . for example , if customers do not receive sufficient appropriations at the beginning of the fiscal year , carryover is necessary to ensure that the frcs ( 1 ) have enough work to continue operations in the new fiscal year and ( 2 ) retain the appropriate number of personnel with sufficient skill sets to perform depot maintenance work . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the contact named above , greg pugnetti ( assistant director ) , steve donahue , keith mcdaniel , and hal santarelli made key contributions to this report . by optimizing the amount of carryover , dod can use its resources in the most efficient and effective manner and minimize the backlog of work . dod's financial management regulation 7000.14-r , volume 2b , chapter 9 , provides that the allowable amount of carryover each year is to be based on the dollar amount of new orders received that year and the outlay rate of the customers' appropriations financing the work . for example , customer orders financed with a specific appropriation total $100 . if the outlay rate for this appropriation is 60 percent , then the working capital fund activity group is allowed to carry over $40 ( i.e. the dod carryover policy further provides that the work on the current fiscal year's orders is expected to be completed by the end of the following fiscal year . for example , for an order accepted in fiscal year 2014 , the work is expected to be completed at the end of fiscal year 2015 . this occurred because the navy was uncertain of the amount of funds the frcs would receive in the supplemental appropriations for depot maintenance work .