( see fig . one recipient reported that by hiring one psychiatrist , it could significantly increase clients' access to services by cutting down a clinic's waiting list and by providing clients with a “same - day” psychiatric consultation or evaluation . another recipient reported that it hired 23 medical care providers , some of whom were staffed at its new sites . some recipients reported that hiring additional providers enabled them to expand the hours some of their sites were open . of the 23 recipients that responded to our survey , 17 reported they used pcasg funds to retain health care providers , and 15 of these reported that they also used grant funds to retain other staff . for example , one recipient reported that pcasg funds were used to stabilize positions that were previously supported by disaster relief funds and donated services . we administered the survey in october 2008 . we received responses from 23 of the 25 recipients , a response rate of 92 percent . we also reviewed and analyzed data from ldhh on expenditures related to the supplemental ssbg and on awards made under cms's professional workforce supply grant program , reviewed the recipients' applications for pcasg funding and their plans for sustainability , and interviewed officials at ldhh and pcasg fund recipients about how the recipients used pcasg and other federal funds . we conducted the work for our july 2009 report from february 2008 through june 2009 . to update the work on the pcasg , we interviewed state , lphi , and pcasg fund recipient officials about sustainability plans and reviewed and analyzed more recent data from these officials about program funding and services . we conducted this new work in october and november 2009 and shared the information we obtained with hhs officials . in addition , we incorporated findings from another july 2009 report , which examined barriers to mental health services for children in the greater new orleans area . we conducted the original and updated work in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that are relevant to our objectives . the framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work . we believe that the information and data obtained , and the analysis conducted , provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions in this product . a detailed explanation of our methodology for each of the 2009 reports is included in the respective reports . pcasg fund recipients that responded to our october 2008 survey reported that they used pcasg funds to hire or retain health care providers and other staff , add primary care services , and open new sites . ( see table 1. ) recipients also said that the pcasg funds helped them improve service delivery and access to care for the patients they served . as of september 20 , 2009 , pcasg recipients reported to lphi that they had used pcasg funds — in conjunction with other funds , such as other federal grants and medicaid reimbursement — to support services provided to almost 252,000 patients .