( see fig . also designed to deter abusive tax shelters , accuracy - related penalties aim at investors who use abusive shelters to substantially undervalue true tax liability . other penalties are for promoters who market shelters that aid and abet the understatement of tax liability or who fail to register shelters . irs's examination returns control system showed irs assessing 21 investor penalties totaling about $73 million between july 1 , 2002 , and may 1 , 2003 , which taxpayers had not necessarily agreed to pay . during our review , treasury included proposed legislation in the administration's revenue proposals to strengthen the penalties that could be used in abusive shelter situations . irs's ability to detect abusive shelters increased in the last 3 years due to otsa's hotline , through which callers provide tips about transactions or investors ; disclosure , registration , and list maintenance requirements ; increased attention by irs management ; and increased use of irs examination resources to look for shelter irregularities . for instance , between may 31 , 2000 , and july 30 , 2003 , the hotline received 729 shelter - related telephone calls and e - mails , some of them leading irs to new listed transactions , promoters , and investors . as another example , irs expanded its disclosure requirements in june 2002 to include noncorporate taxpayers . finally , as evidence of increased management attention , irs established a new senior position reporting to the irs chief counsel to supervise staff and lead task force initiatives to more quickly identify and deal with abusive shelters . cases may be resolved at the examination level if taxpayers agree with irs findings . if taxpayers do not agree , cases are resolved at the appeals level , through litigation , or by alternative dispute resolution . in addition to these detection and case resolution efforts , irs is using schedule k - 1 data to research better methods of detecting abusive shelters that involve multiple levels of flow - through entities . these complex structures of related entities pose challenges in analyzing tax compliance by creating opportunities for taxpayers to disguise noncompliance . in the future , irs hopes to use advanced data analysis tools such as link analysis and graph - based data mining to identify potential abusive shelters . link analysis is the process of building networks of related entities , such as flow - through entities and schedule k - 1 recipients , in order to expose patterns and trends . graph - based data mining , a form of link analysis , is intended to enable irs to identify structures of known abusive shelters and find similar patterns in the population of flow - through networks to discover previously undisclosed potential abusive shelter transactions . irs has paid a contractor $200,000 so far to assess the feasibility of these technologies and plans to spend $575,000 over the next 1.5 to 2 years to develop these concepts into models . coordination within irs and interface with treasury on abusive shelters is a core objective in irs's plans for addressing those shelters .