gen . assem. , reg . sess . ( md . employee access to account - based retirement plans . ( 2 ) how much are workers likely to have saved in dc plans by the time they reach retirement and to what degree do certain key individual decisions and plan features affect plan saving ? ( 3 ) what options have been recently proposed to increase dc plan coverage , participation , and savings ? to analyze participation and savings in dc plans , we examined data from the 2004 version of the federal reserve board's survey of consumer finances ( scf ) , the latest available scf , and data published by other government agencies , by private organizations , and from academic studies . to analyze how much americans can expect to save in dc plans by the time they retire and the factors that affect these savings , we utilized a microsimulation model , pensim , that simulates demographic , working , and pension patterns for a constructed sample over their lives . ( see appendix i for further details of our projections using pensim. ) we also reviewed similar studies to compare their methodologies and conclusions ( see app . ii ) . to analyze policy options to increase dc plan coverage , participation , and savings , we synthesized information gathered from interviews of plan practitioners , financial managers , and public policy experts , as well as from academic and policy studies on dc plan participation and savings . we also researched current government initiatives and policy proposals to broaden participation in account - based pension plans and increase retirement savings . we conducted our work from july 2006 to october 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . employer - sponsored pensions fall into two major categories: defined benefit ( db ) and defined contribution ( dc ) plans . in db , or traditional , plans , benefits are typically set by formula , with workers receiving benefits upon retirement based on the number of years worked for a firm and earnings in years prior to retirement . in dc plans , workers accumulate savings through contributions to an individual account . these accounts are tax - advantaged in that contributions are typically excluded from current income , and earnings on balances grow tax - deferred until they are withdrawn . an employer may also make contributions , either by matching employee's contributions up to plan or legal limits , or on a non - contingent basis . like db plans , dc plans operate in a voluntary system with tax incentives for employers to offer a plan and for employees to participate . contributions to and earnings on dc plan accounts are not taxed until the participant withdraws the money , although participants making withdrawals prior to age 59 ½ may incur an additional 10 percent tax . in 2006 , the pension tax expenditure for dc plans amounted to $54 billion . in addition , a nonrefundable tax credit to qualifying low - and middle - income workers who make contributions , the saver's credit , accounted for less than 2 percent of the 2006 tax expenditure on account - based retirement plans .