housing developments can be assisted by multiple programs . for example , a loan or mortgage on a multifamily property may be insured through a hud or usda program , and the property may have tenants that receive rental assistance from these agencies . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included emily chalmers , natasha ewing , alison martin , john mcgrail , marc molino , lisa moore , john mingus , paul schmidt , and julianne stephens . usda section 502 rural housing loans ( direct ) section 502 direct housing natural disaster loans section 502 guaranteed rural housing loans section 504 rural housing repair and rehabilitation loans section 515 rural rental housing loans section 521 rural rental assistance section 538 guaranteed rural rental housing loans project - based rental assistance ( section 8 and rent supplement ) ( inactive ) section 8 moderate rehabilitation ( inactive ) section 207 mortgage insurance for manufactured home parks section 207 / 223 ( f ) mortgage insurance for existing multifamily properties section 213 mortgage insurance for cooperatives section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) below - market interest rate ( inactive ) section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) / ( d ) ( 4 ) mortgage insurance section 236 mortgage insurance and interest reduction payments ( inactive ) before fiscal year 1992 , the section 202 program also supported the development of housing for the disabled . the section 515 program's congregate housing subprogram requires properties to provide supportive services . the agency assists residents of guthrie properties in obtaining a variety of services , including meals and transportation to a senior center . some elderly residents of public and federally subsidized housing may also obtain health - related services through programs run by hhs . for example , hhs's public housing primary care program provides public housing residents with access to affordable comprehensive primary and preventive health care through clinics that are located either within public housing properties or in immediately accessible locations . the united way provides most of the funding for the senior center . in guthrie , oklahoma , guthrie properties — also a section 515 property — has established a relationship with the local area agency on aging . the program awards grants to public and nonprofit private entities to establish the clinics . the organizations must work with public housing authorities to obtain the physical space for the clinics and to establish relationships with residents . currently , there are 35 grantees , 3 of which are in rural areas . according to a program administrator , although clinics are not specifically geared toward public housing designated for the elderly , they can be established at such properties . elderly residents of federally subsidized housing may also be eligible for the medicaid home and community - based services ( hcbs ) waiver program , which is administered by hhs's centers for medicare and medicaid services . through this waiver program , individuals eligible for medicaid can receive needed health care without having to live in an institutional setting . hud has identified these waivers as an innovative model for assisting the frail elderly in public housing .