we have identified several areas of concern . in many cases the fhlbanks have not substantiated and documented their reasons for not accepting alternative collateral or applying relatively high haircuts to it . available fhlbank documentation suggests that some alternative collateral haircuts may be too high ; limited fdic asset valuation estimates indicate that the risks associated with alternative collateral can vary over time ; and 15 of the 30 cfi representatives we interviewed expressed concerns about haircuts applied to such collateral and other risk - management practices , some of whom said such policies and practices limited their willingness to use alternative collateral . in addition , because fhfa has not leveraged its existing examination procedures to include an assessment of the fhlbanks' alternative collateral policies , the appropriateness of such policies may not be clear . furthermore , fhfa has not ensured that all fhlbanks establish quantitative goals for products related to agricultural and small business lending , which could include alternative collateral , in their strategic business plans as required by the agency's regulations . finally , fhfa has not taken steps , such as revising its regulations pertaining to targeted community development plans , or strategic business plans , or other measures as may be appropriate , to follow a process whereby they conduct market analysis and consult with a range of stakeholders in their communities to identify and address agricultural and small business financing needs , including the use of alternative collateral . we recognize that fhfa has critical responsibilities to help ensure that the fhlbanks' operate in a safe and sound manner , and has not focused on alternative collateral because it was not deemed a risk to safety and soundness . nevertheless , the agency also has an obligation to take reasonable steps to help ensure that the fhlbank system is achieving the missions for which it was established , including economic development through the use of alternative collateral . we recommend that the acting director of fhfa take the following actions to help ensure that the fhlbanks' economic development mission - related activities include the appropriate use of alternative collateral , as provided for in glba . revise fhfa examination guidance to include requirements that its examiners periodically assess the fhlbanks' alternative collateral policies and practices , similar to the manner in which other forms of collateral , such as single - family mortgages , are assessed . specifically , fhfa should revise its guidance to ensure that examiners periodically assess the fhlbanks' analytical basis for either ( 1 ) not accepting alternative collateral , or ( 2 ) establishing their haircuts and other risk - management policies for such collateral . enforce regulatory requirements that the fhlbanks' strategic business plans include quantitative performance goals for products related to agricultural and small business financing , including the use of alternative collateral as appropriate . consider requiring the fhlbanks , through a process of market analysis and consultations with stakeholders , to periodically identify and address agricultural and small business financing needs in their communities , including the use of alternative collateral . such requirements could be established through revisions to fhfa's regulations for targeted community development plans or strategic business plans or through other measures as deemed appropriate .