gao - 03-907 . washington , d.c.: july 29 , 2003 . insurance versus savings . social security is a form of insurance , while individual accounts would be a form of savings . as social insurance , social security protects workers and their dependents against a variety of risks such as the inability to earn income due to old age , disability , or death . in contrast , a savings account provides income only from individuals' contributions and any earnings on them ; individuals effectively insure themselves under a savings approach . defined - benefit versus defined - contribution . social security provides a “defined - benefit” pension , while individual accounts would provide a “defined - contribution” pension . defined - benefit pensions typically determine benefit amounts using a formula that takes into account individuals' earnings and years of earnings . the provider assumes the financial and insurance risk associated with funding those promised benefit levels . defined - contribution pensions , such as 401 ( k ) plans , determine benefit amounts based on the contributions made to the accounts and any earnings on those contributions . as a result , the individual bears the financial and insurance risks under a defined - contribution plan until retirement . pay - as - you - go versus full funding . social security is financed largely on a “pay - as - you - go” basis , while individual accounts would be “fully funded.” in a pay - as - you - go system , contributions that workers make in a given year fund the payments to beneficiaries in that same year , and the system's trust funds are kept to a relatively small contingency reserve . in contrast , in a fully funded system , contributions for a given year are put aside to pay for future benefits . the investment earnings on these funds contribute considerable revenues and reduce the size of contributions that would otherwise be required to pay for the benefits . defined - contribution pensions and individual retirement savings are fully funded by definition . to evaluate reform proposals , we have suggested that policy makers should consider three basic criteria: 1. the extent to which the proposal achieves sustainable solvency and how the proposal would affect the economy and the federal budget ; 2. the balance struck between the twin goals of individual equity ( rates of return on individual contributions ) and income adequacy ( level and certainty of benefits ) ; and 3. how readily such changes could be implemented , administered , and explained to the public . providing higher replacement rates for lower earners than for higher earners is just one of several aspects of our criterion for balancing adequacy and equity . with regard to adequacy , this criterion also considers the extent to which the proposal changes benefits for current and future retirees ; maintains or enhances benefits for low - income workers who are most reliant on social security ; and maintains benefits for the disabled , dependents , and survivors . in addition , providing higher replacement rates for lower earners than for higher earners does not by itself ensure adequacy .