surveillance for other diseases is more limited . the strongest influence on the evolution of the existing surveillance framework has been the collaboration among medical professionals , national governments , and foreign assistance agencies to develop control programs and associated surveillance efforts that focus on specific diseases or groups of diseases . the longest standing of these disease - specific efforts is the global influenza program , which was launched prior to who's founding in 1948 . later , the success of the global effort to eradicate smallpox ( 1966 through 1977 ) spurred the creation of other programs designed to eradicate or eliminate global disease threats , such as polio and leprosy , and diseases found in specific regions , such as guinea worm and river blindness , which are both found primarily in africa.global consensus in favor of these eradication / elimination campaigns was achieved during the late 1980s and early 1990s , after reduction programs had achieved substantial progress . who also collaborates with numerous institutions around the world to maintain programs to control noneradicable infectious diseases such as hiv / aids , cholera , tuberculosis , malaria , and dengue . national disease - control programs reflect this focus on specific diseases . although there is no cure , an effective vaccine is included as part of routine childhood immunizations . fewer than 3,500 confirmed cases were reported in 2000 , with transmission still occurring in up to 20 countries . rift valley fever is a viral disease that primarily affects animals — including domesticated livestock — but can be transmitted to people by mosquitoes or contact with the body fluids of infected animals . rift valley fever usually causes a flu - like illness lasting 4 to 7 days , but about 1 percent of cases develops into a more severe hemorrhagic fever that has an approximately 50-percent fatality rate . an antiviral drug has been identified and is being tested , and vaccines are under development . the disease has occurred in many parts of africa and , in september 2000 , was for the first time reported outside of africa , in saudi arabia and yemen . river blindness , or onchocerciasis , is a parasitic disease . blackflies transmit the larvae of parasitic worms to humans , where they grow into adult worms with a lifespan of 12 to 15 years . these worms spawn millions of microscopic parasites that travel throughout the body causing unbearable itching , skin disfigurement , and vision impairment or blindness . treatment with the drug ivermectin kills the infant parasites but has very limited if any effect on adult worms . the disease is endemic in 37 countries , with nearly all cases in africa . salmonella infection , or salmonellosis , is caused by a group of bacteria that may be present in contaminated foods — often raw or undercooked foods of animal origin . it causes acute diarrheal illness , for which treatment is usually not required . in some cases , however , the infection can spread in the bloodstream and cause death unless antibiotics are used . over 2,200 strains of salmonella bacteria have been identified , including some that have developed antibiotic resistance and are hence more difficult to control .