specialty care . we identified five locations where access to specialty care providers may be particularly problematic . ( see table 2. ) in these five locations , the percent of beneficiaries who reported that they had problems finding a specialty care provider was at or above the 2012- 2015 beneficiary surveys' national average of 23 percent , and also where the percent of specialty care providers who reported that they were accepting new tricare patients was at or below the 2012- 2015 civilian provider surveys' national average of 78 percent . when we compared this analysis to our analysis of the 2008-2011 beneficiary and provider surveys , the “dallas / fort worth , texas” hsa was identified in both results . using data from the prior survey , our analysis identified it as being potentially problematic for primary care , but using data from the more recent survey , we identified specialty care access as being potentially problematic . dod officials told us that their past analysis of beneficiaries' complaints in this location centered on appointment wait times exceeding beneficiaries' preferences and on drive times to providers' offices . officials explained that although there was a wide range of network specialty care providers in this location , tricare beneficiaries were a very small percentage of the overall population . furthermore , this location is home to a number of large corporations that have health care plans that reimburse providers more than tricare . dod officials added that due to these factors , providers in this location do not give preference to tricare beneficiaries , and drive times in this location are often long due to the traffic patterns and overall congestion of a large urban area . in reviewing a draft of this report , dod concurred with our overall findings . dod's written response is reprinted in appendix i . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense and appropriate congressional committees . primary care . we identified two locations where access to primary care providers may be particularly problematic . ( see fig . prior to january 1 , 2018 , tricare provided benefits through three basic options for its non - medicare - eligible beneficiary population — tricare prime , standard , and extra . these options varied by enrollment requirements , choices in civilian and military treatment facility providers , and the amount beneficiaries must contribute toward the cost of their care . ( see table 1. ) the ndaa 2017 made specific changes to the tricare program that became effective on january 1 , 2018 . these changes included terminating the tricare standard and extra options , establishing a new option called tricare select , and ensuring that 85 percent of tricare select beneficiaries are covered by the network of civilian providers . tricare select has similar benefits to tricare standard and extra for obtaining care from nonnetwork and network providers , but unlike these options , tricare select requires enrollment . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .