usms . according to usms officials , each additional court docket , courtroom in use , or immigration - related defendant who appears in court requires judicial security support . usms officials in all five southwest border locations told us that they took actions to meet the judicial security mission need , but that the increased prosecutions have strained their staff . usms officials we spoke with in all five southwest border districts said that they reassigned deputies in fiscal year 2018 from proactive task forces ( such as task forces dedicated to arresting individuals with active federal warrants ) to judicial security court duty and detention security to support increased immigration - related prosecutions . in particular , usms officials said that they assigned more deputies to judicial security court duty because of the increase in improper entry prosecutions . usms officials we spoke with in several locations on the southwest border said that the increased judicial security duty has made it difficult for their deputies to meet their training requirements . they are concerned that the high demand for judicial security in southwest border districts may affect their ability to retain deputies . officials from usms in multiple locations along the southwest border told us that the increase in immigration - related prosecutions strained their existing detention space . for instance , california southern required additional detention space for defendants in improper entry cases , and could not locate additional detention space nearby or within the judicial district . as a result , usms officials told us in october 2018 that deputies may drive defendants to neighboring judicial districts , including california central , nevada , and arizona , to detain them before and between court appearances . according to usms officials , providing transportation for such defendants can comprise deputies' entire shifts . additionally , officials in the texas western district told us in november 2018 that due to the increase in immigration - related prosecutions in fiscal year 2018 , detention facilities in del rio reached capacity . usms transports prisoners up to seven hours one way to other detention facilities . further , usms received permission to triple - bunk prisoners ( using three stacked beds , rather than two stacked beds ) in del rio and el paso , and to use additional temporary beds , such as cots , to house additional prisoners close to courthouses . as we have previously reported , the average daily population of usms prisoners is directly influenced by , among other things , the activities and decisions of federal law enforcement , usaos , and the federal judiciary . according to usms data , the average daily population of immigration - related prisoners on the southwest border increased from 7,796 in may 2017 ( a five - year low ) to 11,668 in september 2018 ( a five - year high ) . according to usms officials with whom we spoke and documents we reviewed , in 2018 , usms sought additional detention space . in may 2018 , usms issued a public request for information to determine the availability of contractor owned and operated secure detention facilities on the southwest border .