any pdp . subject to ma plan's internal appeal process . subject to ma plan's internal appeal process . subject to ma plan's internal appeal process . subject to medicare appeals process . the annual election period ( aep ) is from november 15th to december 1st , the ma open enrollment period ( ma oep ) is from january 1st to march 1st , and special enrollment periods ( sep ) apply whenever a beneficiary meets certain criteria , such as moving out of their current plan's service area . beneficiaries have the right to appeal coverage decisions . this chart relates to the first of the five levels of appeals . in addition to the contact above , christine brudevold , assistant director ; lori achman ; julianne flowers ; hannah marston ; sarah marshall ; elizabeth t. morrison ; and amanda pusey made key contributions to this report . any provider that accepts medicare . any stand - alone medicare prescription drug plan ( pdp ) or pdp offered by the cost plan organization . a part d plan offered by the ma organization . a part d plan offered by the ma organization . a pdp offered by the pffs organization . regional ppos are also ccps . special needs plans exclusively or disproportionately enroll special needs individuals . special needs individuals are beneficiaries who are institutionalized , eligible for both medicare and medicaid , or have a disability or chronic condition . special needs plans can be any type of ccp . private fee - for - service ( pffs ) plans , which are local plans that are not required to have a contracted provider network as long as they pay willing providers at least the medicare ffs rate . ma benefit packages may include medicare part d coverage ; however , all ccps must offer at least one benefit package with part d coverage . cms pays cost plans the reasonable cost of the medicare - covered services they furnish directly to , or arrange for , medicare beneficiaries enrolled in their plan , less the value of the deductible and coinsurance . in addition to the costs directly related to the provision of health services , cms also pays reasonable costs associated with operating a health plan , such as marketing , enrollment , and membership expenses . cost plans receive an advance interim payment per member per month based on the cost plan's estimated reimbursable costs . cms and the cost plans make adjustments after the contract period to align the payments with the actual costs incurred following the plan's submission of an independently certified cost report that details cost , utilization , and enrollment data for the entire contract period . as of december 2009 , 18 organizations operated 22 cost plans , with enrollments ranging from 50 to 74,190 . of the 22 cost plans , 15 were open to enrollment . nonprofit organizations operated 17 of the 22 cost plans . ( see app . i for a list of the organizations that offer cost plans. ) eight cost plans offered part d coverage in 2009 . we determined that all data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .