an updated version of that briefing is provided in appendix i . this report officially transmits our results to the committee and our recommendations to the agency . to perform this work , we reviewed agency policies and procedures for updating and approving flyout charts ; analyzed all changes noaa made to its flyout charts since march 2014 ; and compared noaa's approach against practices used by the air force , internal controls , and relevant program assessments . the briefing slides included in appendix i provide greater detail on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from february 2016 to september 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . noaa has a process for updating its flyout charts , but this process is not established in policy . noaa's process for updating its flyout charts involves obtaining updated information on the health of operational satellites from internal specialists and program based studies , such as satellite availability assessments ; obtaining updated information on the launch schedules for new satellites ; having relevant individuals and entities review the updated charts ; and obtaining approval from the assistant administrator of the national environmental satellite , data , and information service ( nesdis ) to publish the new chart on its public facing website . this process is triggered at least once a year in preparation for the budget process or more often when important changes occur , such as a loss of use of a satellite or when a budget decision affects a launch date . officials estimated that it can take several weeks to prepare , review , and obtain consensus to publish the new charts . this process is partially documented in a draft policy from june 2011 . nesdis officials stated that the draft policy serves as documentation of the agency's process ; however , the policy was never finalized and is currently out - of - date because several details have changed since 2011 . for example , the outdated draft does not include the name of the office responsible for updating the flyout charts , or define the use of fuel limited life to estimate the lifespan of operational satellites . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of commerce , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions on the matters discussed in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or at pownerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . according to the nesdis assistant administrator , the agency recently appointed a new director with responsibility for updating and finalizing the policy .