this problem has been longstanding . in our 1987 report , we noted similar difficulties in matching data from the list of excluded parties with fpds data . despite our findings , the problem continues , increasing the risk that suspended or debarred contractors will be awarded new contracts during a period of exclusion . the overall reliability of reported data is also a concern . according to gsa officials , responsibility for ensuring data reliability rests with the agencies entering data into epls . gsa does not know , however , whether agencies have tested the reliability of their epls data . the absence of information on data reliability makes using the system for oversight or analysis problematic . for example , when we attempted to use epls to determine the average length of time of exclusions , we found many records with an indefinite termination date . in some cases , parties are listed as excluded for an indefinite period of time pending the outcome of a case . in nonprocurement cases , parties also may be excluded for an indefinite period of time . however , when a record is entered in epls without a termination date , the system defaults to record the termination date as indefinite . in the absence of information on data reliability , there is no way to estimate the extent to which the entries with indefinite termination dates reflect parties that had been excluded for an indefinite period of time or parties for which no termination date had been entered . the interagency suspension and debarment committee ( isdc ) is responsible for coordinating policy , practices , and information sharing on various suspension and debarment issues . the isdc serves as an interagency forum and conducts monthly meetings for federal agencies' suspension and debarment officials . while isdc is not a decision - making body , it develops recommendations for the office of management and budget ( omb ) on interagency issues , such as determining which agency should take the lead on a case when more than one agency does business with a particular contractor . the isdc reports to omb's office of federal financial management and has been chaired by epa's suspension and debarment officer since 1988 . in its march 2002 report on interagency coordination , the isdc emphasized the importance of identifying a lead agency to coordinate with other federal agencies that do business with a contractor before entering into an administrative agreement . in our discussions with several suspension and debarment officials they said that , in addition , sharing information on past and current administrative agreements within the broader community of suspension and debarment officials would also be useful . they said that when an agency official is considering taking action with respect to a particular contractor , it would be helpful to know whether another agency had ever used an administrative agreement with that contractor , what the terms of the agreement were , and whether the contractor had complied with the agreement . that information is not currently collected centrally nor routinely made available to all suspension and debarment officials . of the agencies we reviewed , only the army has taken initiative to share information on administrative agreements .