drc . monusco reported in september 2014 that armed groups and national security forces continued to commit crimes of sexual violence . between june 30 , 2014 , and september 25 , 2014 , it recorded 37 cases of sexual violence committed by armed groups and national security forces , 15 of which were committed by the armed forces of the democratic republic of congo and 10 by mayi - mayi combatants from different groups . the report indicates that 18 of the 37 cases of sexual violence occurred in north kivu , south kivu , and orientale provinces . rwanda . domestic violence against women was common . although many incidents remained within the extended family and were not reported or prosecuted , government officials encouraged the reporting of domestic violence , and the rwanda national police stated that reporting of such cases increased . uganda . rape remained a serious problem throughout the country , and the government did not consistently enforce the law . although the government arrested , prosecuted and convicted persons for rape , the crime was seriously underreported , and authorities did not investigate most cases . police lacked the criminal forensic capacity to collect evidence , which hampered prosecution and conviction . the 2013 police crime report registered 1,042 rape cases throughout the country , of which 365 were tried . of these , 11 convictions were secured , with sentences ranging from 3 years to life imprisonment , 11 cases were dismissed ; and 343 cases were still pending in court at year's end . in addition , some un entities reported case file information on sexual violence in the drc and burundi , as described below: drc . a march 2015 report of the secretary - general on conflict - related sexual violence showed that , from january 2014 to september 2014 , the united nations population fund ( unfpa ) recorded 11,769 cases of sexual violence in the provinces of north kivu , south kivu , orientale , katanga , and maniema . of these cases , 39 percent were considered to be directly related to the dynamics of conflict , being perpetrated by arms bearers . the report also notes that , as in 2013 , north kivu and orientale remain the provinces most affected by conflict - related sexual violence , with 42 percent of all incidents taking place in orientale . drc . pub . 124 stat . 1376 , 2213-18. several u.s. agencies — the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , the department of state ( state ) , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , and the department of commerce ( commerce ) — to take certain actions to implement the act's conflict minerals provisions . for example , section 1502 ( b ) of the act required sec , in consultation with state , to promulgate disclosure and reporting regulations regarding the use of conflict minerals from the drc and adjoining countries . sec adopted its conflict minerals disclosure rule in august 2012 .