( recommendation 1 ) . we conducted in - person interviews with staff at 3 of these posts — the u.s. embassy in beijing and the u.s. consulate in shanghai , china , and the u.s. embassy in new delhi , india . we conducted telephone interviews with staff at the other 7 posts — the u.s. embassies in abuja , nigeria ; bogota , colombia ; kinshasa , democratic republic of the congo ; kabul , afghanistan ; mexico city , mexico ; and n'djamena , chad ; and the u.s. consulate in frankfurt , germany . we used the following criteria to select overseas posts for interviews: ( 1 ) posts with larger numbers of foreign service vacancies ; ( 2 ) posts with diversity in the types of foreign service positions that were vacant ; ( 3 ) posts with higher relative importance to u.s. economic , national security , and other foreign policy interests ; and ( 4 ) posts in a range of geographic locations by state region . to examine vacancies in state's foreign service staffing at overseas posts , we analyzed state's personnel data on foreign service staffing at overseas posts from the department's global employment management system ( gems ) , as of march 2018 . our analysis of the gems data includes foreign service positions filled by permanent foreign service employees as well as positions filled by nonpermanent foreign service employees , such as consular fellows . this analysis does not include the number of staffed and vacant positions at overseas posts in libya , syria , and yemen , which , at the time of our review , were in suspended operations status , as well as u.s. mission somalia , which was operating under special circumstances at a different location . the results of this analysis were similar to those we reported in 2012 . for example , a post with 10 positions and 2 vacancies would have a vacancy rate of 20 percent . we calculated vacancy rates for each of the following categories: type ( i.e. , generalist or specialist ) , function ( eg , consular or information management ) , regional bureau ( i.e. in its comments , reproduced in appendix iii , state concurred with our recommendation . state also noted that it has taken actions and identified some causes of vacancies , but acknowledged that it lacks an integrated action plan and will take steps to develop such a plan . state also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of state , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6881 or bairj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .