security . election officials are responsible for establishing and managing security and privacy controls to protect against threats to the integrity of elections . threats to election results and voter confidentiality include potential modification or loss of electronic voting data ; loss , theft , or modification of physical ballots ; and unauthorized access to software and electronic equipment . different types of controls can be used to counter these threats . physical access controls are important for securing voting equipment , vote tabulation equipment , and ballots . software access controls ( such as passwords and firewalls ) are important for limiting the number of people who can access and operate voting devices , election management software , and vote tabulation software . in addition , physical screens around voting stations and poll workers preventing voters from being watched or coerced while voting are important to protect the privacy and confidentiality of the vote . reliability . ensuring the reliability of votes being recorded and tallied is an essential attribute of any voting equipment and depends to a large degree on the accuracy and availability of voting systems . without such assurance , both voter confidence in the election and the integrity and legitimacy of the outcome of the election are at risk . the importance of an accurate vote count increases with the closeness of the election . both optical scan and dre systems are claimed to be highly accurate . , whether the voter's intent is captured ) , and it can also affect the efficiency of the voting process ( confused voters take longer to vote ) . accessibility by diverse types of voters , including those with disabilities , is a further aspect of ease of use . cost . for a given jurisdiction , the particular cost associated with an electronic voting system will depend on the requirements of the jurisdiction as well as the particular equipment chosen . voting equipment costs vary among types of voting equipment and among different manufacturers and models of the same type of equipment . some of these differences can be attributed to differences in what is included in the unit cost . in addition to the equipment unit cost , an additional cost for jurisdictions is the software that operates the equipment , prepares the ballots , and tallies the votes ( and in some cases , prepares the election results reports ) . other factors affecting the acquisition cost of voting equipment are the number and types of peripherals required . once jurisdictions acquire the voting equipment , they also incur the cost to operate and maintain it , which can vary considerably . election officials , computer security experts , citizen advocacy groups , and others have raised significant security and reliability concerns with electronic voting systems , citing , for example , inadequacies in standards , system design and development , operation and management activities , and testing . in 2005 , we examined the range of concerns raised by these groups and aligned them with their relevant life cycle phases . we also examined eac's efforts related to these concerns .