ncap . created in 1978 , this program tests new vehicles to determine how well they protect drivers and passengers during a crash ( front and side ) and how well vehicles resist rollovers . nhtsa tests and rates vehicles using a five - star safety rating system with five stars being the highest safety rating and one star the lowest . nhtsa communicates the results of its vehicle tests through window labels on new vehicles and on its website . in 2010 , nhtsa also began recommending various safety technologies for consumers to consider when purchasing vehicles . recommended technologies include such things as forward collision warning ( an alert that warns drivers to brake or steer to avoid a crash if they are too close to a car in front of them ) ; lane departure warning ( an alert that warns drivers of unintentional lane shifts ) ; and automatic emergency braking , which can automatically activate a vehicle's brakes if a driver takes no action to avoid an imminent crash with a preceding vehicle . nhtsa has not yet included pedestrian automatic emergency braking systems as recommended technologies . recommended technologies are not included in star ratings , but rather are features nhtsa believes consumers may wish to look for in new vehicles . pedestrian safety tests are not currently part of ncap . fmvss . these are minimum performance standards established in regulation for new motor vehicles and items of motor vehicle equipment . according to nhtsa officials , fmvss have test procedures and performance criteria with minimum thresholds for motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment , such as minimum light intensity requirements for headlamps . bumper standard . in addition , while not in the fmvss , nhtsa's bumper standard prescribes performance requirements in regulation for passenger cars in low - speed front - end and rear collisions . according to nhtsa officials , the bumper standard is intended to prevent damage to the car body and safety related equipment at speeds equivalent to a 5 miles - per - hour ( mph ) crash into a parked vehicle of the same weight . the standard applies to front and rear bumpers on passenger cars , but not to other multipurpose passenger vehicles , such as suvs , minivans , or pickup trucks . the united states is also involved with pedestrian safety internationally . in june 1998 , the united states signed an international agreement administered by the united nations concerning the establishment of global technical regulations for motor and other wheeled vehicles . the purpose of the agreement was to establish a global process for jointly developing technical regulations regarding such things as safety , environmental protection , and energy efficiency of vehicles . as part of this agreement , in 2008 , global technical regulation no . 9 was established to improve pedestrian safety by requiring vehicle hoods and bumpers to absorb energy more efficiently when impacted in a vehicle - to - pedestrian collision . this international standard has two sets of performance criteria: head impact requirements that ensure vehicle hoods provide protection to a pedestrian's head when impacted ; and leg protection requirements for the front bumper that would require bumpers to subject pedestrians to lower impact forces .