( see fig . most community colleges and technical schools made their credit curriculums available to high school students through transition programs that link secondary and postsecondary academic and vocational education . we will send copies of this report to the secretaries of education , health and human services , and labor ; to appropriate congressional committees ; and to other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions or wish to discuss this material , please call me at ( 415 ) 904-2272 or cindy ayers at ( 206 ) 654-5591 . in conducting our work , we administered a web - based survey to all public , regionally accredited , less than 4-year institutions throughout the country ; conducted telephone interviews of community college experts and relevant associations ; visited 3 states ; and interviewed representatives from a fourth state by telephone . in spite of this overall response rate , many of the questionnaires were incomplete with item response rates ranging from 51 to 100 percent . because we found evidence of pre - existing differences between respondents and nonrespondents and excessive missing data on some questions , we did not use the survey data to generalize to the entire study population . rather , our conclusions reflect the responses of those who participated in the survey and provided substantive answers to our questions . we conducted the survey between february and may 2004 via the world wide web . we sent a link to the survey via e - mail to the ipeds keyholder at each of the schools . ipeds keyholders are responsible for responding to the ipeds surveys . we obtained the e - mail addresses of these keyholders from the ipeds database . we also interviewed officials at the departments of education , health and human services , and labor , and reviewed existing data and literature to gather what is known about community colleges and technical schools , their outcomes and the policies and funding sources that support academic preparation and workforce development at these schools . we relied on the findings of national outcomes studies regarded to be authoritative by researchers and other experts in the field . a social science analyst examined each study to assess the validity and reliability of selected results for use as evidence in this report . we examined descriptive information from the national center for education statistics , including the beginning postsecondary students longitudinal study and the digest of education statistics . the american association of community colleges and the association for career and technical education provided letters of support for our national survey . we conducted our work from may 2003 to august 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .