national association of attorneys general . a goal of the association — whose membership includes the attorneys general and chief legal officers of the 50 states , the district of columbia , the commonwealth of puerto rico , and associated territories — is to promote cooperation and coordination on interstate legal matters in order to foster a responsive and efficient legal system for state citizens . national district attorneys association . a purpose of the association is to promote the continuing education of prosecuting attorneys by various means , such as arranging seminars and fostering periodic conventions or meetings for the discussion and solution of legal problems affecting the public interest in the administration of justice . among other sources , training is offered at the national advocacy center — located on the campus of the university of south carolina in columbia — which is a joint venture of the association and the u.s. department of justice . in response to a provision in the identity theft and assumption deterrence act of 1998 , ftc established the identity theft data clearinghouse in november 1999 to gather information from any consumer who wishes to file a complaint or pose an inquiry concerning identity theft . federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies may access the clearinghouse database via a secure link in ftc's consumer sentinel network . the consumer sentinel web site was initially established in 1997 to track telemarketing or mass - market fraud complaints received by ftc . however , in conducting a literature search , we found various examples of military - related identity theft cases , including the following: one case involved over 100 victims , each a high - ranking military official . with the passage of the identity theft act , ftc added a link in the consumer sentinel to allow law enforcement agencies access to the identity theft data clearinghouse database . in order to gain access to the secure web site , agencies must sign a confidentiality agreement . only domestic law enforcement agencies are permitted to have access to the detailed information in the clearinghouse database . other domestic government agencies , consumer reporting agencies , and private entities are permitted limited access to overall or aggregate information . also , at www.consumer.gov / sentinel , the general public can view macro - level information ( eg , overall statistics by states or cities ) that ftc maintains on general fraud and identity theft matters . as of may 24 , 2002 , a total of 352 law enforcement agencies ( 46 federal and 306 state and local ) had entered into agreements with ftc to have access to the identity theft data clearinghouse via the secure link in the consumer sentinel . the following is a list of the 352 agencies . this appendix ( 1 ) gives examples of identity theft cases that have a military connection , for example , cases that affect uniformed personnel and ( 2 ) discusses plans for establishing soldier sentinel , an online system designed specifically to collect consumer and identity theft complaint information from members of the armed forces and their families .