restoration projects . table 2 shows that almost $2.9 million was committed to restoration projects from fws's resource management appropriations for fiscal years 2000 through 2004 . combining that amount with the $4.7 million in cash and noncash contributions provided to restoration projects by project participants brings the total invested by the restoration program directly to restoration projects during the 5-year period to a little over $7.6 million . of the $2.9 million in project funding from fws's resource management appropriations , the restoration program provided almost $700,000 to three federal entities to help fund 26 restoration projects carried out by those federal entities , and provided almost $2.2 million to 18 nonfederal entities to help fund 100 restoration projects carried out by those nonfederal entities . the three federal entities that carried out the 26 restoration projects are the same ones that brought cash and noncash contributions totaling almost $1.2 million to the restoration program , and the 18 nonfederal entities that carried out the 100 restoration projects are the same ones that brought cash and noncash contributions totaling almost $3.6 million to the restoration program . thus , according to fws records , total investment from federal and nonfederal sources in restoration projects amounted to a little over $7.6 million that funded 126 restoration projects from the beginning of fiscal year 2000 through the end of fiscal year 2004 . it should be recognized , however , that in addition to restoration program projects , other restoration projects are undertaken in the klamath river basin with funding from fws through its other programs ; and other restoration projects still are undertaken in the klamath river basin with funding from other federal entities , the states of california and oregon , and other nonfederal entities . travel reimbursement expenses . travel reimbursement expenses are contained in each of three expenditure categories ( project management , program administration , and support of federal advisory committees ) shown in table 2 , but they can be segregated . during fiscal years 2000 through 2004 , the amounts of these expenses allocated to the restoration program by fws totaled about $48,000 . this amount is not shown separately in table 2 because , like the travel expenses category , components of this amount are contained in each of three expenditure categories ( project management , program administration , and support of federal advisory committees ) . adding together the restoration program overhead incurred at each of the three fws organizational levels ( almost $216,000 at the fws washington , d.c. , office level ; almost $227,000 at the fws regional office level ; and about $48,000 at the yreka fwo level ) , we found that restoration program overhead was about $491,000 during fiscal years 2000 through 2004 . technical support expense . we also attempted to provide information about what amounts of the funds received by and for the restoration program from the beginning of fiscal year 2000 through the end of fiscal year 2004 were spent for technical support . as provided for in the act , staff from the yreka fwo , along with staff from the state of california's department of fish and game , provide technical and administrative support to the management council and the task force .