mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . this statement is based on the report we issued in october 2007 . to accomplish our report objectives , we reviewed procedural guidance , statistics , and other relevant documentation obtained from and interviewed officials at tsc , the fbi , the national counterterrorism center , the department of homeland security , and other agencies that perform terrorism - related screening . specifically , at the transportation security administration , we examined the prescreening of airline passengers prior to their boarding a flight ; at u.s. customs and border protection , we examined the screening of travelers entering the united states through ports of entry ; and at the department of state , we examined the screening of visa applicants . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . pursuant to homeland security presidential directive 6 , the attorney general established tsc in september 2003 to consolidate the government's approach to terrorism screening and provide for the appropriate and lawful use of terrorist information in screening processes . tsc's consolidated watch list is the u.s. government's master repository for all records of known or appropriately suspected international and domestic terrorists used for watch list - related screening . for many of the encounters , the agency determined there was sufficient information related to watch list records to preclude admission under terrorism grounds . however , for most of the encounters , the agency determined that there was not sufficient information related to the records to preclude admission . tsc data show that when visa applicants were positively matched to terrorist watch list records , the outcomes included visas denied , visas issued ( because the consular officer did not find any statutory basis for inadmissibility ) , and visa ineligibility waived . transportation security administration data show that when airline passengers were positively matched to the no fly or selectee lists , the vast majority of matches were to the selectee list . other outcomes included individuals matched to the no fly list and denied boarding ( did not fly ) and individuals matched to the no fly list after the aircraft was in flight . additional information on individuals on the watch list passing undetected through agency screening is presented later in this statement . u.s. customs and border protection data show that a number of nonimmigrant aliens encountered at u.s. ports of entry were positively matched to terrorist watch list records . tsc data show that state or local law enforcement officials have encountered individuals who were positively matched to terrorist watch list records thousands of times . also , department of homeland security component agencies are taking steps to address instances of individuals on the watch list passing undetected through agency screening . although data on the actual outcomes of these encounters were not available , the vast majority involved watch list records that indicated that the individuals were released , unless there were reasons other than terrorism - related grounds for arresting or detaining the individuals , such as the individual having an outstanding arrest warrant .