benefits . in recent years , the food stamp program has grown tremendously . from in recent years , the food stamp program has grown tremendously . from 2000 to 2005 , the program — administered by the food and nutrition 2000 to 2005 , the program — administered by the food and nutrition service ( fns ) of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , in service ( fns ) of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , in partnership with the states — has grown from $15 billion in benefits partnership with the states — has grown from $15 billion in benefits provided to 17 million individuals to $29 billion in benefits to nearly provided to 17 million individuals to $29 billion in benefits to nearly 26 million individuals . almost one in every 12 americans participates in 26 million individuals . almost one in every 12 americans participates in the program . during this period of time , fns and the states completed the program . during this period of time , fns and the states completed replacing paper food stamp coupons with electronic benefit transfer ( ebt ) cards that work much like a debit card at the grocery checkout counter . this ebt transaction provides a wealth of new electronic information to fns officials , who are responsible for monitoring food stamp retailers and sanctioning those who traffic . the federal food stamp program is intended to help low - income individuals and families obtain a more nutritious diet by supplementing their income with benefits to purchase nutritious food such as meat , dairy , fruits , and vegetables , but not items such as soap , tobacco , or alcohol . the food and nutrition service ( fns ) pays the full cost of food stamp benefits and shares the states' administrative costs — with fns usually paying approximately 50 percent — and is responsible for promulgating program regulations and ensuring that state officials administer the program in compliance with program rules . the states administer the program by determining whether households meet the program's income and asset requirements , calculating monthly benefits for qualified households , and issuing benefits to participants on an electronic benefits card . in fiscal year 2005 , the food stamp program issued almost $28.6 billion in benefits to about 25.7 million individuals participating in the program , and the maximum monthly food stamp benefit for a household of four living in the continental united states was $506 . as shown in figure 1 , the increase in the average monthly participation of food stamp recipients in 2005 continues a recent upward trend in the number of people receiving benefits . retailers are the front line for determining which goods can be purchased and for ensuring the integrity of the food stamp transaction . fns operates 44 field offices throughout the country , and they have the primary responsibility for authorizing retailers to participate in the food stamp program .