we found these programs to be potentially duplicative . dod currently relies on its requirements and acquisition processes and decision makers to ensure that capabilities and programs are not unnecessarily redundant or duplicative . its experiences with ground radar programs suggest ways to make these processes more effective in the future . for example , dod may have missed an opportunity to review whether the capabilities of the army's an / tpq - 53 counterfire radar and the marine corps' g / ator block ii were unnecessarily redundant or duplicative because the requirements document for the an / tpq - 53 was validated by the army , rather than the jroc , which has a broader perspective on dod's capability needs . in another case , dod was better positioned to encourage cooperation for patriot radar upgrades . because cape had visibility into the program , it was able to shape the army's aoa to make sure existing radars , such as 3delrr and g / ator , were considered . there may be other opportunities for increased service cooperation to meet future ground radar needs , but , in order for key decision makers such as the jroc , cape , and the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics to take advantage of them , it is important for them to have insight into ground radar programs , including upgrade programs and programs that do not meet the dollar thresholds that trigger a “jroc interest” designation and automatic review . a “jroc interest” designation provides the jroc the opportunity to review ground radar performance requirements and capabilities for potential duplication and cape with the opportunity to develop broad aoa guidance . this type of visibility would put dod in a better position to take the actions necessary to make the most efficient use of its resources . unlike the ground radar programs we examined , most of the air - to - ground precision guided munitions programs were already being developed and procured jointly . this cooperation has helped dod leverage its buying power . as new areas of potential cooperation emerge , the services should look to leverage those opportunities . specifically , when the army revalidated its air - to - ground guided rocket requirement , it opened up the possibility of cooperating with the navy on jointly buying apkws or holding a competition to find a system that can meet both services' needs when the navy's current sole source contract expires in 2016 . either option seems preferable to the army and navy potentially procuring the same or similar systems to fill the same requirement under different program and contracts , which could lead to duplicative procurement activities in both services and a degradation in buying power .