thank you . for further information on this testimony , please contact orice williams brown on ( 202 ) 512-8678 or williamso@gao.gov or a. nicole clowers on ( 202 ) 512-4010 or clowersa@gao.gov . contact points for our congressional relations and public affairs offices may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this testimony were emily chalmers , rachel demarcus , francis a. dymond , nancy m. eibeck , sarah a. farkas , heather j. halliwell , cheryl m. harris , debra r. johnson , christopher ross , and raymond sendajas . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . acting as a reluctant shareholder . the government has no desire to own equity stakes in companies any longer than necessary and will seek to dispose of its ownership interests as soon as it is practical to do so — that is , when the companies are viable and profitable and can contribute to the economy without government involvement . not interfering in the day - to - day management decisions of a company in which it is an investor . in exceptional cases , the government may determine that ongoing assistance is necessary but will reserve the right to set upfront conditions to protect taxpayers , promote financial stability , and encourage growth . when necessary , these conditions may include restructurings similar to that now under way at gm and changes to help ensure a strong board of directors . ensuring a strong board of directors . after any up - front conditions are in place , the government will protect the taxpayers' investment by managing its ownership stake in a hands - off , commercial manner . any changes to boards of directors will be designed to help ensure that they select management with a sound long - term vision for restoring their companies to profitability and ending the need for government support as quickly as possible . the government will not interfere with or exert control over day - to - day company operations , and no government employees will serve on the boards or be employed by these companies . exercising limited voting rights . as a common shareholder , the government will vote on only core governance issues , including the selection of a company's board of directors and major corporate events or transactions . while protecting taxpayer resources , the government has said that it intends to be extremely disciplined as to how it uses even these limited rights . treasury's investments have generally been in the form of nonvoting securities .