pub . l. 107-56 , 115 stat 272 ( oct. 26 , 2001 ) . a correspondent account is an account established by a banking institution to receive deposits from , make payments on behalf of , or handle other financial transactions for another financial institution . in this report , we ( 1 ) examined the process u. s. agencies used to implement the usa patriot act section 311 restrictions against targeted financial institutions and countries and the results of these actions ; ( 2 ) assessed the process treasury follows to determine whether to finalize or withdraw a proposed rule ; and ( 3 ) described how treasury assesses the impact of section 311 restrictions . to meet these objectives , we reviewed program documentation and interviewed knowledgeable officials from key u.s. agencies at the department of justice ( justice ) , department of state ( state ) , treasury , and the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) in washington , d.c. we focused this performance audit on all locations where the u.s. government has targeted financial institutions or jurisdictions for section 311 actions . these were belarus , burma , latvia , macau , nauru , syria , turkish republic of northern cyprus , and ukraine . we met with u.s. and foreign government officials , and representatives of financial institutions and financial institution associations , and reviewed documents in kyiv , ukraine ; macau and hong kong , china ; and riga , latvia . we visited kyiv , ukraine ; macau and hong kong , china ; and riga , latvia , because they provided examples of different applications of section 311 , specifically a targeted jurisdiction and targeted financial institutions where section 311 restrictions were finalized and withdrawn . treasury provided us with key documents it identified to show how it implemented its 311 process . a detailed description of our scope and methodology is included in appendix i of this report . we conducted this performance audit from september 2007 through september 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . section 311 is one of many legal and regulatory resources that the united states uses to combat money laundering and financial crime . u.s. laws and programs aimed at combating money laundering include the bank secrecy act ( bsa ) , which includes section 311 and authorizes treasury to promulgate regulations on the reporting and recordkeeping of certain financial transactions ; economic and trade sanctions implemented by the office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) ; and several justice programs focused on anti - money laundering . the united states is also a member of the financial action task force ( fatf ) , an intergovernmental body that has created a comprehensive global framework for anti - money laundering efforts and has called for countermeasures against countries that are not complying with this framework .