we found that program costs were identified . however , while we are able to determine the inclusion of o&s costs in the fiscal year 2017-2021 report , dhs excluded these costs in the fiscal year 2018-2022 report . we discussed with dhs and components the financial management systems used by the five components to track obligations and expenditures , and the financial management system used by the department to develop the monthly execution reports and future years homeland security program database . to assess the extent to which the dhs budget management and reporting has affected operations , we reviewed program budget information including the congressional budget justification , a data collection instrument , a monthly execution report to congress , and the fiscal years 2017-2021 and fiscal years 2018-2022 reports from the future years homeland security program database . in addition , we conducted interviews with program personnel to discuss the effect of any budget shortfall or surplus on their programs . ( recommendation 3 ) . we provided a draft of this report for review and comment to dhs . dhs provided written comments , which are reproduced in appendix iii . in its comments , dhs concurred with all three of our recommendations and identified actions it plans to take to address them . dhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . appendix i contains detailed information on our scope and methodology . dhs and the coast guard are continuing to address this recommendation . you asked us to evaluate o&s activities for dhs's major acquisition programs . this report assesses , for selected major acquisition programs , the extent that ( 1 ) dhs's budget management and reporting affects operations and oversight ; and ( 2 ) o&s life - cycle cost estimates ( lcces ) are comprehensive and accurate , as well as regularly updated . to conduct our work , we reviewed the dhs major acquisition oversight list as of april 2017 and selected 11 major acquisition programs from five components to serve as case studies for our review . we selected a non - generalizable sample of programs , and their corresponding components , in various stages of the acquisition cycle , including programs in deployment . the future years homeland security program is a database that contains 5-year funding plans for dhs's major acquisition programs and is used to prepare a report to congress that supplements information in the annual budget request . in addition to the information presented in the budget submission and monthly execution report , this document organizes funding projections by major acquisition program . we also ensured we had a mix of different dhs components reflecting the broad spectrum of dhs operations . our case studies included four information technology programs and seven other programs . to determine how o&s funds are organized within the budget request , we reviewed the o&s and procurement , construction , and improvements appropriations accounts within the fiscal year 2017 and 2018 congressional budget justification by program / project activity account ( ppas ) for the 11 programs in our review . we identified the selected programs within these accounts , as possible .