see apps . v through x for more detailed information about the distribution of afg , safer , and fp&s program funds . in awarding fiscal year 2008 afg and safer grants and fiscal year 2007 fp&s grants , fema met seven of eight statutory and two of three program requirements . these requirements specified how fema was to distribute appropriated grant funds between different applicants and activities . in july 2009 , when fema provided fire grant award data for our review , the agency was in the process of awarding fiscal year 2007 fp&s grants and fiscal year 2008 afg and safer grants . we then compared these statutory and program requirements to fema grant award data that stratified awards based on the type of fire department: volunteer , career , or combination — and based on the type of activity , such as awards for vehicle acquisitions . fema began maintaining electronic fire grant award data in fiscal year 2002 . fema's fire grant award data are current as of july 2009 , at which time fema was in the process of awarding fiscal year 2007 fp&s grants and fiscal year 2008 afg and safer grants . these years were the latest for which grants had been awarded at the time of our review and for which we were able to determine fema's compliance with statutory and program funding distribution requirements . in addition to analyzing compliance issues , we also analyzed fema's annual listings of applications and awards for the afg and fp&s grant programs from fiscal years 2002 through 2008 and safer grant program from fiscal years 2005 through 2008 to provide descriptive information on a number of other characteristics , such as the type of community served by the applicant — urban , suburban , or rural . we provided descriptive information on the type of community served because the fire act requires fema to distribute afg grants to a variety of different fire departments based on such characteristics as the type of community served , although the statute did not provide a specific percentage of funds against which we could evaluate compliance for the community - based requirement . we also determined the number of times that departments have applied for and been awarded grants . the descriptive information regarding the distribution of grant awards appears in appendixes v through x and appendix xiii of this report . to assess the reliability of data provided by fema , we reviewed and discussed the sources of data with agency officials . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to determine the actions fema has taken to provide assistance to grant applicants and involve the fire service community in the grant process , we collected and reviewed pertinent fema documents , such as program guidance , and observed fema's fiscal year 2010 criteria development panel process and the fiscal year 2008 fp&s peer review panel process . we conducted interviews with officials from fema and the nine fire service organizations to determine the type of information fema provides to applicants on the grant application and review process .