the timing of the legislation and hearing is critical . recent studies have shown that tanks that leak hazardous substances , such as methyl tertiary butyl ether ( mtbe ) , contaminate the soil or water and continue to pose health risks ranging from nausea to kidney or liver damage or even cancer . indeed , leaks of mtbe — a fuel additive for reducing emissions and raising octane — have been found in drinking water sources and several communities have now had to close their wells . for example , a school in roselawn , indiana , discovered that the children had been using and drinking water with 10 times epa's recommended safe limit . the congress in 1984 created the ust program to protect the public from potential leaks from the then more than 2 million tanks located across the nation , mostly at gas stations . under the program , epa required tank owners to install new leak detection equipment by the end of 1993 and new spill - , overfill - , and corrosion - prevention equipment by the end of 1998 . if these conditions were not met , owners had to close or remove their tanks . in general , epa has granted states the authority to implement the program with agency oversight and monitoring , or states operate their own program under state law with limited epa oversight . epa has provided states funding ( about $187,000 per state ) for doing so . epa retains authority for a small number of tanks primarily located on indian lands . in addition , the congress created a trust fund in 1986 to help epa and the states cover tank cleanup costs that owners and operators could not afford or were reluctant to pay . the fund is replenished partly through a $ .001 / gallon tax on gasoline and other fuels . at the end of fiscal year 2001 , the fund had a balance of about $1.7 billion . because the states are primarily implementing the provisions of the program , in october 2000 , we conducted a survey of all 50 states and the district of columbia to determine whether tanks are complying with program requirements , how epa and the states are inspecting tanks and enforcing the requirements , and whether upgraded tanks still leak . we also visited the three epa regions with the largest number of tanks to monitor . in summary , we found that: about 1.5 million tanks had been permanently closed since the program was created , leaving about 693,000 tanks subject to ust requirements . based on the states' responses to our survey , we estimated that about 89 percent of these tanks had the required protective equipment installed , but that almost 30 percent of them — more than 200,000 tanks — were not being operated and maintained properly , thus , increasing the chance of leaks . for example , 19 states reported frequent problems with corrosion - prevention equipment and 15 states reported that leak detection equipment was frequently turned off or improperly maintained . the states and epa attributed these operation and maintenance problems primarily to poorly trained staff .