we agreed . the associations' aggregated data are presented in table 15 . as indicated , for domestic ( u.s. ) operations , the associations' identity theft - related fraud losses — defined as involving account takeovers and fraudulent applications — rose from $79.9 million in 1996 to $114.3 million in 2000 , an increase of about 43 percent . much of this increase is reflected in the account - takeover losses , which increased more than twofold , from $33.0 million in 1996 to $68.2 million in 2000 . an official of one association said that this increase probably could be attributed to “inconsistencies in reporting among member banks.” the official added that consumers are not really at risk because a zero liability policy protects them from financial loss . furthermore , table 15 shows that the associations' identity theft - related losses as a percentage of total fraud losses were relatively constant at about 9 to 10 percent during 1996 through 2000 . in further perspective , for most of these years , table 15 shows that the associations' total fraud losses represented less than 1 / 10th of 1 percent of u.s. member banks' sales volume . generally , the fraud losses are borne by the financial institution that issued the payment card . in some instances , although reportedly rare , retail merchants may bear such losses if the merchants do not follow proper procedures for verifying use of the card . to reiterate , regarding direct fraud losses involving payment cards , we contacted mastercard and visa only . we did not obtain information about losses involving other general - purpose cards ( american express , diners club , and discover ) , which account for about 25 percent of the market . also , we did not obtain information about losses involving merchant - specific cards issued by retail stores . furthermore , we did not obtain information from various entities , such as insurance companies and securities firms , which may incur identity theft - related costs . an official of one of the associations told us that identity theft is not perceived to be one of the biggest fraud - related problems faced by member banks . the official said that many banks have experience in dealing with identity fraud , including using new technology to detect where such fraud may be taking place . additionally , to help reduce the incidence of fraud , the official noted that the association provides guidance or recommendations for member banks and merchants to follow , as well as a number of specific computer models and authorization and verification systems that help reduce fraud and identity theft . officials of six credit card - issuing banks that we contacted said their financial institutions track fraud in several categories . but , we found some inconsistency among these institutions on the definition of credit card fraud associated with identity theft . for example , some financial institutions did not consider “friendly fraud” or “family fraud” in their fraud losses to be related to identity theft . however , two categories of identity theft - related fraud used by all six banks were ( 1 ) fraudulent applications and ( 2 ) account takeovers .