this issue remains unresolved . in 2009 , usps filed a request for a prc advisory opinion of its analysis of over 4,000 stations and branches for possible closure , which resulted in the closure of about 145 facilities from this proceeding . the prc's opinion advised usps to improve public notice and input prior to making closure decisions . in order for usps to be self - sustaining , it needs to significantly reduce its costs to match its revenues . change is needed to needed to facilitate restructuring postal networks and operations . some changes to consider include: revise legal requirements to facilitate networkwide restructuring . this would broaden the current focus on individual facility closures , which are often contentious , time consuming and inefficient , to a broader networkwide restructuring , perhaps similar to the defense base closure and realignment and commission ( brac ) approach . under this approach , expert panels have successfully informed and permitted difficult restructuring decisions , helping to provide consensus on intractable decisions . adapt prc review processes to changes made to facilitate networkwide review . the current appeals process focuses on decisions usps has made about individual facilities closing . another oversight approach to facilitate networkwide restructuring would be an annual reporting and review requirement , whereby usps would report all service changes , including facility closures , completed over the past year and changes planned for the next fiscal year in its annual compliance report to the prc . the prc could then review and comment on any potential impacts on service in its annual compliance determination report . improve outreach and transparency of information used to make decisions . for example , strategically communicate and conduct outreach with retail customers , government officials , and employee groups ; use maps and a template of specified data to show all locations of postal facilities , alternatives , and retail partners where postal services are available in a designated service area ; indicate proposed changes in this context ; and allow the public to submit questions or comments . enhance public input by simplifying rules and requirements so that they are consistent , timely , and easy to understand . for example , eliminate references to internal usps terms that are not clear to the public , such as whether a retail facility is a post office , station , or branch , and clearly define what is meant by such terms as facility closings , consolidations , discontinuance , conversions , or replacements . in summary , effectively rightsizing usps will require both congressional support and usps leadership to address resistance to change . usps senior management will need to provide leadership and work with stakeholders for such actions to be successfully implemented . usps must explain its plans in an open and transparent manner ; engage with its unions , management associations , the mailing industry , and political leaders ; and then demonstrate the results of its actions . in turn , stakeholders need to recognize that major change is urgently needed if usps is to be financially viable and self - sustaining .