michael. , and collin o'rourke . homeownership education and counseling: do we know what works ? policylab consulting for research institute for housing america ( special report ) and mortgage bankers association . washington , d.c.: april 2011 . ding , lei , roberto g. quercia , and janneke ratcliffe . “post - purchase counseling and default resolutions among low - and moderate - income borrowers.” journal of real estate research , vol . do financial counseling mandates improve mortgage choice and performance ? evidence from a legislative experiment . federal reserve board of chicago working paper no . 2009-7 , october 2009 . “learning to cope: voluntary financial education and loan performance during a housing crisis.” american economic review , vol . carswell , andrew . “does housing counseling change consumer financial behaviors ? evidence from philadelphia.” journal of family and economic issues , vol . collins , j. michael . “exploring the design of financial counseling for mortgage borrowers in default.” journal of family and economic issues , vol . collins , j . hartarska , valentina , and claudio gonzalez - vega . “credit counseling and mortgage termination by low - income households.” journal of real estate finance and economics , vol . “evidence on the effect of credit counseling on mortgage loan default by low - income households.” journal of housing economics , vol . herbert , christopher e. , jennifer turnham , and christopher n. rodger . the state of the housing counseling industry . abt associates for the u.s. department of housing and urban development . washington , d.c.: september 2008 . hirad , abdighani , and peter m. zorn . a little knowledge is a good thing: empirical evidence of the effectiveness of pre - purchase homeownership counseling . joint center for housing studies of harvard university , low income homeownership working paper series 01.4 . cambridge , mass . : august 2001 . hornburg , steven p. strengthening the case for homeownership counseling: moving beyond “a little bit of knowledge.” joint center for housing studies of harvard university report w04-12 . cambridge mass . : august 2004 . jones , katie . “housing counseling: background and federal role.” congressional research service report to congress r41351 . washington , d.c.: july 2010 . mallach , alan . homeownership education and counseling: issues in research and definition . community affairs discussion paper 00-01 , federal reserve bank of philadelphia , 2001 . mayer , neil s. , peter a. tatian , kenneth , temkin , and charles a. calhoun . national foreclosure mitigation counseling program evaluation: preliminary analysis of program efforts , september 2010 update . prepared for neighborworks america . washington , d.c.: urban institute , 2010 . mccarthy , g. and roberto quercia . bridging the gap between supply and demand: the evolution of the homeownership education and counseling industry . research institute for housing america report no . washington , d.c.: may 2000 . quercia , roberto , and spencer m. cowan . “the impacts of community - based foreclosure prevention programs.” housing studies , vol . quercia , roberto , and jonathan s. spader . “does homeownership counseling affect the prepayment and default behavior of affordable mortgage borrowers ? ” journal of policy analysis and management , vol .