fdic . for the three fdic - supervised institutions whose examination documents we reviewed , fdic examiners did not communicate to boards of directors the information they would need to monitor whether deficiencies were fully addressed by management . for these three institutions , fdic examiners stated the concern ( deficiency ) and required corrective action in their internal communications of supervisory recommendations and also externally with depository institutions . they sometimes stated the potential effect of the deficient condition on the safety and soundness of the institution . these practices were consistent with fdic policies and procedures in place at the time . for example , in the written communication to one fdic institution selected for our review , examiners conveyed specific information about the supervisory concerns , the effect of the deficiencies on the institution , and the required corrective action for the mrbas related to an examination . in another instance , the communication of the supervisory concerns appeared less specific . in that case , examiners reported that the institution management's actions did not fully address a deficient condition identified in the prior examination . we found that the prior written communication of concerns to the institution did not identify the cause of the deficient condition or propose specific action to be taken . fdic staff told us they believed that updates to their policies and procedures in 2016 already require examiners to identify the cause for the deficient condition and communicate it to the depository institutions . specifically , fdic requires examiners to “describe the deficient practices , operations , or financial condition and how it deviates from sound governance , internal controls , or risk management or consumer protection principles , or legal requirements.” this requirement is similar to occ's requirement to “describe the concern.” specifically , occ examiners are required to “describe the deficient practice and how it deviates from sound governance , internal control or risk management principles.” fdic's policies and procedures do not require examiners to identify the factor ( s ) responsible for the deficient condition ( the “why” ) or communicate it to the institutions . based on the examination documents we reviewed , we did not observe that fdic examiners communicated the cause of the deficiency . including the cause facilitates a better understanding of why an institution's condition is not consistent with law or regulations and , ultimately , can help an institution determine how it could remedy the condition . federal reserve . in our review of examination documents for three institutions , federal reserve examiners did not include information that boards of directors would need to monitor whether deficiencies were fully addressed by management . reserve bank examiners stated the condition and required corrective action in their internal and external communications of supervisory recommendations to depository institutions , consistent with federal reserve policies and procedures . furthermore , the condition and required corrective action were generally closely linked to the criteria examiners applied during the examination , which often consisted of federal reserve supervisory guidance . we found that the written communications to depository institutions did not always provide information that would convey the reason the deficient condition occurred ( cause ) or the potential consequences of the deficient condition ( effect ) .