gao - 20-270t . washington , d.c.: nov 19 , 2019 . ( recommendation 7 ) . we provided a draft of this report to the departments of the interior ( interior ) and education ( education ) for review and comment . interior provided formal comments , which are reproduced in appendix ii , agreeing with all seven recommendations and describing actions bie plans to take to address them . education provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretaries of the interior and education and interested congressional committees . the report will also be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 617 ) 788-0534 or emreyarrasm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . our report examines ( 1 ) the extent to which eligible bureau of indian education ( bie ) students with disabilities are provided the special education and related services required by their individualized education programs ( iep ) ; and ( 2 ) the extent to which bie oversees and supports the provision of these services at its schools . to obtain a generalizable sample of students , we defined our target population as all students at bie schools with an active iep covering a full 5-month period between september 2017 and february 2018 and obtained an electronic listing of ieps for the 2017-2018 school year — the most recent complete school year at the time of our analysis — extracted from the native american student information system ( nasis ) . we used these data as a basis to define a sample frame and identified 2,904 unique students with an active iep for the full period from 169 bie schools . we assessed the reliability of these data by interviewing knowledgeable agency officials and reviewing technical documentation describing the methodology , assumptions , and inputs used to produce the iep - related data we received from bie , upon which we created our generalizable sample . we determined these data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report . we selected a random two - stage cluster sample of 30 bie schools and 150 students ( about 5 per school ) who had at least one active iep covering the full period from the sample frame of 169 schools and 2,904 students . we chose to use a two - stage sampling approach to control ( limit ) the number of schools that we would need to coordinate with to collect the school - level data required . because the number of unique in - scope students ranged between 2 and 88 per school , we chose to select schools with probability proportional to size .