see appendix i for more information about this fund . from states , survivors may obtain state crime victim compensation board funds , unemployment insurance , or workers' compensation . charities , government agencies , watchdog groups , and survivors' organizations shared with us the lessons they learned from the september 11 charitable aid process that could be incorporated into the nation's strategies for responding to large - scale disasters in the future . easing access to aid for those eligible — helping individuals in need find out what assistance is available , and easing their access to that assistance could be facilitated if a central , accessible source of public and private assistance is made available to survivors . access to assistance could be further facilitated if charities adopted a simplified , one - stop application process and a standard waiver of confidentiality that would allow survivors to get access to multiple charities and allow charities to share information on individuals served and avoid duplicative services . other charities and oversight organizations believe that needs are best met when the charitable funds take into account a broad range of needs , including those in the long term , and focus on services rather than cash grants . ( 4 ) what lessons can be learned about how to best distribute charitable aid in similar situations ? to answer these questions , we contacted september 11-related charities identified by the chronicle of philanthropy , a key trade publication of the nonprofit sector , and gathered information on the funds they raised and distributed . we supplemented the chronicle's list with information we gathered from additional charities during our review . we interviewed officials from 12 of the larger september 11-related funds in nyc and washington , d.c. ; representatives from three september 11 victims groups ; officials from various philanthropic oversight organizations ; and representatives from the major charities providing assistance after the oklahoma city bombing in 1995 . we also spoke with officials from the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , the federal agency charged with responding to disasters ; the nyc office of emergency management ; and the office of family policy of the department of defense . finally , we interviewed officials from government oversight agencies , including the internal revenue service ( irs ) , officials from state charity offices or attorneys general offices in seven states , and the new york county ( manhattan ) district attorney's office . we conducted our review from january through november 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we did not independently verify data provided by the charitable organizations or oversight officials , and it was not within the scope of our work to review the charities' systems of internal control or to trace their use of funds . on september 3 , 2002 , we issued an interim report on the results of our review . charities are organizations established to address the needs of the poor or distressed and other social welfare issues . federal , state , and private agencies and the american public monitor how well charities are meeting these needs .