pages 12-14 . port risk management: additional federal guidance would aid ports in disaster planning and recovery . gao - 07-412 . washington , d.c.: march 28 , 2007 . activities related to port security exercises are not specifically identified in the coast guard budget . such activities fall under the coast guard's ports , waterways and coastal security mission . such actions enhance the security of these vessels . dhs has worked with its component agencies to increase maritime domain awareness and taken steps to ( 1 ) conduct risk assessments , ( 2 ) establish area security committees , ( 3 ) implement a vessel tracking system , and ( 4 ) better share information with other law enforcement agencies through interagency operations centers . conducting risk assessments: recognizing the shortcomings of its existing risk - based models , in 2005 the coast guard developed and implemented the maritime security risk assessment model ( msram ) to better assess risks in the maritime domain . we reported in november 2011 that msram provides the coast guard with a standardized way of assessing risk to maritime infrastructure , such as chemical facilities , oil refineries , and ferry and cruise ship terminals , among others . we recommended that the coast guard review its actions for ensuring the timely submission of after - action reports on terrorism - related exercises and determine if further actions are needed . coast guard units throughout the country use this model to improve maritime domain awareness and better assess security risks to key maritime infrastructure . establishing area maritime security committees: to facilitate information sharing with port partners and in response to mtsa,coast guard has established area maritime security committees . these committees are typically composed of members from federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies ; maritime industry and labor organizations ; and other port stakeholders that may be affected by security policies . an area maritime security committee is responsible for , among other things , identifying critical infrastructure and operations , identifying risks , and providing advice to the coast guard for developing the associated amsp . these committees provide a structure that improves information sharing among port stakeholders . developing vessel tracking systems: the coast guard relies on a diverse array of systems operated by various entities to track vessels and provide maritime domain awareness . for tracking vessels at sea , the coast guard uses a long - range identification and tracking system and a commercially provided long - range automatic identification system.waterways , and ports , the coast guard operates a land - based automatic identification system and also obtains information from radar and cameras in some ports . in addition , the national strategy and three of the supporting plans also lack investment strategies to direct resources to necessary actions . to address this , the working group tasked with monitoring implementation of the plans recommended that the maritime security policy coordination committee — the primary forum for coordinating u.s. national maritime strategy — examine the feasibility of creating an interagency investment strategy for the supporting plans . we recognized that other documents were used for allocating resources and , accordingly , we did not make any recommendations .