we concur with this position . in addition , usda stated that the “lack of credit” requirement could be removed with no detriment to rhs housing programs . usda initially disagreed with our finding that its rental assistance budget estimates were too high , questioning whether we demonstrated that using inflation rate projections from the president's budget would provide a more accurate budget estimate . however , usda has now reported that it will adopt omb estimates , and it appears that rhs now agrees with our report findings . usda also generally agreed with most of our recommendations on monitoring and internal controls . rhs has recently issued regulations and an asset management handbook on transferring unused rental assistance and expanded guidance on income verification . also , it appears that rhs is acting on our recommendation to improve sampling methods to ensure a sufficient number of tenant households are selected for supervisory reviews ; that is , the agency has informed us that it is revamping that process . finally , the rhs administrator has generally agreed to implement our recommendations on the irm databases . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or members of the subcommittee may have . for more information regarding this testimony , please contact william b. shear at ( 202 ) 512-4325 or shearw@gao.gov or andy finkel at ( 202 ) 512- 6765 or finkela@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony also included martha chow , katherine trimble , and barbara roesmann . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . maryland now uses only roads . figure 1 shows a new boundary , a road that divides the eligible area on the left from the ineligible area on the right . rhs local office officials told us that the “road only” criteria forced them to find the nearest public road to a populated section of hagerstown , which happens to go through farmland . the result is that apparently similar rural areas received different designations . figure 2 shows an area in brookside , ohio , where the city line divides the eligible from the ineligible area . the statute states that eligible communities cannot be a part of or associated with an urban area . some field staff determinations of eligibility in these cases might be questionable as some of these communities , despite their low populations , might not be considered rural , and thus , eligible . for example , field staff told us that belpre , ohio , is eligible for rhs programs because it meets both the population and “rural in character” requirements . however , belpre is contiguous with parkersburg , west virginia , which has a population of more than 33,000 ( see fig .