some tribes are making significant progress in addressing these barriers . for example , we found that several tribes are moving toward owning or developing their own telecommunications systems using federal grants , loans , or partnering with the private sector . some are focusing on wireless technologies , which can be less expensive to deploy over rural rugged terrain . two tribes of the six tribes we visited are bringing in wireless carriers to compete with wireline carriers on price and service . tribal lands vary dramatically in size , demographics , and location , ranging from the navajo nation , with 24,000 square miles and over 176,000 native american residents , to tribal land areas in california comprising less than 1 square mile with fewer than 50 native american residents . most tribal lands are located in rural or remote locations , though some are near metropolitan areas . also , some tribal lands have a significant percentage of nonnative americans residing on them . tribes are unique in being sovereign governments within the united states . their sovereign status has been established by the u.s. constitution , treaties , and other federal actions . to help manage tribal affairs , tribes have formed governments or subsidiaries of tribal governments that include schools , housing , health , and other types of corporations . in addition , the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) in the department of the interior has a fiduciary responsibility to tribes and assumes some management responsibility for all land held in trust for the benefit of the individual native american or tribe . native american tribes are among the most economically distressed groups in the united states . according to the 2000 census , about 37 percent of native american households had incomes below the federal poverty level — more than double the rate for the u.s. population as a whole . residents of tribal lands often lack basic infrastructure , such as water and sewer systems , and telecommunications systems . the federal government has long acknowledged the difficulties of providing basic services , such as electricity and telephone service , to rural areas of the country . the concept of universal telephone service has its origins in section 1 of the communications act of 1934 , as amended , ( communications act ) which states that the fcc was created “for the purpose of regulating interstate and foreign commerce in communication by wire and radio so as to make available , so far as possible , to all people of the united states , a rapid , efficient , nationwide , and worldwide wire and radio communication service with adequate facilities at reasonable charges . .” the goal of universal service is to ensure that all u.s. residents have access to quality telephone service regardless of their household income or geographic location . a 1995 report by the census bureau based on 1990 census data noted that about 47 percent of native american households on tribal lands had telephone service , compared to about 95 percent of households nationally .