accuracy . some international food assistance reports have not reported targets accurately . following our request for data on ffp's performance in yemen , ffp officials found that the international food assistance reports for fiscal years 2009 and 2010 reported incorrect targets for yemen . an ffp official attributed these misreported targets to a database error that resulted in the number of planned recipients being double - counted . while ffp provided us with corrected targets for use in our analysis of ffp's progress in yemen , it has not yet reported the corrected figures to congress . clarity . the international food assistance report includes various types of data that are not clearly defined and could be misinterpreted . for instance , the report includes data on recipients without stating that these data reflect the number of planned recipients in yemen for the reported year — a target — as opposed to the number of actual recipients . additionally , although they appear directly next to the number of planned recipients , figures on metric tons of food delivered to yemen and the associated cost represent actual values , not planned values , but are not marked as such . consistency . the international food assistance report uses inconsistent measures for reporting planned and actual results . the report uses the number of planned recipients as targets but measures actual performance in metric tons and cost . this makes it impossible to draw an accurate comparison and prevents an evaluation of the extent of progress made in achieving the planned results . two dod programs account for the vast majority of u.s. security assistance to yemen ; however , dod has yet to evaluate their effectiveness in building yemeni counterterrorism capacity . as noted earlier , of the $497 million in total security assistance allocated to yemen between fiscal years 2007 and 2012 , dod allocated over 70 percent ( $361 million ) to its section 1206 and 1207 ( n ) programs . dod has used this funding to provide various types of equipment and training to yemeni security forces . specifically , through its section 1206 program , dod has assisted several components of the yemeni mod . for example , dod has provided vehicles , communications equipment , and other support to the yemeni border security force to enhance yemen's capability to detect and detain terrorists along its borders ; helicopters , maintenance , and surveillance cameras to yemen's air force to support counterterrorism operations ; and weapons , ammunition , and boats to yemen's special operations forces to build their counterterrorism capacity . similarly , dod's section 1207 ( n ) program aims to enhance the ability of the yemeni moi to conduct counterterrorism activities , providing radios , vehicles , training , and , as shown in figure 6 , weapons . see appendix iii for a complete list of section 1206 and 1207 ( n ) efforts in yemen by fiscal year . according to federal internal control standards , agencies should have control activities in place , such as performance reviews , to ensure that government resources are achieving effective results .