asop no . 5 , incurred health and disability claims asop no . 5 provides guidance to actuaries preparing or reviewing financial reports , claims studies , rates , or other actuarial communications involving incurred claims within a valuation period under a health benefit plan . asop no . 8 , regulatory filings for rates and financial projections for health plans ( particular focus is placed on the sections dealing with the recognition of benefit plan provisions , consistency of business plan and assumptions , reasonableness of assumptions , and use of past experience to project future results. ) did the acrp audit process provide cms sufficient information to assess potential impacts on beneficiaries and identify actions to address those impacts ? how did cms conduct audits of bids for 2006 , what information did the bid audit process provide cms , and how did cms use that information ? to determine whether cms met requirements for auditing the financial records of at least one - third of the ma organizations for contract years 2001-2005 and the bid submissions for contract year 2006 , we obtained from cms a listing of the organizations that had their acrps or bids audited each year and compared it with the total number of approved acrp and bid submissions for each year obtained from cms's acrp and bid management database , the health plan management system ( hpms ) . we also interviewed cms staff and officials . to determine whether information provided by the acrp audit process was sufficient for cms to assess potential impacts on beneficiaries and address those impacts , we obtained and reviewed audit reports for contract years 2001-2004 and reports prepared by a contractor that reviewed and analyzed the audits for contract year 2003 . we interviewed cms staff and officials about what they did with the audit results , and we discussed cms's review of an analysis of contract year 2003 acr audits performed by the contractor . to determine how cms conducted bid audits for contract year 2006 , what information the bid audit process provided cms , and how cms used that information , we obtained and reviewed cms's instructions and guidance for bid auditors , bid audit reports for contract year 2006 , planned audit procedures , and bid certifications records . we interviewed the bid audit firms and cms staff and officials about the bid audit process and discussed with cms how it used the results of the contract year 2006 audits and its plans for future use . see appendix i for details about our scope and methodology . we requested written comments on a draft of this report from the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) or his designee . we conducted our review from november 2006 to june 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the medicare program has a long - standing history of offering its beneficiaries managed care coverage through private plans as an alternative to the traditional ffs program . in 1997 , congress passed the balanced budget act of 1997 , which replaced an existing managed care program with the medicare+choice program in an effort to expand beneficiaries' managed care options .