2 in app . we used generalized linear models to estimate beneficiaries' spending and use of services and predict values for these variables assuming both that they did and that they did not have prior continuous insurance . we included the following independent variables in all of our analyses: prior continuous insurance , demographic characteristics ( census division , education level , income , marital status , race , and sex ) , potential health risk factors ( body mass index and smoking status ) , and ever having had a diagnosis of any of eight health conditions ( arthritis , cancer , diabetes , heart problems , high blood pressure , lung problems , psychological problems , and stroke ) . for our analyses of spending and use of services , we also included a variable for the number of months a beneficiary was alive during the year to control for partial - year spending and use of services . in addition , for our spending analyses , we adjusted spending to calendar year 2011 constant dollars . differences in health status , spending , and use of services that are discussed in the text of this report are based on results that were statistically significant at a 95 percent confidence level . the tables display all of our analytical results — whether or not the results were statistically significant at conventional confidence levels — and indicate the level of statistical significance . our methodology had some important limitations . because we used multiple exclusion criteria to define our study populations , our results might not be representative of the entire medicare population . however , we compared certain characteristics of our study populations with those of the entire medicare population and noted only small differences . in addition , like other researchers , we were limited in our ability to control for instances where individuals' poor health led to the loss of insurance rather than the loss of insurance leading to poor health . to address this issue , we controlled for potential health risk factors and diagnoses of eight health conditions in all of our analyses , and we excluded beneficiaries who were enrolled in medicare or medicaid before age 65 because their enrollment in these programs may be due , at least in part , to poor health . furthermore , because hrs does not collect health insurance plan information , we were unable to control for variations in health plan benefits and coverage options in our analyses . moreover , although we structured our analyses to capture as many beneficiaries as possible , the number of beneficiaries in our study populations may not be large enough to find significant differences for some variables . we ensured the reliability of the hrs and medicare data used in this report by reviewing related documentation , performing appropriate electronic data checks , and discussing the data with officials from acumen , llc . we found the data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of our analyses . ( see app . i for additional details about our scope and methodology. ) we conducted this performance audit from july 2011 to december 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .