waiver applications . to determine the adequacy of cms regional office oversight of states' waiver programs , we asked all 10 cms regional offices to provide the following information for each of the waivers for which they were responsible , including both waivers for the elderly as well as those serving other target populations: ( 1 ) the waiver start date , ( 2 ) the current waiver time period , ( 3 ) the fiscal year the waiver was last reviewed , and ( 4 ) whether or not the waiver review report was finalized . of the 263 waivers , 228 had been in place for 3 years or more and therefore should have had a regional office review . our review of the most current waiver applications for the 15 largest waivers serving the elderly found that many states provided cms limited information about how they plan to protect the health and welfare of beneficiaries . eleven of the 15 states cited three or fewer quality assurance mechanisms . for example , new york's application only contained information about the state licensure and certification requirements for its waiver services . cms does not hold its regional offices accountable for conducting and documenting periodic waiver reviews , nor does cms hold states accountable for submitting annual reports on the status of quality in their waivers . as of june 2002 , about one - fifth of the 228 waivers in place for 3 years or more had either never been reviewed or were renewed without a review . we found that the reviews varied considerably in the number of beneficiary records examined and the method of determining the sample , potentially limiting the generalizability of findings . according to cms regional office staff , the allocation of staff resources and travel funding levels have at times impeded the scope and timing of their reviews . in addition , some regional office staff told us that limited travel funds have resulted in the substitution of more limited desk reviews for on - site visits and in the conduct of reviews with one staff member when two would have been preferable . cms has a number of initiatives under way to generate information and dialogue on quality assurance approaches , but the agency's initiatives stop short of ( 1 ) requiring states to submit detailed information on their quality assurance approaches when applying for a waiver or ( 2 ) stipulating the necessary components for an acceptable quality assurance system . cms recognizes that insufficient attention has been given to the various mechanisms that states could and should use to monitor quality in their waiver programs . as described in appendix vi , the initiatives cms has under way include identification of strategies that states are currently using to monitor and improve quality in home and community - based care , distribution of a guide on quality improvement and assessment mechanisms for states and regional offices , and provision of a variety of technical assistance and resources to states . the agency also has implemented a new hcbs waiver quality review protocol for use by regional offices in assessing whether state waivers should be renewed .