these costs can vary by area . what factors most hinder competition in broadband markets ? what factors attract competitors to a broadband market ? which factors can government most affect ? which can government least affect ? how can industry support competitive broadband markets ? what should be fcc's top priorities with regard to broadband competition from your perspective ? this report covers ( 1 ) selected experts' and stakeholders' views on the factors currently affecting broadband competition and the factors that may affect it in the future and ( 2 ) the actions fcc has taken to promote broadband competition and assess the effectiveness of its actions , as well as to examine consumers' experience with broadband competition . to obtain expert and stakeholder views on factors that affect competition in broadband , we convened a meeting of 19 experts and interviewed 23 stakeholders . our meeting of experts was held at the national academy of sciences ( nas ) in february 2017 over one - and - a half days . staff from nas assisted us in identifying experts for the meeting . to identify the experts appropriate for this meeting , nas relied on staff experience and professional judgment drawn from its board on science , technology , and economic policy . experts were selected by us with the goal of ensuring that a broad spectrum of views was represented from multiple broadband - related areas , such as those of broadband providers , academia , and consumer and industry groups . the range of the experts' knowledge included both fixed and mobile broadband services . the meeting was moderated by one individual who guided the other 18 experts though a series of 14 questions that served as the basis for discussion . we developed these questions for the meeting of experts in consultation with nas staff . this meeting of experts was planned and convened with the assistance of nas to better ensure that a breadth of expertise was brought to bear in the meeting's preparation ; however , all final decisions regarding its substance and expert participation were our responsibility . the meeting was recorded and transcribed to ensure that we accurately captured the experts' statements , and we analyzed the transcripts to identify the experts' key statements regarding factors that affect competition in the broadband market or that may do so in the future . specifically , we developed categories for expert statements and then coded key portions of the transcript into those categories based on the consensus of multiple analysts . we selected the 23 stakeholders that we interviewed based on our prior telecommunications work , other broadband competition literature , and recommendations from stakeholders we interviewed . we selected broadband providers to include companies that offer broadband via a variety of methods , such as satellite , fiber - optic cables , and coaxial cable , among others . we interviewed these stakeholders about their knowledge of factors affecting broadband competition . stakeholders were from: 8 broadband providers , 7 associations representing broadband providers and utilities , 4 financial services firms , and 4 consumer advocacy groups . instead , we analyzed the responses and reported on common themes that arose from our expert meeting and stakeholder interviews .