( see app . ii , tables 9-11. ) other research has found that physicians' willingness to accept patients enrolled in medicaid and uninsured patients is lower than willingness to accept privately insured patients . when accepting new medicaid and chip patients , physicians who participate in medicaid and chip do not appear to show a preference for children in a fee - for - service or managed care delivery model . in areas where both delivery models exist for these programs , 69 percent of participating physicians accept children in medicaid and chip under both fee - for - service and managed care . the percentage of physicians who only accept these children under one type of delivery model is about the same for each delivery model — 7 percent only accept medicaid and chip children in a managed care delivery model , and 10 percent only accept these children in a program with a fee - for - service delivery model . ( see app . ii , table 12 , for additional information regarding physician acceptance of children in medicaid and chip by delivery model. ) participating physicians do not appear to have a preference for , or to give priority to , privately insured children when scheduling appointments for new patients . nationally , physicians cited wait times for new patient appointments as largely the same for children in medicaid and chip and privately insured children . for example , the most common wait time for a new appointment cited was less than 48 hours for both children in medicaid and chip and privately insured children . further , for both groups of children , more than half of the participating physicians could schedule a nonurgent visit in 6 days or fewer . wait times for children in medicaid and chip and privately insured children were similar for primary care physicians ( national , urban , and rural ) and specialty care physicians . for primary care physicians overall and those in urban and rural locations , more than half of participating physicians indicated that wait times are less than 1 week for children seeking new appointments , regardless of insurance coverage of the child . for specialty care physicians , more than half of physicians indicated that wait times for new appointments are 1 week or more for children with private insurance , as well as for children covered by medicaid and chip . ( see app . ii , tables 13 through 15 , for data on wait times by physician type and geographic location of primary care physicians. ) a june 2011 report on children's access to specialty services found that wait times in one large urban county differed for children in medicaid and chip as compared to privately insured children . using a methodology that entailed researchers calling clinics in cook county , illinois , and posing as mothers of children with medicaid or chip coverage , and , in separate calls , as mothers of children with private insurance , the study found that among the clinics that accepted both medicaid and chip and private insurance , the average wait time for children covered by medicaid and chip was 22 days longer than that for children with private insurance .