contacting participants . several state and local officials we interviewed said that they generally begin the process of collecting data on training - related employment by attempting to contact participants , though some can be unresponsive or inaccessible , which workforce experts from one national organization noted as well . if case managers are successful , they ask participants for information such as the name of their employer and their job title . some local areas also ask participants directly if their new jobs are — in the participants' opinion — related to the training they received . in some cases , case managers make their training - related employment determinations based solely on information the participants provide about their employment . to what extent do wia training participants obtain credentials and secure training - related employment ? what challenges do states face in reporting data on credential attainment and what steps , if any , are they and dol taking to address them ? what challenges do states face in reporting data on training - related employment and what steps , if any , are they and dol taking to address them ? to address our objectives , we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and dol's guidance for the adult and dislocated worker programs . we also interviewed dol officials and national experts on workforce issues representing six organizations . we identified these experts by reviewing relevant literature and using an iterative process to solicit recommendations from dol officials and experts . the results of these interviews are not generalizeable , but provided insights about the overall challenges states face in reporting on these outcomes and any efforts by states to overcome them . to more specifically identify the challenges states face in reporting data on credential attainment and employment related to training , as well as to learn about any steps they are taking to address these challenges , we interviewed state and local workforce officials from a nongeneralizeable sample of six states: alabama , illinois , kansas , rhode island , texas , and washington . we selected the states to reflect a mix of those that had leading edge data practices ( as identified by experts ) and those with either incomplete data or relatively high rates of reporting errors ( as identified by wia data quality reports on credential attainment ) . we also factored geographic diversity into state selection . in each state , we interviewed state workforce officials and also local workforce officials from at least one workforce investment board ( wib ) , and at least one american job center . in addition , we interviewed at least one employer organization in each state . in selecting these entities , we considered states' input on organizations that could provide us with an employer perspective on the value of credentials and certain types of training for various industries . these employer organizations included statewide business associations , regional business associations , individual employers , and industry - specific representatives .