, subject to frequent changes ) . this evm approach in effect ensured that material variances from planned project performance would not be identified and that the state of the project would not be reliably reported . we recommended that the director of opm address these deficiencies by , among other things , conducting effective system tests prior to system deployment , in addition to improving program cost estimation and progress reporting . then the agency provides the retirement package to the employee's payroll office . after the employee separates for retirement , the payroll office is responsible for reviewing the documents for correct signatures and information , making sure that all required forms have been submitted , and adding any additional paperwork that will be necessary for processing the retirement package . once the payroll office has finalized the paperwork , the retirement package is mailed to opm to continue the retirement process . payroll offices are required to submit the package to opm within 30 days of the retiree's separation date . upon receipt of the retirement package , opm calculates an interim payment based on information provided by the employing agency . nevertheless , opm deployed a limited initial version of the modernized retirement system in february 2008 . after unsuccessful efforts to address system quality issues , the agency suspended system operation , terminated the system contract , and began restructuring the modernization effort . in april 2009 , we again reported on opm's retirement modernization , noting that the agency still remained far from achieving the modernized retirement processing capabilities that it had planned . specifically , we noted that significant weaknesses continued to exist in three key management areas that we had previously identified — cost estimating , progress reporting , and testing — while also noting two additional weaknesses related to planning and oversight . despite agreeing with our january 2008 recommendation that opm develop a revised retirement modernization cost estimate , the agency had not completed initial steps for developing a new cost estimate by the time we reported again in april 2009 . at that time , we reported that the agency had not yet fully defined the estimate's purpose , developed an estimating plan , or defined the project's characteristics . by not completing these steps , opm increased the risk that it would produce an unreliable estimate and not have a sound basis for measuring project performance and formulating retirement modernization budgets . although it agreed with our january 2008 recommendation to establish a basis for effective evm , opm had not completed key steps as of the time of our april 2009 report . specifically , despite planning to begin reporting on the retirement project's progress using evm , the agency was not prepared to do so because initial steps , including the development of a reliable cost estimate and the validation of a baseline , had not been completed . engaging in evm reporting without first performing these fundamental steps could have again rendered the agency's assessments unreliable . as previously discussed , effective testing is an essential component of any project that includes developing systems . to be effectively managed , testing should be planned and conducted in a structured and disciplined fashion .