satisfied ? stage 1: ea awareness agency is aware of ea . in december 2002 , the cio issued a memorandum stating the agency's intent to develop and use an ea . adequate resources exist ( funding , people , tools , and technology ) . according to the chief technology officer ( cto ) , the agency has adequate program funding . nasa estimates that it will cost $750,000 to develop its ea for fiscal years 2001 through 2003 . further , the agency reports that it has skilled staff ( government employees and contractors ) for its architecture program . in addition , nasa is using automated tools and technology , such as rational rose by rational software corporation / ibm software group . committee or group representing the enterprise is responsible for directing , overseeing , or approving the ea . nasa has not assigned responsibility for directing , overseeing , or approving the ea to a committee or group comprising representatives from across the agency . program office responsible for ea development and maintenance exists . in december 2002 , nasa established a program office that is responsible for ea development and maintenance . chief architect exists . in january 2003 , nasa designated the cto as the chief architect . ea is being developed using a framework , methodology , and automated tool . the ea is being developed using the zachman framework . according to the cto , the agency is also using a defined methodology to develop the ea . in addition , nasa is using automated tools , such as rational rose by rational software corporation / ibm software group , to build the ea . according to the cto , the plans for the ea “as is” and the “to be” environments of the enterprise , as well as a sequencing plan for transitioning from the “as is” to the “to be.” provide for describing both the “as is” and the “to be” environments and a sequencing plan . according to the cto , the plans for the ea “as is” and the “to be” environments in terms of business , performance , information / data , application / service , and technology . provide for describing both the “as is” and the “to be” environments in terms of business , performance , information / data , application / service , and technology . ea plans call for business , performance , information / data , application / service , and technology descriptions to address security . according to the cto , the plans for the ea provide for addressing security for the “as is” and “to be” environments . ea plans call for developing metrics for measuring ea progress , quality , compliance , and return on investment . according to the cto , the plans for the ea provide for developing metrics to measure progress , quality , compliance , and return on investment . satisfied ? written / approved organization policy exists for ea development . according to the cto , the agency is revising its existing policy to require the development of an ea .