this has not been the case . consumer demand for php product has not created the financial incentive to encourage the majority of the industry to pursue php . your report provides an accurate estimate of the prevalence of vv illnesses which is approximately 32 illnesses per year . when compared to other food borne illnesses , this number is very small . this number has remained virtually unchanged since the early 1990s . during this period the number of reporting states has nearly doubled . the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) reports that due to the severity of the illness , practically all cases are reported . the state voting delegates of issc , responsible for implementing controls in their respective states , have struggled to identify controls to address a naturally occurring organism that affects only 32 individuals annually . it is also important to note that the general population is not at risk . vv poses a risk to immuno - compromised individuals . approximately 7% of the us population is immuno - compromised . only a small number of that 7% is affected . most food safety concerns place all consumers at risk . states prioritize resources to address food safety issues which pose the greatest threat of illness to consumers . implementing regulatory controls which cause industry financial hardship make regulating this problem very problematic . the inability to identify other food safety issues with similar illness burdens that have been regulated with similar costs to an industry has made consensus on this issue difficult . the cost benefit debate on vv has always been an obstacle for the issc in agreeing on controls . yet the issc has continued to be proactive in its efforts to reduce vv illnesses . the report recommends that the issc and fda agree on an appropriate vv illness reduction goal . to accomplish this , issc and fda must address the two broad questions: ( 1 ) what should be the goal of a public funded regulatory program for addressing a food safety issue which affects 32 persons annually ; and ( 2 ) to what extent should a program of this type impose economic hardship to the industry . your report outlines several areas of disagreement between the fda and issc . there is agreement between fda and issc in several areas that provide a foundation for identifying approach for addressing the problem . the fda and issc agree that vv illnesses pose a health risk which requires public health intervention . there is agreement on the scope of the problem and the ability of known controls to reduce risk . the only major disagreement is the extent of public health interventions that will appropriately address the problem . the extent of the interventions dictates the financial impact to the shellfish industry . the present controls adopted by the issc recognize a risk at harvest and are intended to minimize any increase in risk as a result of post harvest growth . although these controls pose significant fiscal challenges for the industry , states have imposed these controls . the fda is proposing an approach requiring php , which would reduce the levels of vv post harvest and further reduce the risk .