issuers . issuers include private and public companies , and pooled investment vehicles such as hedge , venture capital , or private equity funds . placement agent or finders . issuers may employ placement agents ( who are registered with sec , the financial industry regulatory authority , or states ) and finders ( who are unregistered with regulators ) to access accredited or other qualified investors . regulation d defines accredited investors and describes certain terms and conditions of offers and sales of private placements securities . under regulation d , accredited investors consist of institutional entities and individuals . institutions that qualify as accredited investors include certain regulated financial institutions and certain entities with total assets of $5 million or more . individuals who qualify as accredited investors are directors , executive officers , and general partners of the securities issuers , or persons who have a minimum annual income in excess of $200,000 ( $300,000 with spouse ) or net worth in excess of $1 million excluding primary residence ( see fig . the focus of this report is on individual accredited investors . regulation d establishes registration exemptions , with the exemptions differing in the size of offerings , the number and type of investors , or both . these exemptions are described in rules 504 , 505 , 506 . under rule 504 , the maximum dollar amount of the offering is $1 million in any 12-month period and no limit is set on the number of investors . under rule 505 , the maximum offering is $5 million in any 12-month period and unlimited number of accredited investors and up to 35 nonaccredited investors may invest . under rule 506 , there are no offering dollar limits and an unlimited number of accredited investors and up to 35 nonaccredited sophisticated investors may invest . offerings made in reliance on the rules cannot solicit investors through any form of general solicitation or general advertising . sec staff has indicated that an issuer would not contravene the prohibition against general solicitation if the issuer had a preexisting and substantive relationship with the investor . of the three rules , rule 506 is the most widely used exemption because there is no limit on the size of the offering or the number of accredited investors . further , according to a gao report , complying with state securities registration requirements for other exemptions may play a role as to why issuers rely more on regulation d. sec data show that businesses make more regulation d offerings than registered public offerings ( see table 1 ) . regulation d is designed to ( 1 ) eliminate any unnecessary restrictions sec rules place on small business issuers , and ( 2 ) achieve uniformity between state and federal exemptions to facilitate capital formation consistent with investor protection . the accredited investor standard , which is used to adjust exemptive conditions under regulation d , has undergone several changes since its adoption in 1982 . as shown in figure 2 , the qualifications for investment in private placements securities went through several interpretations and changes .