( see fig . in those four states , the differences in average percentages between the government hospital groups and the nonprofit hospital groups ranged from about 4.3 percentage points in georgia to 11.3 percentage points in texas . in contrast , in the fifth state , indiana , the nonprofit hospital group devoted the largest share , on average , of patient operating expenses to uncompensated care . between the nonprofit and for - profit hospital groups , the nonprofit hospitals' average percentages were greater in four of the five states — ranging from 1.2 percentage points greater in florida to 2.3 percentage points greater in indiana . in contrast , in the fifth state , california , the nonprofit group's average percentage was similar to that of the for - profit group . the five states varied in their hospitals' shares of patient operating expenses devoted to uncompensated care , ranging from an average 4.1 percent for all indiana hospitals to an average 8.3 percent for texas hospitals . ( see table 4. ) similar state - to - state variation found in other studies was due , in part , to differences in states' proportions of uninsured populations , variation in medicaid eligibility or payment levels , and the presence of state programs that provide health insurance to low - income uninsured individuals . specifically , prior research showed that hospitals located in states with more uninsured individuals and hospitals in states with relatively more eligibility - restricted medicaid programs may have higher levels of uncompensated care . our data are consistent with these studies' findings on the uninsured . for example , in our five - state review , texas had the highest percentage of uninsured — 25 percent — and the highest share , on average , of patient operating expenses devoted to uncompensated care , whereas indiana had the lowest percentage of uninsured — 13 percent — and the lowest average share . for each group , uncompensated care costs were concentrated in a small number of hospitals . we observed this pattern when examining the percentages of patient operating expenses devoted to uncompensated care costs as well as hospitals' shares of total uncompensated care costs in a state . for the three hospital ownership groups , we ranked hospitals according to their share of patient operating expenses devoted to uncompensated care . we found that , for all three hospital groups , the top quarter of hospitals devoted substantially greater percentages of their patient operating expenses to uncompensated care , on average , compared with the bottom quarter of hospitals . ( see fig . for example , in california's nonprofit hospital group , the top quarter of hospitals devoted an average of 7.2 percent compared with 1.4 percent for the bottom quarter of hospitals . i for more detail on our scope and methodology. ) in summary , the cost burden of providing uncompensated care varied among the three hospital groups , but the burden was generally concentrated in a small number of hospitals . in four of the five states , government hospitals , as a group , devoted substantially larger shares of their patient operating expenses to uncompensated care than did nonprofit and for - profit hospitals .