we included that additional information where appropriate . hhs's comments are printed in appendix i. hhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or at crossem@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and office of public affairs can be found on the last page of this report . other major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . remote collection of cord blood units is under consideration . finally , sales of cord blood units have slowed and could challenge banks' efforts to increase the ncbi . if banks lose collection sites because of concerns about possible fda inspection , the banks would be subject to the additional costs of adding new sites , which would include training site staff , providing collection materials , and transporting the units from the site to the bank . however , fda officials told gao in a july 2011 interview that they are taking the approach that neither individuals nor hospitals that have agreements with banks to collect cord blood will be required to register separately with fda . fda officials said that such entities are required to comply with product requirements applicable to their collecting activities , and the cord blood bank is responsible for ensuring that these entities under contract with the bank comply with fda regulations . fda officials have said that the benefits of cord blood licensure include greater assurance among doctors and patients of the quality and efficacy of cord blood units . additionally , with licensure , cord blood banks will be able to sell cord blood units without ind pricing restrictions . however , some banks also reported that they were uncertain whether potential increased revenue from licensed units will offset their costs . in addition , the advisory council has expressed concerns about the potential for fda's licensure requirements to result in increased cost and decreased availability of public cord blood units without necessarily increasing the safety , stability , potency , or purity of the units . in november 2010 , the advisory council recommended that the fda meet with the banks applying for licensure to share and resolve specific concerns regarding licensure . fda officials have been meeting individually with cord blood banks to discuss the specifics of each bank's licensure application and circumstances . while fda officials have stated that they could not confirm , for example , that a certain facility design would be acceptable in all situations , they said that they could provide clarification of the manufacturing regulations for individual banks . since 2005 , hrsa has contracted for about 30 percent of the minimum statutory goal of at least 150,000 new units of high quality cord blood .