penmanship . among the 91 ( 76 percent ) survey respondents that reported penmanship as challenging , several noted that it is difficult for staff to read illegible handwritten medical notes . this , in turn , results in difficulty determining the accurate diagnosis , the required prescription , or a referral . tracking medications . according to 89 ( 76 percent ) of the respondents , it is challenging to track medications without an ehr . for example , one administrator stated that the lack of an ehr makes the management of patient medication use difficult , as staff are unable to verify what medications a patient is taking , what medications have been prescribed from an outside location , and / or the effectiveness of medications . another administrator stated that staff members rely heavily on patients to remember what medications they are taking — potentially causing harm if patients cannot remember what medications they are taking and the medications have dangerous interactions . amount of time to manage records . according to 86 ( 72 percent ) of the respondents , managing paper health records is challenging and requires more time for staff to complete and file paperwork . several respondents stated that the size of the paper health records has increased , resulting in additional time required to review and file records . ability to search within records . eighty - three ( 70 percent ) of the respondents reported the ability of clinical staff to search within paper health records for information as challenging . for example , one respondent stated that providers must flip through individual pages of a record to search for necessary information . another respondent reported that some patients have up to three volumes of a health record and it can take up to 2 or 3 days to find requested information if the patient does not recall when or where the medical care was performed . figure 3 shows a large paper health record and the multiple storage cabinets used to store them , which illustrates the difficulty in manually searching for information within the records . missing records . eighty - three ( 69 percent ) of the survey respondents stated that missing records are challenging . according to one administrator , repeat evaluations that may not be required for chronically ill patients are being conducted due to missing records . another administrator stated that information can often get misfiled in the record of a patient with a similar name . availability of records . seventy - eight ( 65 percent ) of the respondents reported that the availability of records is challenging . for example , one administrator reported that many records are located in different locations , making it difficult to access the necessary information . another administrator stated that delays occur when clinic staff have to wait for patients to bring records in for review or wait for updated notes from a previous location . amount of time for patient encounters . according to 65 ( 55 percent ) of the respondents , the lack of an ehr has resulted in an increase in the amount of time required to check - in patients , complete patient appointments , and enter information in the patient record .