dod concurred with our recommendation . in september 2015 , we found the comptroller intended to measure these reductions based on the advisory and assistance service obligations in the fiscal year 2017 budget submission . our analysis found that using these revised measures , the military departments achieved the required funding reductions . in addition , section 2330a ( f ) of title 10 of the u.s. code requires the secretaries of the military departments or heads of the defense agencies responsible for contracted services in the inventory to develop a plan , including an enforcement mechanism and approval process for using the inventory to inform management decisions ( see figure 1 ) . collectively , these statutory requirements mandate the use of the inventory and the associated review process to enhance the ability of dod to identify and track services provided by contractors , achieve accountability for the contractor sector of dod's total workforce , help identify contracted services for possible conversion from contractor performance to dod civilian performance , support dod's determination of the appropriate workforce mix , and project and justify the number of contractor ftes included in dod's annual budget justification materials . the naval sea systems command ( navsea ) identified four of the nine selected contract actions as including closely associated with inherently governmental functions in its inventory review letter . in two of these cases , our review of the statements of work matched navsea's determination , but in the third case we found the statement of work did not include closely associated with inherently governmental functions . in the fourth case , it was unclear whether the contract activities would include these functions . of the selected navy contract actions , we also identified one where the statement of work included requirements for contractors to perform closely associated with inherently governmental functions that was not identified by navsea . at the army , it is unclear whether eight of the 10 contract activities were included in the army's inventory review results . army's pdc tool , used to inform the inventory review , tracks by location and functional requirement — such as administrative or logistics support . officials who input data into this system noted that there is no data field specifically for contract number but stated they can include this information in the description field if they choose to do so . for the two contracts we could confirm were included in the inventory review results we agreed with the army determination that the contractor activities did not include closely associated with inherently governmental functions based on our review of the statements of work . the joint explanatory statement accompanying the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 directed the senior acquisition executives from the navy and air force , along with the usd ( at&l ) for the defense agencies , to issue policies implementing a standard checklist to be completed before awarding a contract for services , similar to the army's current process that identifies whether contractors are performing closely associated with inherently governmental functions , among other things . neither usd ( at&l ) nor the two military departments met the march 30 , 2015 deadline .