to participate in coordination . we also interviewed we conducted this performance audit from june 2011 to june 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . transportation - disadvantaged populations , including those that cannot provide their own transportation due to age , disability , or income constraints , may face challenges in accessing transportation , such as lack of access to public transportation or a private vehicle . for example , according to a 2011 report by the national council on disability , people with disabilities are more likely than people without disabilities to report that they have inadequate transportation ( 34 percent versus 16 percent , respectively ) . we have previously reported that people in need of transportation often benefit from greater and higher quality services when transportation providers coordinate their operations . in addition , we have reported that coordination has the potential to reduce federal transportation program costs by clustering passengers ; using fewer one - way trips ; and sharing the use of personnel , equipment , and facilities . federal agencies , including usda , education , hhs , hud , interior , dol , dot , and va , play an important role in helping transportation - disadvantaged populations access federal programs by providing funds to state and local grantees . federal programs that provide funding for transportation cover a variety of services , including education , job training , employment , nutrition , health , medical care , or other human services . as we have previously reported , many federally funded programs purchase transportation services from existing private or public providers . this includes contracting for services with private transportation providers or providing transit passes , taxi vouchers , or mileage reimbursement to program participants , or some combination of these methods . some programs may use federal funds to purchase and operate their own vehicles . dot and hhs formed the coordinating council on human services transportation ( coordinating council ) in 1986 to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of human service transportation by coordinating related programs at the federal level and promoting the maximum feasible coordination at the state and local levels . in 2003 , we reported that coordination efforts at the federal , state , and local levels varied greatly , and while some coordination efforts showed promising results , obstacles continued to impede coordination . as a result , we recommended that , among other things , the coordinating council be expanded to include additional federal agencies . the coordinating council was expanded to 11 federal agencies in 2004 by executive order 13330 and renamed the interagency transportation coordinating council on access and mobility . the expanded coordinating council was charged with , among other things , promoting interagency cooperation and establishing appropriate mechanisms to minimize duplication and overlap of federal programs and services so that transportation - disadvantaged persons have access to improved transportation services .