document the charitable contribution deduction . deduct only the fair market value of the vehicle . follow state law regarding the car title and license plates . generally , the donor should ensure that the title of the vehicle is transferred to the charity's name , by contacting the state department of motor vehicles , and keep a copy of the title transfer . donors are also advised to remove the license plates , if allowed by the state . the irs and the states have identified few significant occurrences of abuse by charities and fund - raisers operating vehicle donation programs . however , the guidance above may help potential donors avoid donating vehicles to organizations that have not complied with laws or regulations related to vehicle donation activities , and prevent problems sometimes encountered with vehicle title transfers . such questions include the following: will the vehicle be fixed up and given to the needy ? will it be resold , and if so , what share of the proceeds will the charity receive ? itemize deductions in order to receive a tax benefit from the donation . the decision to itemize is determined by whether total itemized deductions are greater than the standard deduction . the fair market value takes into account many factors , including the vehicle's condition , and can be substantially different from the blue book value . irs publication 526 , “charitable deductions,” and irs publication 561 , “determining the value of donated property,” provide instructions on how to calculate the fair market value of donated property . irs publication 526 identifies requirements for the types of receipts taxpayers must obtain and the forms they must file . for example , see the following: irs revoked the charity status for one florida organization that solicited boat donations after finding that its charitable activities were insubstantial , and that proceeds were kept for personal gain . i would now like to discuss these areas in more detail . individuals often first learn about vehicle donation programs through advertisements . vehicle donation advertisements can be found on billboards , truck banners , and television , as well as in newsletters and even on small paper bags . some of the most common mediums for vehicle donation advertisements include the radio , newspapers , and the internet . based on a sample of advertisements we reviewed , we found that advertisements for vehicle donations often identified that individuals could claim tax deductions for the donations , the donations served charitable purposes , and the donors' vehicles would be towed free of charge . figure 1 identifies the most common claims made in the newspaper , radio , and internet advertisements we reviewed . irs has expressed concern about some vehicle donation advertisements . according to an official from irs's tax exempt division , tax deduction claims are potentially deceptive when they do not specify that taxpayers must itemize their deductions to claim a vehicle donation , since many taxpayers do not itemize . of the 147 advertisements we reviewed , 117 identified that taxpayers could claim a tax deduction , but only 7 advertisements specified that donors must itemize in order to claim a deduction .