104-106 , div . federal information security management act of 2002 , pub . 107- 347 , title iii , 116 stat . 2899 , 2946 ( dec. 17 , 2002 ) , codified as amended at 44 u.s.c . department of homeland security financial accountability act , pub . 108-330 , 118 stat . see appendix i for details . we performed the work on which this statement is based from october 2018 to october 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . prior to the enactment of the cfo act , government reports found that agencies lost billions of dollars through fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement . these reports painted the picture of a government unable to properly manage its programs , protect its assets , or provide taxpayers with the effective and economical services they expected . reported financial management problems included ( 1 ) unreliable financial information driven by widespread weaknesses in agency internal controls over financial reporting and obsolete and inefficient agency financial management systems and ( 2 ) financial reporting practices that did not accurately disclose the current and probable future cost of operating , permit adequate comparison of actual costs among executive branch agencies , or provide the timely information required for efficient program management . for example , in 1988 , we reported on internal control problems such as the department of defense being unable to account for hundreds of millions of dollars in advances paid by foreign customers for equipment , weak controls permitting things such as over $50 million in undetected fraudulent insurance claims paid by the federal crop insurance corporation , millions of dollars in interest penalties because agencies paid 25 percent of their bills late , and over $350 million in lost interest because agencies paid their bills too soon . in 1990 , congress mandated financial management reform through enactment of the cfo act . the cfo act was the most comprehensive and far - reaching financial management improvement legislation enacted since the budget and accounting procedures act of 1950 . the cfo act established a controller position at the government - wide level and a cfo position for each of the agencies identified in the act ( referred to as the cfo act agencies ) , provided for long - range planning , and began the process of preparing and independently auditing federal agency financial statements . the act aimed to strengthen internal controls , integration of agency accounting and financial management systems , financial reporting practices , and the financial management workforce . the act also called for systematic performance measurement and cost information . as figure 1 shows , a number of other financial management reforms were subsequently enacted to help improve federal financial management , some of which i will briefly discuss in my statement today . a chronological list of statutes cited in this report and selected additional financial management reforms is included in appendix ii .