the scope of our review was set by the jade act . the act has several provisions , one part of which amends the burmese freedom and democracy act of 2003 to prohibit the import of burmese - origin jadeite and rubies and jewelry containing burmese - origin jadeite and rubies into the united states and calls on the administration to pursue certain international actions to prevent the global trade in burmese gemstones . the jade act also requires gao to submit a report to congress assessing the effectiveness of the implementation of this section of the act , including any recommendations for improving its administration . we conducted this performance audit from december 2008 to september 2009 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . ( a ) pursuant to section 3a of the burmese freedom and democracy act of 2003 ( public law 108-61 ; 50 u.s.c . 1701 note ) , as amended by the tom lantos block burmese jade act of 2008 ( public law 110-286 ) , for purposes of goods provided for in headings 7103 , 7113 , and 7116 , except as set forth in subdivisions ( c ) and ( d ) of this note , the importation of any of the following goods shall be prohibited: i ) jadeite mined or extracted from burma and classifiable in heading 7103 of the tariff schedule , ii ) rubies mined in or extracted from burma and classifiable in heading 7103 of the tariff schedule , iii ) articles of jewelry containing jadeite described in subdivision ( a ) ( i ) of this note , whether classifiable in heading 7113 or 7116 of the tariff schedule ; and iv ) articles of jewelry containing rubies described in subdivision ( a ) ( ii ) of this note , whether classifiable in heading 7113 or 7116 of the tariff schedule . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix viii . to examine u.s. agencies' efforts in response to the tom lantos block burmese jade ( junta's anti - democratic efforts ) act of 2008 ( jade act ) ( pub .