pub . 111-5 , enacted in february 2009 , included a provision for gao to report periodically on the economic impact of minimum wage increases in american samoa . gao previously reported in response to this mandate in 2010 , 2011 , 2014 , and 2016 . this report updates our previous reports and examines ( 1 ) economic trends including changes in employment and earnings since the minimum wage increases in american samoa began in 2007 , ( 2 ) the status of the tuna canning industry , and ( 3 ) stakeholder views on the minimum wage increases . to examine economic trends including changes in employment and earnings , we analyzed gross domestic product data from the u.s. department of commerce's bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) ; tax and administrative data from the american samoa government ; and employment , earnings , and wage data gathered through an employer questionnaire that we submitted to american samoa's tuna canning industry . to examine the status of the territory's key private sector industry — tuna canning — we estimated changes in employment and earnings by submitting an employer questionnaire to american samoa's tuna canning industry in accordance with the methodology of prior reports , and analyzed tuna trade data using u.s. census bureau data . using employer questionnaire data , we determined both the median wage rate and the number of workers that would be affected by future minimum wage increases because their wages were at or below future scheduled minimum wage rates . we estimated the cost of future scheduled minimum wage increases by calculating the cost to the cannery of increasing each worker's wages to scheduled levels . in addition , we interviewed cannery representatives to obtain their views on challenges facing the industry , including minimum wage increases . to examine stakeholder views on the minimum wage increases , we conducted interviews with officials from the american samoa government and american samoa chamber of commerce , and employers and workers from the public and private sectors . we interviewed a nongeneralizable sample of employers and workers selected on the basis of key industry information from prior gao reports and employment data from the american samoa government . specifically , we interviewed the following employers and their workers: ( 1 ) the american samoa government and three of its component units , and ( 2 ) starkist samoa . to supplement these employers and their workers , we requested that the american samoa chamber of commerce select additional employers and their workers on the basis of criteria related to the tuna canning , construction , and retail industries , among other things . for more details on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from june 2019 to may 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .