license holders unknown . representatives from eight of the tribal entities we contacted stated that it is difficult to determine who holds spectrum licenses . for example , two tribal entities had to hire consultants to identify who held licenses for spectrum over the tribes' lands , and another tribal entity relied on the expertise of its non - tribal partner to identify the license holders . opportunities for federal funding . regarding one of these tribal entities' experiences with the secondary market , the tribal representative we contacted stated that an indian - owned telecommunications consulting company was pivotal in identifying the license holder and facilitating the transaction and that the transaction would not have happened without the consulting company . representatives from this company told us that they conducted an analysis to identify unused spectrum licenses over the tribe's land . the company identified three providers holding such licenses , but only one of those providers was willing to participate in a secondary market transaction . representatives from another of the tribal entities that accessed licensed spectrum through the secondary market told us that they relied on the expertise of their non - tribal partner to facilitate these transactions . we found that fcc has taken the following actions to increase tribal access to and use of spectrum: ( 1 ) initiated proposed rulemakings on promoting tribal access to spectrum , ( 2 ) adopted rules to increase spectrum available for broadband use , and ( 3 ) conducted outreach and training for tribal entities on spectrum - related issues . fcc issued two nprms — one in march 2011 and one in may 2018 — that included policy options intended to enhance tribal access to spectrum . at the time of our report , fcc had not adopted new rules or taken further action on the 2011 rulemaking , and fcc had not taken further actions since the comments period ended on september 7 , 2018 , on the may 2018 rulemaking . according to fcc officials , the 2011 nprm addressed several recommendations made in the national broadband plan to promote the greater use of spectrum over tribal lands . among other things , the 2011 nprm sought comments on three proposals to create new spectrum access opportunities for tribal entities ( see fig . fcc officials told us that they have reviewed public comments to the proposed rulemaking , but have no current plans to take further actions . we reviewed the public comments fcc received that pertained to the three proposals , which included comments from tribal associations , tribal governments , rural and nationwide industry associations , and tribal and private providers . based on our analysis of the comments that included positions on the proposal for a tribal licensing priority , eight stakeholders — including industry associations , private providers , and a tribal government — were supportive of this proposal . however , we found that stakeholder views differed on implementing good faith negotiations and on the build - or - divest processes . in general , the tribal stakeholders indicated that they were supportive of these proposals , while the industry associations and private providers were not .