we cannot determine why these searches failed . epls agency points of contact are incorrect: the epls web site lists points of contact for further information regarding specific exclusion actions . this directory covers 59 agencies and lists 78 different individuals . overall , we were unable to contact suspension and debarment personnel at 15 — about 25 percent — of the agencies with listed points of contact . for example , we initially found that 19 of the phone numbers listed were disconnected or otherwise nonfunctioning . in addition , we found that 6 points of contact were incorrect . in response to our recommendation to take steps to ensure that the epls points of contact list is updated , gsa explained that while it maintains responsibility for updating the list , it is the responsibility of each agency to notify gsa of any changes to their individual point of contact information . gsa also mentioned that the responsibility of each agency has been addressed at the interagency suspension and debarment committee and epls advisory group meetings . in addition , gsa stated that epls includes semi - annual automated notifications to verify agency point of contacts and that the epls help desk also provides support in identifying current information in response to public user reports of outdated point of contact information . as we noted in our report , the epls web site has a directory that covers 59 agencies and lists 78 different individuals , if additional follow - up is needed . however , we were unable to contact suspension and debarment personnel at 15 — about 25 percent — of the agencies with listed points of contact . for example , we initially found that 19 of the phone numbers listed were disconnected or otherwise nonfunctioning . in addition , we found that 6 points of contact were completely incorrect . in one instance , the individual listed had been retired for 5 years . as of february 11 , 2009 , the date of gsa's agency comment letter , our follow - up work shows that the majority of these inaccuracies still existed on the epls agency contact list . therefore , it appears that the steps gsa mentions in its comment letter have been ineffective . although we recognize that agencies have a responsibility to provide gsa with up - to - date information , we think it is reasonable for gsa to proactively manage the completeness and accuracy of the list , especially since they know , as a result of our investigation , that the list has significant errors . in short , we do not consider gsa's actions to be sufficient to close the recommendation . finally , we recommended that gsa place a warning on the federal supply schedule web site indicating that prospective purchasers need to check epls to determine whether vendors are excluded and also explore the feasibility of removing or identifying excluded entities that are listed on the gsa schedule . in response , gsa outlined proposed actions that it believes warrant closing the recommendation .