gao - 12-151 . us that fsoc has an ongoing effort to develop charters for the other committees that serve the council . the deputies committee's bylaws and the ongoing effort to review fsoc's governance structures are positive developments in providing additional clarification on the roles and responsibilities of fsoc committees . we will continue to monitor these efforts and the extent to which they clarify coordination and collaboration across member agencies . similarly , in our september 2012 report , we recommended that fsoc more fully incorporate key practices for successful collaboration that we have previously identified , which could include working jointly with agencies to coordinate schedules for rulemakings , conduct collaborative systemwide stress tests , or create external advisory committees . fsoc staff told us that the statute did not give fsoc the authority to direct actions of individual members including requiring members to coordinate rulemakings . while we understand the sensitivity to respecting members' independence , we maintain that additional collaboration practices can be adopted without impinging on the regulators' independence . further , although the dodd - frank act gave fsoc a certain statutory exemption to encourage the development of external advisory committees that could include industry representatives , academics , and state regulators , it has not formed any such committees . however , over the last year , fsoc has reached out to external stakeholders in some other ways . in may 2014 , fsoc held a public conference on the asset management industry and its activities , at which they solicited input from the industry and other stakeholders , including academics and public interest groups . fsoc staff at treasury also told us in june 2014 that a banker had briefed fsoc principals on cybersecurity issues . finally , we recommended in our september 2012 report that fsoc and ofr clarify responsibility for implementing requirements to monitor threats to financial stability across fsoc and ofr , including among fsoc members and member agencies . as noted earlier , fsoc is tasked with monitoring the financial services marketplace to identify potential threats to u.s. financial stability , and ofr's research and analysis center must develop and maintain metrics and reporting systems for risks to u.s. financial stability as well as monitor , investigate , and report on changes in systemwide risk levels . the dodd - frank act defines certain responsibilities for fsoc and ofr , but the lack of clear responsibility for implementation can lead to duplication , confusion , and gaps in their efforts . this risk is further compounded by the fact that many fsoc member agencies have risk analysis and data collection functions associated with their supervisory responsibilities . some of these functions are explicitly focused on risks to financial stability , and some member agencies have created their own programs to examine them . to the extent that these programs provide unique information to fsoc , they will be contributing to the overall effort . however , if not properly coordinated , these separate efforts could be less effective and duplicative , resulting in wasted time and resources .