navy . navy officials reported that they used phrams , but supplemented phrams estimates of mental health provider staffing needs with additional information . according to navy officials , this was necessary because phrams does not include estimates of mental health provider staffing needs on navy vessels and for deployed marine corps units . as a result , navy officials adjusted their phrams output to account for these additional needs for mental health providers . air force . according to navy officials , the fiscal year 2016 budget request submitted by the navy for mental health provider staffing is the sum of the estimated staffing levels generated by phrams and the calculated operational requirements for mental health providers . when we shared this information with dha officials , they told us that they were unaware of specific supplemental or alternative methods used by the military services to determine their final mental health provider staffing estimates . however , these officials did note that the military services do make modifications to their phrams results through modifying certain aspects of the model and dha does not collect information on these modifications . dha and the phrams contractor review the model annually to incorporate changes requested by the military services in the next version of the model . standards for internal control in the federal government state that information should be recorded and communicated to management and others within the agency that need it in a format and time frame that enables them to carry out their responsibilities . however , since dha did not have access to this information on how the military services supplemented phrams for their fiscal year 2016 budget request , this critical information was not included in this annual update process . as a result of the military services' alterations to phrams estimates of mental health provider staffing needs , dha cannot consistently determine how beneficiary demand affects the mental health provider staffing needs for the mhs . specifically , due to the army's use of a workload - based staffing estimate , the resulting mental health provider staffing needs estimates submitted for the fiscal year 2016 budget process may not consistently reflect the beneficiary demand for mental health services across military services . in addition , without an accurate picture of the ways the military services altered or supplemented phrams results , dha cannot evaluate the role phrams played in the development of the fiscal year 2016 budget request for mental health provider staffing and cannot ensure that it is directing the phrams contractor to make the most appropriate changes to the model that minimize the need for these service - specific supplements . the military services submit quarterly reports to dha through the oasd ha human capital office that include information on their current mental health provider staffing levels and should , as requested , include information on their future needs for these providers . however , the military services do not include reliable information about their mental health provider staffing needs on these quarterly reports , despite having access to phrams since fiscal year 2010 .