( see fig . 1 for an example of a bullet - resistant structure. ) according to nrc , other sites took comparable actions to defend against the revised dbt . in addition to adding measures designed to detect , delay , and respond to an attack , the licensees at the four sites we visited installed new vehicle barrier systems to defend against the larger vehicle bomb in the revised dbt . the dbt does not include the threat of an airborne attack . force - on - force inspections are nrc's performance - based means for testing the effectiveness of nuclear power plant security programs . these inspections are intended to demonstrate how well a nuclear power plant might defend against a real - life threat . in a force - on - force inspection , a professional team of adversaries attempts to reach specific “target sets” within a nuclear power plant that would allow them to commit radiological sabotage . these target sets represent the minimum pieces of equipment or infrastructure an attacker would need to destroy or disable in order to commit radiological sabotage that results in an elevated release of radioactive material to the environment . nrc also conducts baseline inspections at nuclear power plants . during these inspections , security inspectors examine areas such as officer training , fitness for duty , positioning and operational readiness of multiple physical and technical security components , and the controls the licensee has in place to ensure that unauthorized personnel do not gain access to the protected area . other threats in the dbt include a waterborne assault and the threat of an insider . nrc's policy is to conduct a baseline inspection at each site every year , with the complete range of baseline inspection activities conducted over a 3-year cycle . for both force - on - force and baseline inspections , licensees are responsible for immediately correcting or compensating for any deficiency in which nrc concludes that security is not in accordance with the approved security plans or other security orders . the process by which nrc revised the dbt for nuclear power plants was generally logical and well defined in that trained threat assessment staff made recommendations for changes based on an analysis of demonstrated terrorist capabilities . the nrc commissioners evaluated the recommendations and considered whether the proposed changes constituted characteristics representative of an enemy of the united states , or were otherwise not reasonable for a private security force to defend against . despite the substantial security improvements we observed at the four sites we visited , it is too early to conclude , either from nrc's force - on - force or baseline inspections , that all nuclear power plant sites are capable of defending against the revised dbt for the following two reasons: first , as of march 30 , 2006 , nrc had completed force - on - force inspections at 27 of the 65 sites , and it is not planning to complete force - on - force inspections at all sites until 2007 , in accordance with its 3-year schedule .