tsa concurred and has addressed this recommendation . specifically , in june 2015 , tsa provided documentation showing that , while conducting operational testing of the ait - 2 system , the agency considered screening officer performance and measured ait - 2 system effectiveness based on both the performance of the ait - 2 technology and the screening officers who operate it . this should help tsa assess whether this screening system will meet mission needs and perform as intended . with regard to the managed inclusion process , in december 2014 , we reported that tsa had tested the security effectiveness of the individual components of the managed inclusion process , but had not tested the overall effectiveness of the managed inclusion process as it functions as a whole . according to tsa officials , tsa tested the security effectiveness of the individual components being used in the managed inclusion process at the time — such as bdos , passenger screening canine teams , and explosives trace detection ( etd ) devices — before implementing managed inclusion , and tsa determined that each layer alone provides an effective level of security . however , in our prior body of work , we identified challenges in several of the layers used in the managed inclusion process , raising questions regarding their effectiveness . further , as of the time of our report , tsa officials stated that they had not yet tested the security effectiveness of the managed inclusion process as it functions as a whole . tsa officials explained that they had been planning to test the process as a whole and estimated that such testing would begin in october 2014 and would take 12 to 18 months to complete . however , tsa could not provide us with specifics or a plan or documentation showing how the testing was to be conducted , the locations where it was to occur , how those locations were to be selected , or the timeframes for conducting testing at each location . in general , evaluations are most likely to be successful when key steps are addressed during design , including defining research questions appropriate to the scope of the evaluation , and selecting appropriate measures and study approaches that will lead to valid conclusions . as a result , we recommended that to ensure tsa's planned testing yields reliable results , the tsa administrator take steps to ensure that tsa's testing of the managed inclusion process adheres to established evaluation design practices . dhs concurred with our recommendation and has taken some initial steps toward addressing it . however , we found that tsa did not have a systematic process for evaluating the root causes of these screening errors at the checkpoint across airports , which could allow tsa to identify trends across airports and target nationwide efforts to address these issues . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the aviation and transportation security act ( atsa ) established tsa as the primary federal agency with responsibility for securing the nation's civil aviation system . this responsibility includes the screening of all passengers and property transported from and within the united states by commercial passenger aircraft .