the bureau agreed with our recommendation . during the 2018 test , the bureau had both an information technology ( it ) hotline and a census - field - supervisor hotline established for technical and procedural questions , respectively . yet , enumerators we observed told us they did not always report to their support lines the technical issues that they were easily able to resolve by , for example , turning their devices on and off to reset . this lack of reporting kept the bureau from getting information on commonly - occurring challenges that might be useful real - time feedback in the testing environment . moreover , a bureau it manager noted that the bureau does not formally review and share observations and troubleshooting notes from it hotline and census field supervisor hotline calls . reengineered field operations . for most of nrfu during the 2018 test , the bureau relied on automated data collection methods , including a system - based , automated process for assigning work to enumerators , a smartphone - based application for collecting enumeration data in the field , and system - generated supervisory alerts . in planning documentation , the bureau listed the outcomes of interview attempts that it considered complete and thus not in need of further enumeration assignments . use of administrative records . to help reduce costly nrfu visits during the 2018 test , the bureau reviewed and , where appropriate , applied administrative records — information already provided to the government as it administers other programs , such as social security , the selective service , or the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children — to determine the occupancy status of housing units and thus remove vacant housing units from the nrfu workload , as well as to provide population counts of households not responding . the bureau also tested multiple operational features for the first time this decennial cycle under full census - like production conditions in 2018: nrfu closeout . having more enumerators work weekends . until the latter stages of 2018 nrfu testing , the bureau assigned cases to enumerators based on the alignment of the bureau's estimated probability of finding respondents at home at certain times and enumerator - reported work availability . bureau officials told us that saturdays are generally one of the best days to find a household member home to respond to the census . however , during the test , our analysis showed that saturdays had the second - fewest number of enumerators assigned to cases of any day of the week . bureau officials said that they would review whether the incentive structure for working on saturdays should be altered and that they would examine ways to ensure that more enumerators are working on those days . this includes exploring the feasibility of hiring and assigning work to applicants who may only want to work weekends and being clearer with enumerators about what the expected peak enumeration hours are . increasing electronic completion rates for group quarters .