let me elaborate . although recent omb efforts to assess programs in a crosscutting fashion represent progress , to provide the kind of information that can be of assistance in reexamining the base of government , we encourage a more extensive and consistent approach to evaluating all programs relevant to common goals . we recommended in 1994 and again in 2005 that omb design and implement a structure for conducting reviews of tax expenditures' performance . our recommendation is consistent with language in the senate committee on government affairs' report on gpra , which specified that the director of omb was to establish an appropriate framework for periodic analyses of the effects of tax expenditures in achieving performance goals . to significantly increase the oversight and analysis of tax expenditures , the committee report also called for a schedule for periodic tax expenditure evaluations . although incorporating tax expenditures into crosscutting reviews presents significant analytical challenges , we do not believe such challenges are insurmountable . moreover , assessing the performance of tax expenditures is critically important given that many function as entitlement programs — although perhaps with even less transparency — and do not compete overtly in the annual budget process . hence i believe it is important for congress to develop structures and processes that are flexible , adaptable , and inclusive of various perspectives to conduct successful performance reviews on those issues that cross jurisdictional boundaries . gao stands ready to assist congress in addressing the much needed baseline review of existing federal programs , policies , functions , and activities . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . presenting tax expenditures alongside outlays is a first step in providing the public and policymakers with a more useful and accurate picture of the extent of federal support and activities . in fact , in the tax expenditure chapter in analytical perspectives , omb has in the past included a section outlining possible performance measures developed by treasury , which could be used to present information about the performance of tax expenditures . although this overview was initially introduced in the 1997 budget and expanded in the 1999 budget , no performance information is actually displayed . omb states that the measure examples provided are “illustrative” in nature , acknowledges that the performance measure discussion “although broad , is nonetheless incomplete,” and notes that many tax expenditures are not explicitly cited . one of the key impediments to moving forward in conducting reviews of tax expenditures' performance is the continuing lack of clarity about the roles of omb , treasury , irs , and departments or agencies with responsibility for related spending programs . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . designing a structure and approach for including tax expenditures in performance reviews will be challenging , but it is important .