we have reported on these more significant launch delays in the past . this kept both production and launch processes moving . under past eelv contracts , satellites have frequently been delayed by many months , and sometimes years . according to the air force , launch dates have changed an average of 3.9 times and by 22 months for completed launches through january 2015 . under the phase 1a contracts , the air force may not have this same flexibility , and launch delays could potentially cost the government more than originally planned . according to dod officials , in the current contract with ula , launch delays may not incur added costs because of the nature of the launch capability portion of that contract , though the overall cost of that portion of ula's contract is significantly larger than the potential costs of the delays under the phase 1a , firm - fixed - price contracts . under the phase 1a contracts , the air force expects to have the ability to postpone the contracted launch by up to 90 days at no charge , but postponing a launch beyond this grace period will add costs . additionally , we reviewed past and current evolved expendable launch vehicle ( eelv ) program contracts and examined the cost reporting requirements . we received several in - depth briefings from the contractor , united launch alliance ( ula ) , as well as the defense contract audit agency ( dcaa ) and the defense contract management agency ( dcma ) . additional details of our scope and methodology are discussed in appendix i . the air force initiated the eelv program in 1995 to develop a new generation of launch vehicles to provide assured , affordable access to space for government satellites . after 3 years of funding preliminary system designs from four contractors , the air force competitively awarded two $500 million “other transaction agreements” to mcdonnell douglas ( before it merged with boeing ) and lockheed martin for the development of eelv launch vehicles and launch infrastructure . simultaneous with its execution of the other transaction agreements , the air force also competitively awarded firm - fixed - price contracts , one to each contractor , to procure 28 launches . these firm - fixed - price launch services contracts were awarded under the far provisions governing commercial items — far part 12 . as a result of procuring the launch services as commercial items , under the far , the air force could not request certified cost or pricing data from the contractor . in addition , as a general rule , when procuring a commercial item , the far requires an agency to use a firm - fixed - price contract . at the time of award , the launch services contracts had a combined value of about $2 billion . in 2000 , new market forecasts showed that the demand for commercial launch services upon which the air force based its eelv acquisition strategy would not materialize and the air force was anticipated to be the majority customer for both launch services companies .