there are other approaches to consider . while some practices in the countries we studied , such as mandatory employer participation , would not be feasible in the u.s. context ; others may have more ready application for addressing some challenges that u.s. multiemployer plans face . for example , the countries that we studied had pension regulators that interacted with plans on a frequent basis , collected timely and detailed plan information , provided a range of tools to plans to address plan underfunding and made information on the funded status of plans available to the public . yet , there is no one - size - fits - all solution . ( 3 ) what is the structure of multiemployer plans in other countries ? ( 4 ) what statutory and regulatory changes , if any , could help plans to continue to provide participants with the benefits due to them ? to identify the current status of the nation's multiemployer pension plans , we analyzed data from pbgc , the department of labor's employee benefits security administration ( ebsa ) , and the department of the treasury's internal revenue service ( irs ) and reviewed relevant industry studies . to determine the steps pbgc takes to monitor the health of these plans , we interviewed pbgc officials and reviewed pbgc's multiemployer policies and procedures . we also reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations . ( 2 ) what steps does pbgc take to monitor the health of these plans ? to understand the structure of multiemployer plans in other countries , we conducted site visits to four countries — the netherlands , denmark , united kingdom , and canada — and we worked with u.s. state department officials to identify and interview government officials and various pension experts in these countries . we did not conduct an independent legal analysis of foreign laws . to identify what changes , if any , are needed to help plans continue to provide participants with the benefits due them , we interviewed a diverse range of multiemployer plan experts and practitioners in the united states and abroad . we assessed the reliability of the data used in this report and determined that they were reliable for our purposes . we conducted this performance audit from september 2009 through october 2010 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . appendix i provides more detail on the scope and methodology used in developing this report . the taft hartley act of 1947 established terms for negotiating employee benefits in collectively bargained multiemployer plans and placed certain restrictions on the operation of these plans , including the placement of plan assets in a trust . for example , the law required a collectively bargained plan and its assets to be managed by a joint board of trustees equally representative of management and labor .