we added this information to the report . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services , directors of state child support enforcement agencies in the states we visited , and other interested parties . in addition , we will make copies available to others upon request . also , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about his report , please contact me at 202-512-7215 or ashbyc@gao.gov . federal funds also are available through grants . grants for special improvement projects , demonstration projects , and child access and visitation programs are generally awarded annually . ocse has received an annual appropriation of $1.8 million for special improvement project grants or demonstration projects to promote the program's overall objectives . additionally , since fiscal year 1997 , ocse has distributed approximately $10 million per year to state agencies to support child access and visitation grants for activities such as mediation , counseling , education , development of parenting plans , noncustodial parent visitation enforcement ( including monitoring and supervision ) , and development of noncustodial parent visitation and alternative custody guidelines . according to a november 2005 report , state agencies used a number of funding sources to finance their share of cse program administrative costs . these funding sources included federal incentive payments , child support collected for parents receiving assistance through the tanf program , state general funds , state general funds paid as incentives , county general funds , and fees , along with several other sources that were mentioned less often by state agencies . while state agencies generally used more than one revenue source , they also varied in the combination of the revenue sources they used . for the cse program , federal and state expenditures are generally offset by certain collections as well as fees and interest payments . child support collections for families that receive benefits from the tanf and foster care programs are deducted from the total federal and state expenditures and paid to these programs as reimbursements . for example , in fiscal year 2004 about $2 billion in child support collections for families that received tanf benefits were deducted from total cse expenditures — the federal government was reimbursed $1.1 billion , and state agencies were reimbursed about $900 million . in addition , some state agencies collect fees from parents for their services , and such fees are also deducted from total expenditures . hhs also said that the report does not note that staffing declined since fiscal year 2003 . we did not make any changes in response to this comment since data in the report show this decline . in addition , hhs commented that we did not discuss the relationship between spending and performance and referred to the findings in a report done by the lewin group , inc. we did not include an analysis of the relationship between spending and the performance measures because that analysis was beyond the scope of our work for this review .