open . treasury has continued developing reconciliation procedures to aid in understanding the net position balance but remains unable to eliminate the plugs associated with compiling the cfs . in addition , there are hundreds of billions of dollars of unreconciled differences between the general fund and federal entities related to appropriation and other intragovernmental transactions . the ability to reconcile these transactions is hampered because only some of the general fund transactions are reported in treasury's financial statements . as omb continues to make strides to address issues related to intragovernmental transactions , the director of omb should direct the controller of omb to develop policies and procedures that document how omb will enforce the business rules provided in omb memorandum m - 07- 03 , business rules for intragovernmental transactions . omb will continue its efforts to implement this recommendation . open . closed . the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary to assess the infrastructure associated with the compilation process and modify it as necessary to achieve a sound internal control environment . treasury continued to make improvements to its internal control infrastructure during fiscal year 2009 . treasury has updated its documentation to help ensure that control procedures are in place at all critical areas of the cfs preparation process and is working to ensure that these controls are adequately monitored and assessed each year . open . treasury has not completed an assessment to ensure that it has sufficient personnel with specialized financial reporting experience to achieve a sound internal control environment to carry out the compilation process and help ensure reliable financial reporting by the reporting date . gao - 06-415 ( results of the fiscal year 2005 audit ) the director of omb should direct the controller of the office of federal financial management to consider , in order to provide audit assurance over federal agencies' closing packages , not waiving the closing package audit requirements for any verifying agency in future years , such as tennessee valley authority ( tva ) . omb will continue working with tva so that it submits its audited closing package by the required financial reporting deadline . of note , tva moved closer to submitting its closing package by the required year - end reporting deadline during fiscal year 2009 . open . omb has not yet reasonably ensured that audit assurance is provided over all federal agencies' closing package information . the secretary of the treasury should direct the fiscal assistant secretary , in coordination with the controller of omb , to develop policies and procedures for monitoring internal control to help ensure that ( 1 ) audit findings are promptly evaluated ; ( 2 ) proper actions are determined in response to audit findings and recommendations , such as a documented plan of action with milestones for short - term and long - range solutions ; and ( 3 ) all actions that correct or otherwise resolve the audit findings are completed within established time frames . treasury has designed a process to identify and execute the actions necessary to address gao audit findings . efforts will continue in fiscal 2010 to track and resolve audit findings . open .