all records in this database were reviewed . we intended to use these data to select a random set of files to review and to conduct analyses of workloads , but the data were not reliable enough to do so ( see below ) . given the weaknesses in the files as well as the data reliability issues , our review focused on identifying c - tpat's processes . because of deficiencies in the files and database , we were unable to verify the extent cbp actually follows these processes for individual members . what benefits does cbp provide to c - tpat members ? before providing benefits , what approach does cbp take to determine c - tpat members' eligibility for them ? after providing benefits , how does cbp verify that members have implemented their security measures ? to what extent has cbp developed strategies and related management tools for achieving the program's goals ? to address all four objectives , we discussed program operations with cbp officials in washington , d.c. , with program responsibilities for c - tpat and reviewed available data and documentation for the program . to ascertain the manner in which cbp validates security procedures for participating companies , we asked cbp to provide us with examples of participant files , including files of participants with responsibilities along various parts of the supply chain . while the files we reviewed were not a representative sample of files , we noted that in many cases these files were incomplete . while we were able to review cbp's processes , because of the poor condition of member files we were unable to verify the extent that the bureau followed the processes in individual cases for individual members . we also examined the status of the agency's efforts to implement our prior recommendations for the program . we conducted our work from february through december 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . more details about the scope and methodology of our work are presented in appendix i . cbp maintains two overarching goals: ( 1 ) increasing security and ( 2 ) facilitating legitimate trade and travel . disruptions to the supply chain could have immediate and significant economic impacts . for example , in terms of containers , cbp data indicates that in 2003 about 90 percent of the world's cargo moved by container . in the united states , almost half of all incoming trade ( by value ) arrived by containers on board ships . almost 7 million cargo containers arrive and are offloaded at u.s. seaports each year . additionally , containers arrive via truck and rail . therefore , it is vital for cbp to try to strike a balance between its antiterrorism efforts and facilitating the flow of legitimate international trade and travel . the terrorist events of september 11 , 2001 , raised concerns about company supply chains , particularly oceangoing cargo containers , potentially being used to move weapons of mass destruction to the united states .