table 1 summarizes these principles . we also described in our report and testimonies challenges associated with protecting electronic health information that are faced by federal and state health information exchange organizations and health care providers . these challenges are summarized in table 2 . we reported that hhs had undertaken several initiatives intended to address aspects of key principles and challenges for protecting the privacy of health information . for example , in 2005 , the department awarded four health it contracts that included requirements for developing solutions to comply with federal privacy requirements and identifying techniques and standards for securing health information . since january 2007 , hhs has undertaken various initiatives that are contributing to its development of an overall privacy approach , although more work remains . we recommended that this overall approach include ( 1 ) identifying milestones and the entity responsible for integrating the outcomes of its privacy - related initiatives , ( 2 ) ensuring that key privacy principles in hipaa are fully addressed , and ( 3 ) addressing key challenges associated with the nationwide exchange of health information . in this regard , the department has fulfilled the first part of our recommendation , and it has taken important steps in addressing the two other parts . nevertheless , these steps have fallen short of fully implementing our recommendation because they do not include a process for ensuring that all key privacy principles and challenges will be fully and adequately addressed . to supplement our data collection and analysis , we conducted interviews with officials from the office of the national coordinator to discuss the department's approaches and future plans for addressing the protection of personal health information within a nationwide health information network . we conducted this performance audit at the department of health and human services in washington , d.c. , from april 2008 through september 2008 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in the absence of such a process , hhs may not be effectively positioned to ensure that health it initiatives achieve comprehensive privacy protection within a nationwide health information network . the department and its office of the national coordinator have continued taking steps intended to address key privacy principles and challenges through various health it initiatives . among other things , these initiatives have resulted in technical requirements , standards , and certification criteria related to the key privacy principles described in table 1 . the following are examples of ways that the office of the national coordinator's health it initiatives relate to privacy principles reflected in hipaa . as part of its efforts to advance health it , the american health information community defines “use cases,” which are descriptions of specific business processes and ways that systems should interact with users and with other systems to achieve specific goals . among other things , several of the use cases include requirements and specifications that address aspects of the access , uses and disclosures , and amendments privacy principles . for example , the “consumer empowerment” use case describes at a high level specific capabilities that align with the access principle .