criteria for designating entities as coes . in 2011 , following our study of one of dod's statutorily mandated coes , dod leadership determined that it needed to conduct a review of all existing coes and develop a definition that would be used as criteria for designating entities as defense coes . ( see fig . dod officials established criteria that coes must meet to be designated a defense coe and a uniform process for applicants . vha's service offices use a peer review process to designate coes . however , unlike dod , vha has not established criteria for an entity to be designated as a coe . mhs leadership developed a definition for defense coes , and the coe oversight board members refined and approved the criteria contained in this definition . only entities that meet the criteria in the oversight board - approved definition can be given the designation of a defense coe . the definition approved by the oversight board states that defense coes will focus on an associated group of clinical conditions and achieve improvement in outcomes through clinical , educational , and research activities . the criteria require defense coes to provide the entire clinical spectrum of care for a patient — from the prevention of diseases and treatment of clinical conditions through rehabilitation and transition to civilian life ; for example , by developing clinical practice guidelines and educational materials and identifying research priorities and strategies for improving access to care . in addition , the oversight board developed other criteria that entities applying for defense coe designation have to meet , such as clearly defining their mission , developing metrics to quantitatively assess their progress in meeting their mission , and determining whether the research they plan to conduct is needed because of existing research gaps . the oversight board acting chairman said the board developed criteria for a defense coe because it is important for the board , as well as mhs leadership , to apply consistent criteria when designating entities as defense coes . the acting chairman said not having clear and consistent criteria could make it easier for entities to self - identify as a defense coe without meeting rigorous requirements . in addition , the criteria may facilitate coordination among coes to meet the agency's intended objectives for them — which is to improve the health of servicemembers , veterans , their families , and ultimately the military readiness of servicemembers . approval process for defense coes . the oversight board established a uniform process that requires applicants to present consistent information when applying for defense coe designation . applicants are required to describe why the designation as a defense coe is important to them and how they meet the criteria of a defense coe . the oversight board , after considering the applications from potential coes , subsequently determines whether a defense coe applicant passes the preliminary review . applicants that do not pass the preliminary review are instructed to provide additional information or clarify the information presented for reconsideration . there is no limit on the number of times they can resubmit their application .