energy sector . in 2011 , div provided a $300,000 stage 2 grant to mera gao power ( mgp ) to test whether its solar micro - grid system providing low - cost electricity to off - grid villages in india was commercially viable . after micro grids were installed , mgp's customers paid a weekly subscription fee of approximately $0.27 for the use of two led lights and one phone charger . results of a large - scale randomized behavior change intervention on road safety in kenya . proceedings of the national academy of sciences , 2015 . karlan , dean , and leigh l. linden . loose knots: strong versus weak commitments to save for education in uganda . national bureau of economic research , 2014 . maitra , pushkar , sandip mitra , dilip mookherjee , alberto motta , and sujata visaria . “financing smallholder agriculture: an experiment with agent - intermediated microloans in india.” hong kong university of science & technology institute for emerging market studies working paper no . 2015-23 , april 2015 . david b. gootnick , ( 202 ) 512-3149 or gootnickd@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , james michels ( assistant director ) , jeremy latimer ( analyst - in - charge ) , debbie chung , daniel kuhn , jill lacey , christopher j. mulkins , kyerion printup , and ozzy trevino made key contributions to this report . “evaluation of the information and communication technology ( ict ) continuum of care services ( ccs ) intervention in bihar.” mathematica policy research report , may 8 , 2015 . callen , michael , and james long . “institutional corruption and election fraud: evidence from a field experiment in afghanistan.” american economic review , vol . dhaliwal , iqbal , and rema hanna . “deal with the devil: the successes and limitations of bureaucratic reform in india.” nber working paper no . 20482 , september 2014 . duflo , esther , michael greenstone , rohini pande , and nicholas ryan . “the value of regulatory discretion: estimates from environmental inspections in india.” nber working paper no . 20590 , october 2014 . duflo , esther , michael greenstone , rohini pande , and nicholas ryan . “truth - telling by third - party auditors and the response of polluting firms: experimental evidence from india.” the quarterly journal of economics , vol . duflo , esther , michael greenstone , rohini pande , and nicholas ryan . “what does reputation buy ? differentiation in a market for third - party auditors.” american economic review: papers & proceedings , vol . habyarimana , james , and william jack . an mgp staff member came to subscribing villages each week at prearranged times to collect customer payments in cash ( see fig . by the conclusion of the grant in march 2013 , mgp had installed the service in approximately 180 villages , reaching 4,480 households — exceeding its targets of 40 villages and 4,000 customers . mgp officials told us in march 2015 that they had further expanded the service to approximately 17,000 customers and had secured external financing from an impact investment firm .