thank you . for further information on this testimony or our february 28 , 2012 , reports , please contact janet st. laurent , managing director , defense capabilities and management , who may be reached at ( 202 ) 512-4300 , or stlaurentj@gao.gov ; and zina merritt , director , defense capabilities and management , who may be reached at ( 202 ) 512-4300 , or merrittz@gao.gov . specific questions about individual issues may be directed to the area contact listed at the end of each area summary in the reports . contact points for our congressional relations and public affairs offices may be found on the last page of this statement . this appendix presents a summary of gao's assessment of the overall progress made in each of the 81 areas that we identified in our march 2011 report in which the congress and the executive branch could take actions to reduce or eliminate potential duplication , overlap , and fragmentation or achieve other potential financial benefits . for each of the 34 areas related to duplication , overlap , or fragmentation that gao identified , table 3 presents gao's assessment of the overall progress made in implementing the actions needed in that area . for each of the 47 areas where gao identified cost saving or revenue enhancement opportunities , table 4 presents gao's assessment of the overall progress made in implementing the actions gao identified . as noted above , table 4 presents gao's assessment of the overall progress made in addressing the 47 cost - saving and revenue - enhancing areas . the agencies agreed with our recommendation . we also recommended that dod , doe , and dhs correct the miscategorizations of the investments we identified and ensure that investments are correctly categorized in agency submissions , which would enhance the agencies' ability to identify opportunities to consolidate or eliminate duplicative investments . dod and dhs agreed with our recommendation , but doe disagreed that two of the four investments we identified were miscategorized , explaining that its categorizations reflect funding considerations . however , omb guidance indicates that investments should be classified according to their intended purpose . consequently , we believe the recommendation is warranted . we suggested that the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness and the military services designate organizational responsibility and a supporting process to inventory and evaluate existing language and culture products and plans for additional investments , eliminate any unnecessary overlap and duplication , and adjust resources accordingly , as well as take steps to develop and contract for new products that can be used by more than one military service . dod agreed that departmentwide coordination efforts could be improved and noted that our analysis would be useful in targeting specific areas for improvement . federal facility risk assessments: federal facilities continue to be vulnerable to terrorist attacks and other acts of violence , as evidenced by the 2010 attacks on the irs building in austin , texas , and the federal courthouse in las vegas , nevada , which resulted in loss of life .