application package . state's fam requires that upon receipt of the approved i - 129f petition and other information from uscis , consular officers provide imbra - related disclosures and the imbra pamphlet to beneficiaries by mail as part of an application package . in august 2008 , we recommended that dhs and state develop a mechanism to ensure beneficiaries are notified of the number of previously filed i - 129f petitions by the petitioner . in response , in october 2008 , state revised its guidance to consular officers to require that the application package include the approved petition.posts we interviewed , their respective posts mailed the imbra disclosures , pamphlet , and approved petitions to beneficiaries in advance of the in - person visa interview . consular officials at one post we interviewed in june 2014 stated that they did not mail imbra - related disclosures , such as the i - 129f petition containing criminal history information , to beneficiaries in advance of their interviews because of limitations in the post's support contract for mail services . rather , this post provided the imbra - related disclosure information to beneficiaries only during the k visa interview . as a result of our audit work , state's consular affairs bureau officials in washington , d.c. , provided guidance to this post to ensure that consular officers mail imbra - related disclosure information and the imbra pamphlet to all beneficiaries prior to visa interviews , in accordance with imbra and fam requirements . not all beneficiaries who are sent an application package schedule a k visa interview , according to consular affairs officials . ultimately , consular officers said there are various reasons an applicant might not apply for a visa , and could not say to what degree the information provided in the mailings in advance of the interviews was a factor in this decision . according to consular officers at four of five consular applicant interview . consular officers are to provide the beneficiary with information about the petitioner's criminal history and prior i - 129f petition filings and the imbra pamphlet in the beneficiary's primary language during the k visa interview , in accordance with imbra , and allow time for beneficiaries to consider the information . state requires consular officers to document within its ivo database whether they made all of these disclosures to the beneficiary during the visa interview . for example , state's fam requires consular officers to denote within ivo that the “imbra pamphlet was received , read , and understood” for each k visa beneficiary . according to consular affairs officials , other than this fam requirement for documentation in the consular notes in ivo , state does not have other mechanisms by which it ensures that consular officers are providing required information to k visa applicants during the in - person interviews . regarding the remaining 80 of the 227 cases , state consular officials in washington , d.c. , said that possible reasons the interview may not have taken place are that the interview has yet to be conducted with the k visa applicant , or the case may not have been sent from uscis to state for adjudication . notations in accordance with fam guidance .