officials from 23 of the 36 tribes responded to our survey . to report on fema pre - disaster grant funds select tribes received during this period , we collected grant data from fema grants program division . to assess the reliability of these data , we performed electronic data testing for obvious errors in accuracy and completeness , and interviewed agency officials knowledgeable about the collection and processing of these data . we determined these data to be sufficiently reliable for the purpose of reporting the grant funds obligated from 2013 through 2016 . in addition , we conducted site visits to 7 tribes selected from the 23 tribes that responded to our survey in order to obtain tribal officials' views on factors influencing their disaster declaration decisions during this period and to observe recent disaster damages , ongoing recovery projects , and aspects of each tribe's emergency management capability . we selected these sites so that as a set they included tribes that made a direct request whether granted or denied , joined a state declaration , and were located in a variety of fema regions . although the information gathered from our survey and site visits cannot be generalized across all tribes , it added context to the survey responses , underscored the uniqueness of each tribe , and offered important details regarding the opportunities and challenges for tribes under this new authority . to address the second objective , we reviewed relevant documentation , such as the tribal declarations pilot guidance , and federal regulations and statutes governing the major disaster declaration process . we interviewed representatives from two national tribal organizations to discuss any successes and issues with the new authority that had been reported by their constituents . in addition , during our seven site visits , we gathered testimonial evidence of successes and challenges each tribe faced in implementing the new authority and carrying out the various requirements associated with requesting and managing a major disaster declaration directly or as a sub - recipient to a state declaration . to assess the reliability of these data , we performed electronic data testing for obvious errors in accuracy and completeness , and interviewed agency officials knowledgeable about the collection and processing of these data . we determined these data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of reporting fema's awards of these grant funds . to address the second objective , we reviewed federal documentation — such as fema's tribal declarations pilot guidance , federal regulations and statutes governing the major disaster declaration process to see what actions fema has taken specifically related to tribe's requesting and managing major disaster declarations . we also reviewed disaster - related documentation provided by tribal governments and available on - line , including correspondence between tribes and fema , testimony statements , and additional documents that provided details of tribes' experiences requesting and managing major disaster declarations . in addition , we interviewed officials from the two aforementioned national tribal organizations to discuss any successes or challenges they were familiar with related to the new authority that allows tribes to request a major disaster declaration directly from the president of the united states .