( see fig . about 44 percent of borrowers 50 and older at the time of their initial offset saw the maximum possible amount of their social security benefit withheld , equal to 15 percent of their benefit payment . we measured the total amount of offset payments and the number of individual offset transactions per borrower using treasury offset program data . we only included a borrower in our analysis if we were able to identify the application of the offset payment for a majority of the borrower's individual offset transactions . death discharges: loan discharges due to death may not occur immediately after a borrower's death because education requires documentation of the death . when we identified a borrower as deceased through the mbr data , we considered the borrower to have received a death discharge as of the month of the borrower's death , regardless of whether a death discharge was indicated in the nslds data . the offset for the remaining 56 percent was less than the maximum 15 percent of their benefit payment . most of these borrowers had between 10 and 15 percent of their benefit payment offset . a small proportion of borrowers ( about 5 percent of those 50 to 64 and 4 percent of those 65 and older ) were approved for a financial hardship reduction and paid a reduced amount of offset compared to what they would have otherwise . the typical monthly social security benefit offset for older americans across fiscal years 2001 through 2015 was slightly more than $140 . the minimum amount was $25 , which is the lowest amount at which treasury will initiate an offset . for borrowers 65 or older at their initial offset , monthly payments ranged up to about $240 ( see fig . at the median , monthly offsets were similar for those 50 to 64 and 65 and older — $142 and $146 , respectively . a growing share of social security beneficiaries is potentially subject to offset because the share of beneficiaries who have benefits below the protected threshold of $750 has declined . because of the offset threshold , those receiving monthly benefits of $750 or less who hold defaulted federal student loans are not subject to offset . however , unlike social security benefits which are increased on an annual basis through cost of living adjustments , the social security offset threshold of $750 has not been adjusted . as the relative value of the offset threshold has declined over time , it applies to a smaller share of social security beneficiaries . across all social security beneficiaries in 2004 , about 42 percent of those receiving social security disability benefits and about 33 percent of those receiving retirement benefits had monthly benefits of less than $750 a month and thus could not become subject to offset . by 2014 , however , the share of all beneficiaries below the $750 threshold had fallen to 19 percent of disability beneficiaries and 16 percent of retirement beneficiaries . over time , the population of older americans in social security offset has become increasingly composed of those with social security incomes below the median benefit amount .