dod concurred with this recommendation . asset visibility is an area dod has focused on in its plans to improve logistics , including its supply chain management improvement plan and the recently released logistics roadmap . the roadmap describes visibility as answering the questions , “where is it ? ” , “how will it get here ? ” , and “when will it get here ? ” lack of asset visibility increases vulnerability to undetected loss or theft and substantially heightens the risk that millions of dollars will be spent unnecessarily . furthermore , a lack of visibility potentially compromises cargo security and the readiness of the military . two of the initiatives included in the supply chain management improvement plan and the logistics roadmap that focus on improving asset visibility are item unique identification ( iuid ) and passive radio frequency identification ( passive rfid ) . iuid and passive rfid are technologies for capturing data on individual items or shipments and are sometimes referred to as automatic identification technology ( ait ) . iuid provides for the marking of individual items with a set of globally unique data elements to help dod value and track items throughout their life cycle . the passive rfid initiatives provide for the tagging of assets with an electronic identification device consisting of a chip and an antenna , usually embedded within a “smart” packaging label , in order to enable electronic tracking of the assets , including the shipping date and the date they are received . in some cases , data are not being gathered at all . officials at three out of four locations participating in the implementation of the alaska rfid implementation project stated they derive no benefit yet from passive rfid as a result of the lack of integration between rfid data collection platforms and supply chain information systems . deriving benefit from iuid implementation has also been difficult . officials from multiple military components stated that while iuid marking efforts are time consuming and resource intensive , lack of data system integration prevents implementation benefits from being realized . without a clear return on investment , achieving the integration necessary to derive benefit from the technologies may be resource intensive to a degree that discourages the military components from investing in technology solutions . for instance , faced with a lack of information system interoperability , the army decided against investing in technologies that would allow its legacy supply systems to use iuid and passive rfid data . instead , the army decided to delay obtaining benefit from the technologies for multiple years until army - wide information systems that can directly communicate with one another are operational . army officials stated that the costs associated with implementing an interim solution were prohibitive , given the uncertain return on investment for the technologies in the near term . the importance of supply chain management to the operational capability of u.s. forces , as well as the considerable resources being spent in this area , highlight the importance of addressing long - standing problems that have resulted in our designation of this dod function as a high - risk area .