the economy . the four studies we reviewed suggested that removing crude oil export restrictions would increase the size of the economy . three of the studies projected that removing export restrictions would lead to additional investment in crude oil production and increases in employment . this growth in the oil sector would — in turn — have additional positive effects in the rest of the economy . for example , nera economic consulting's study projected an average of 230,000 to 380,000 workers would be removed from unemployment through 2020 if export restrictions were eliminated in 2015 . these employment benefits would largely disappear if export restrictions were not removed until 2020 because by then the economy would have returned to full employment . two of the studies we reviewed suggested that removing export restrictions would increase government revenues , although the estimates of the increase vary . one study estimated that total government revenue would increase by a combined $1.4 trillion in additional revenue from 2016 through 2030 , and another study estimated that u.s. federal , state , and local tax receipts combined with royalties from drilling on federal lands could increase by an annual average of $3.9 to $5.7 billion from 2015 through 2035 . chairman conaway , ranking member peterson , and members of the committee , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have at this time . if you or your staff members have any questions concerning this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . other individuals who made key contributions include christine kehr ( assistant director ) , quindi franco , alison o'neill , and kiki theodoropoulos . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . this is equivalent to 1.5 percent to environment . two of the studies we reviewed stated that the increased crude oil production that could result from removing the restrictions on crude oil exports may affect the environment . most stakeholders we interviewed echoed this statement . this is consistent with what we found in a september 2012 report.we found that crude oil development may pose certain inherent environmental and public health risks . however , the extent of the risk is unknown , in part , because the severity of adverse effects depends on various location - and process - specific factors , including the location of future shale oil and gas development and the rate at which it occurs . it also depends on geology , climate , business practices , and regulatory and enforcement activities . the stakeholders who raised concerns about the effect of removing the restrictions on crude oil exports on the environment identified risks including those related to the quality and quantity of surface and groundwater sources ; increases in greenhouse gas and other air emissions , and increases in the risk of spills from crude oil transportation .