task orders . this contracting vehicle involves issuing task orders under an existing , master contract , thereby giving a contractor a new task to perform . proposals are submitted in response to solicitations called requests for task orders , which are issued to contractors already awarded contracts by the agency . general services administration ( gsa ) - schedule task orders . this contracting vehicle involves the use of contracts that have been awarded by gsa for governmentwide use . gsa - schedule task orders are issued under existing master contracts awarded by gsa . these task orders are solicited through a request for quote solicitation that is competed among these contractors . upon receiving proposals in response to a solicitation , ahrq typically evaluates contract proposals for award using standard contracting procedures and criteria , which are governed by the far and the phsa and implementing regulations . a technical review panel of agency officials and external experts evaluates each proposal submitted in response to a solicitation against standard criteria that are tailored to the specific needs of each solicitation . these criteria include ( 1 ) demonstrated knowledge and understanding of the contract requirements ; ( 2 ) the proposed approach to address tasks and subtasks listed in the proposal ; ( 3 ) the qualifications and experience of key management personnel , such as the project director and project manager ; ( 4 ) the potential contractor's ability to meet the project's milestones ; ( 5 ) the facility , equipment , and space available to support the project goals and objectives ; and ( 6 ) the past performance of the potential contractor using information from references or other government customers . based on this evaluation of each proposal's scientific and technical merit and cost , the review panel , along identifies with the contracting officer's technical representative ( cotr ) ,the entity they believe should be awarded the contract and forwards the recommendation to the contracting officer , the federal official who has authority to enter into a contract . the contracting officer reviews the recommendation and makes a final award decision . ahrq used its standard , competitive review process and criteria to select grant recipients and award 110 recovery act - funded cer grants , totaling approximately $311 million . in addition , ahrq primarily used its standard contracting processes and criteria to select contract proposals and enter into 34 contracts for cer using recovery act funding , totaling approximately $161 million . ahrq also took several steps to coordinate with other hhs agencies when soliciting and awarding cer grants and contracts . between february 2009 and september 2010 , ahrq used its standard , competitive grant review process to select grant recipients and ultimately award 110 cer grants using approximately $311 million in recovery act cer funds . specifically , ahrq used its standard process for selecting grantees , which includes an initial review and preliminary scoring of applications ; review and final scoring of applications at peer review panel meetings ; development of preliminary funding recommendations ; review of funding recommendations by a senior leadership team within ahrq ; and a final determination of funding by the agency director .