other expenses covered . sponsoring agency components chose to reimburse their research participants for different types and amounts of expenses not covered by their stipends . for example , in fiscal year 2014 , the air force expended an average of $492 per appointment to pay for participants' travel expenses , while the environmental protection agency expended an average of $1,387 per appointment for that purpose . 2 below and app . ii for further information ) . an orau official who maintains data on appointments attributed the growth in the number of appointments to an increase in the program's popularity , which led to the addition of new sponsoring agencies and increases in the number of appointments per sponsoring agency . agency component officials we interviewed cited a variety of reasons for wanting to sponsor orise research participants , including: access to the orise program's recruiters and network of connections administrative support from the orise program that the sponsoring agencies could not easily supply themselves , and the speed , flexibility , and relatively low overhead cost of the orise program . for example , an official who managed the research participation program at the u.s. army medical research institute of infectious diseases told us that the cost of hiring and managing staff to administer their own program would cost more than the overhead that they pay for the orise program . the average total expenditure per appointment in the orise program also increased from fiscal year 2010 through fiscal year 2014 , from about $27,200 per appointment in fiscal year 2010 to about $33,100 per appointment in fiscal year 2014 . expenditures per appointment may have risen for a variety of reasons , such as changes in the average education level of research participants and the average length of their appointments . for example , the proportions of appointments at different education levels in fiscal year 2014 shifted compared to the proportions in fiscal year 2010 , with recent graduate and postdoctoral appointments increasing 65 percent and 68 percent , respectively , while undergraduate appointments increased 12 percent . an orau official said that postgraduate appointments generally command higher stipends than undergraduate appointments . for example , according to information provided by fda's center for drug evaluation and research , monthly stipends at their center could be as high as $2,897 for currently enrolled undergraduate students and as high as $7,569 for postgraduates with phd degrees . the official said that postgraduate appointments at their center also last longer than undergraduate appointments , resulting in higher expenditures per appointment . from fiscal year 2010 through fiscal year 2014 , stipends — funds paid to research participants to defray their costs of living during their appointments — comprised the majority of agencies' expenditures for the orise program . sponsoring agencies' other expenditures for the program included the following categories of expenses: travel and other research participant expenses: funds paid to research participants to cover particular expenses not covered by their stipends , such as expenses for travel to conferences or other appointment - related destinations . program support and overhead: funds paid to doe to cover orau's expenses for administering the appointment of research participants at agencies .