ii ) . dod also stated that citing the views of unnamed sources regarding the modular combat brigade design does not contribute to an accurate , balanced assessment of the army's progress . dod agreed or partially agreed with our recommendations to develop and provide information on its equipping strategy and personnel initiatives and to develop expanded performance metrics for assessing progress . however , dod disagreed with three recommendations regarding the need for risk assessments and a testing plan to further assess designs for modular units . as discussed below , because of the significance , cost , scope , and potential for risk associated with the army's modularity initiative , we continue to believe that more transparency of the army's plans and risk assessments is needed in light of the limited amount of information the army has provided to congress . therefore , we have included a matter for congressional consideration to require the secretary of defense to provide more detailed plans and assessments of modularity risks . our specific comments follow . first , we strongly disagree with dod's assertion that gao used anonymous and unverifiable sources which detracted from an accurate and balanced assessment of the army's progress in implementing modularity . our analysis of the army's progress and potential for risk in implementing modular units is primarily based on our independent and thorough analysis of army plans , reports , briefings , and readiness assessments , which we used to compare the army's goals for modularity against its actual plans for equipping and staffing modular units . we disagree with dod's assessment . as our report clearly points out , based on documentation obtained from the army , the army's approved modular combat brigade design was for seven air vehicles per shadow system , which would provide 24-hour per day aerial surveillance , but the army opted to field shadow systems with four air vehicles instead , primarily because it lacks adequate numbers of air vehicle operators and maintainers . although the army believes that shadow systems with four air vehicles are adequate at this time , we believe it is important to provide transparency by presenting information which shows that modular combat brigades will not have all of the capabilities intended by the original modular combat brigade designs ( i.e. , brigade - level 24-hour per day surveillance operations ) without shadow systems composed of seven air vehicles . with regard to the number of intelligence positions , our report accurately notes that the army decided to increase its intelligence positions by 5,600 in the active force . however , we also note that this was a revision of an earlier higher estimate of 8,400 positions projected by army intelligence officials . therefore , we do not agree with the department's comment that the report inaccurately depicts the growth of army intelligence positions , nor do we agree with its characterization that the report inappropriately focuses on the army's manning challenges . we believe that it is important for the secretary of defense and congress to have a clear and transparent picture of the personnel challenges the army faces in order to fully achieve the goals of modular restructuring and make informed decisions on resources and authorized end strength .