at some of these sites , this was not possible . in addition to the individuals named above , ilene pollack and melissa a. roye made key contributions to this report . also contributing to this report were john w. delicath , doreen feldman , judy k. pagano , keith a. rhodes , and barbara timmerman . this may have been a result of either the respondent's choice or they may have been instructed to skip a question according to their previous response . does the licensee have records documenting spent fuel pool operations conducted by contractors or fuel vendors ? does the licensee perform an annual physical inventory of the spent fuel pool that includes resolution of all discrepancies ? don't know ( please go to question 8 ) elaboration: overall , 38 respondents provided an elaboration . of that 38 , 20 responded yes , 12 responded no , and 6 responded that they did not know . our survey of nrc's senior resident inspectors identified some differences in what the inspectors did to answer the phase ii questions . the inspectors generally interviewed licensee staff and reviewed licensees' records and written procedures . for the most part , they also used the licensee's map to verify materials in the spent fuel pool . about half used visual tools such as binoculars or underwater cameras to verify materials in the spent fuel pool . about one - fifth observed licensee activities . phase iii , which has not begun , is to expand on the questions in phase ii with more detailed inspection and review of site documentation to verify that procedures or controls are implemented and that they are adequate . for a sample of sites , including those for which “no” was answered to any of the phase ii questions , personnel with material control and accounting expertise , rather than the regional and on - site inspectors , are to carry out the activities . the ti called for phases i and ii to be completed within 6 months ( by may 2004 ) and phase iii within 18 months ( by may 2005 ) . phases i and ii were carried out from january 2004 to may 2004 . the phase i review at 70 sites — all 103 operating nuclear power plants at 65 sites ( a site may contain more than one nuclear power plant ) , decommissioning plants at 4 sites , and 1 wet storage facility — identified 65 sites that had removed irradiated fuel rods from an assembly or had reconstituted fuel assemblies . does the licensee have written procedures for the movement of individual spent fuel rods within the spent fuel pool ? as of february 2005 , nrc officials told us that they are in the planning stages for phase iii inspections . because the ti expires 2 years after its november 2003 issuance , if the phase iii inspection were to be performed before this , it would be late 2005 before the project would be completed . in september 2001 , shortly after the terrorist attacks on the world trade center and the pentagon , the chairman of nrc directed the staff to undertake a comprehensive review of all the agency's safeguards and security programs .