complaints . we analyzed the results of cms's state performance review for fiscal year 2001 to determine states' success in investigating both immediate jeopardy complaints and actual harm complaints within time frames required either by statute or by cms instructions . to better understand the results of state performance as determined by cms's review , we interviewed officials from cms's 10 regional offices and 16 state survey agencies ( see state performance standards below for a description of how these states were chosen ) . we also reviewed the report submitted to cms by its contractor , which was intended to assess and recommend ways to strengthen state complaint practices . finally , to assess the implementation of cms's new automated system for tracking information about complaints , we reviewed cms guidance materials and interviewed cms officials and state survey agency officials from our 16 sample states . enforcement . to determine if states had consistently applied the expanded immediate sanction policy , we analyzed state surveys in oscar that were conducted before april 9 , 2002 , and identified homes that met the criteria for referral for immediate sanction . we included surveys conducted prior to the implementation of the expanded immediate sanction policy because actual harm deficiencies identified in such surveys were to be considered by states in recommending a home for immediate sanction beginning in january 2000 . to be affected by cms's expanded policy , a home with actual harm on two surveys must have an intervening period of compliance between the two surveys . because oscar is not structured to consistently record the date a home with deficiencies returned to compliance , we had to estimate compliance dates using revisit dates as a proxy . we compared the results of our analysis to cms's enforcement database to determine if cms had opened enforcement cases for the homes we identified . our analysis compared the survey date in oscar to the survey date in cms's enforcement database . we considered any survey date in the enforcement database within 30 days of the oscar survey date to be a match . cms officials reviewed and concurred with our methodology . we then asked cms to analyze the resulting 1,334 unmatched cases to determine if a referral should have been made . survey predictability . in order to determine the predictability of nursing home surveys , we analyzed data from cms's oscar database . we considered surveys to be predictable if ( 1 ) homes were surveyed within 15 days of the 1-year anniversary of their prior survey or ( 2 ) homes were surveyed within 1 month of the maximum 15-month interval between standard surveys . consistent with cms's interpretation , we used 15.9 months as the maximum allowable interval between surveys . because homes know the maximum allowable interval between surveys , those whose prior surveys were conducted 14 or 15 months earlier are aware that they are likely to be surveyed soon . state performance standards .