screening technology . there is currently no technology approved or qualified by tsa to screen cargo once it is loaded onto a uld pallet or container — both of which are common means of transporting air cargo on wide - body passenger aircraft . cargo transported on wide - body passenger aircraft makes up 76 percent of domestic air cargo shipments transported on passenger aircraft . prior to may 1 , 2010 , canine screening was the only screening method , other than physical search , approved by tsa to screen such cargo . however , tsa officials still have some concerns about the effectiveness of the canine teams , and effective may 1 , 2010 , the agency no longer allows canine teams to be used for primary screening of uld pallets and containers . canine teams still may be used for secondary screening of uld pallets and containers ; however , secondary screening does not count toward meeting the air cargo screening mandate . in addition , tsa is working to complete qualification testing of air cargo screening technologies ; thus , until all stages of qualification testing are concluded , the agency may not have reasonable assurance that the technologies that air carriers and program participants are currently allowed to use to screen air cargo are effective . qualification tests are designed to verify that a technology system meets the technical requirements specified by tsa . because of the mandated deadlines , tsa is conducting qualification testing to determine which screening technologies are effective at the same time that air carriers are using these technologies to meet the mandated requirement to screen air cargo transported on passenger aircraft . while we recognize that certain circumstances , such as mandated deadlines , require expedited deployment of technologies , our prior work has shown that programs with immature technologies have experienced significant cost and schedule growth . we reported that these technology challenges suggest the need for tsa to consider a contingency plan to meet the screening mandate without unduly affecting the flow of commerce . contingency planning . although tsa faces industry participation and technology challenges that could impede the ccsp's success and the agency's efforts to meet the 100 percent screening mandate by august 2010 , the agency has not developed a contingency plan that considers alternatives to address these challenges . without adequate ccsp participation , industry may not be able to screen enough cargo prior to its arrival at the airport to maintain the flow of commerce while meeting the mandate . likewise , without technology solutions for screening cargo in a uld pallet or container , industry may not have the capability to effectively screen 100 percent of air cargo without affecting the flow of commerce . we have previously reported that a comprehensive planning process , including contingency planning , is essential to help an agency meet current and future capacity challenges . industry participation . although tsa is relying on the voluntary participation of industry stakeholders to meet the screening mandate , far fewer shippers and independent ccsfs have joined the program than tsa had targeted .