gao - 07-277 . washington , d.c.: mar . u.s. international broadcasting: management of middle east broadcasting services could be improved . gao - 06-762 . washington , d.c.: aug. 4 , 2006 . we plan to issue a final report this summer . the key objectives of u.s. public diplomacy are to engage , inform , and influence overseas audiences . state's under secretary for public diplomacy and public affairs oversees an annual budget of nearly $800 million , which funds the activities of program bureaus in washington and the activities of nearly 700 public diplomacy officers located at more than 260 posts around the world and domestically . program efforts include academic and professional exchanges , english language teaching , information programs , and news management activities . the bbg , as the overseer of u.s. international broadcasting efforts , aims to support u.s. public diplomacy objectives by broadcasting fair and accurate information , while maintaining its journalistic independence as a news organization . the bbg manages a budget of nearly $650 million that funds multiple discrete broadcast entities that broadcast in 57 foreign languages to 125 media markets around the world . mr. chairman , you asked us to discuss key findings from the reports we have issued over the past several years , particularly regarding our government's public diplomacy strategy and the challenges faced in implementing these activities in the field . today , i will talk about ( 1 ) the negative consequences various groups have associated with rising anti - american sentiments ; ( 2 ) strategic planning , coordination , and performance measurement issues affecting u.s. public diplomacy efforts ; and ( 3 ) the key challenges that hamper agency efforts . as part of our reviews of public diplomacy , we have met with officials from the department of state , the department of defense ( dod ) , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , and the broadcasting board of governors . we have also observed u.s. public diplomacy efforts in a range of countries including egypt , morocco , nigeria , and pakistan ; conducted a worldwide poll of public diplomacy officials in 2003 and more limited surveys of field activity in recent reviews ; and have met with public diplomacy counterparts in the united kingdom and germany . finally , we convened roundtables of key agency staff and experts on public relations and the muslim world to obtain their key insights and recommendations for improvement . the work used to support this testimony was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the key objectives of u.s. public diplomacy are to engage , inform , and influence overseas audiences . public diplomacy is carried out through a wide range of programs that employ person - to - person contacts ; print , broadcast , and electronic media ; and other means . traditionally , the state department's efforts have focused on foreign elites — current and future overseas opinion leaders , agenda setters , and decision makers . however , the dramatic growth in global mass communications and other trends have forced a rethinking of this approach , and state has begun to consider techniques for communicating with broader foreign audiences .