state is incorrect . gao did not praise the policy and program review committee ( pprc ) regional policy paper process in past reports . after we inquired about this point , a prm official acknowledged that state's inspector general and the office of management and budget have complimented the process , but gao has not . in addition , state declined to provide gao a copy of pprc #2004-38 , and the same official said that state had not provided a copy to usaid , either . we recognize that tracking beneficiaries assisted by international organizations may be difficult . however , we found that usaid tracks the number of individuals assisted each quarter by its grantees , including international organizations . the report does not state that there is no coordination . rather , we concluded that state and usaid can do a better job of “handing off” state's short - term beneficiaries to usaid's longer - term assistance program . we modified the text to better describe state's funding . the $1 billion figure was not intended to be a definitive estimate . the point is that u.s. assistance cannot address all identified needs . we do not agree that better coordination between state and usaid would compromise the security of the staff . we modified the text to acknowledge the government of colombia's efforts to enhance public security and the improvement in human rights indicators over the past year . however , as state quotes from its own 2003 human rights report , “the government's human rights record remained poor. the following are gao's comments on the department of justice letter , dated june 23 , 2004 . as we indicate in note “c” on p. 8 , state transfers funding to justice for its rule of law programs . usaid took over the plant in 2002 . when we visited the site in january 2004 , it was operating at 30 percent capacity . all three agencies received unqualified opinions . however , state's bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs did not provide complete funding data for the programs it supports . as a result , the funding figures may not reflect what was actually programmed , obligated , and expended for assisting vulnerable groups , promoting democracy and rule of law programs , and enhancing state presence and public security . moreover , we did not audit the funding data and are not expressing an opinion on them . however , based on our examination of the documents received and our discussions with cognizant agency officials , we concluded that the funding data we obtained were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this engagement . to determine the reliability of the performance measurement data we obtained , we asked state , justice , and usaid program officials how the data were collected and verified . we found that because of the difficult security situation in colombia , u.s. agencies ( usaid in particular ) must often rely on third parties , including the united nations , to document performance data , such as the number of hectares voluntarily eradicated .