( see app . the facilities with the lowest percentage of fully certified controllers include william p. hobby airport ( houston ) ( 56 percent fully certified controllers ) , laguardia airport ( 61 percent ) , dallas - ft. worth airport ( 62 percent ) , and cleveland hopkins airport and tampa airport ( both 63 percent ) . facilities with the highest percentage of fully certified controllers include st. louis airport ( 94 percent ) , san francisco airport ( 93 percent ) , portland airport and logan airport ( both 92 percent ) , and minneapolis / st . paul airport ( 90 percent ) . faa recognizes the importance of balancing the numbers of trainees and fully certified controllers . historically , trainees have accounted for less than 35 percent of the controller workforce , but the agency is working to determine target ranges for the number of trainees that individual facilities can accommodate . these ranges are likely to depend on factors such as the size and workload of the facility . the speedy development and verification of these data will help to ensure that facilities have a sufficient number of fully certified controllers to instruct trainees and to safely and efficiently manage air traffic . for transparency , it will be important for faa to include such data in its annual controller workforce plan . to the extent that retirement rates and the proportion of trainees at individual facilities leads to greater use of overtime , the potential for fatigue can increase , raising safety concerns . we previously reported that air traffic controllers at some of the nation's busiest airports were regularly working 6-day weeks because of staffing shortages , raising questions about the extent to which this situation may cause fatigue . in november 2007 , we identified controller fatigue as an issue affecting runway safety and recommended that faa develop a mitigation plan for addressing controller overtime by adopting strategies to attract controllers to facilities with high volumes of air traffic and high rates of controller overtime . in response to our recommendation , faa has established a working group to develop a mitigation plan and identify recruitment and retention tools . faa has already taken positive steps toward implementing the mitigation plan by offering pay and relocation incentives of up to $25,000 to controllers who volunteer to relocate to facilities that are short - staffed . faa's initial offerings have had generally positive results ; volunteers accepted faa's relocation offer for 11 locations but 1 location had no volunteers . it remains to be seen whether future planned offerings will be successful in achieving the needed staffing levels . in addition , the national transportation safety board ( ntsb ) has cited controller work schedules as contributing to fatigue and raising safety concerns . since 1990 , ntsb has placed efforts to address fatigue on its list of “most wanted” transportation safety improvements , citing safety concerns about the effects of fatigue on air traffic controllers and other persons performing critical functions in the aviation industry . ntsb noted in 2007 that about 61 percent of controllers work rapidly rotating 8-hour shifts with progressively earlier start times ( see fig .