it is too late for the program to meet these initial promises . dod non - concurred with our recommendation stating that the current jsf acquisition strategy provides an effective balance of technical risk , financial constraints , and operational needs of the services . however , we believe dod's actions to reduce aircraft quantities in the fiscal year 2008 president's budget are in line with our recommendation to limit production to current manufacturing capacity until each variant's flying qualities have been demonstrated in flight testing . in the 2008 budget , dod reduced the number of production aircraft it plans to buy during the flight test program by about 35 percent as compared to its previous plan for the jsf . under this new plan dod does not substantially increase its buy quantities of production aircraft until 2011 . we continue to believe that limiting production quantities until the design is demonstrated would reduce the overlap in production and development while still allowing the efficient transition from development to production . it would also make cost and schedule more predictable and lessen the risk to dod's production investment . the jsf program is still only in its sixth year of a 12-year development program with significant challenges remaining such as completing the design , software development , and flight testing . as such , there is continued risk that testing will not go as planned and demonstrating the aircraft's capability could be delayed beyond the current plan . therefore , we maintain our recommendation and will continue to monitor the progress in the test program and the resulting dynamics between development and production . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the air force , army , and navy ; and the director of the office of management and budget . we will also provide copies to others on request . in addition , the report will be made available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . other staff making key contributions to this report were michael hazard , assistant director ; lily chin ; matthew lea ; gary middleton ; daniel novillo ; karen sloan ; brian smith , adam vodraska ; and joe zamoyta . to determine the status of the joint strike fighter ( jsf ) program's cost , schedule , and performance , we compared current program estimates against estimates established after the program rebaselined in fiscal year 2004 . current official program cost estimates are based on the program's december 31 , 2005 , selected acquisition report to congress . at the time of our review , the office of the secretary of defense was still preparing its new cost estimate to be included in the program's selected acquisition report dated december 31 , 2006 , expected to be delivered to the congress in april 2007 .