( see fig . a staff member from the office of e - government stated that omb could not stop agencies from making such recategorizations and that omb had no control over such agency decisions . by gathering incomplete information on it investments , omb increases the risk of not fulfilling its oversight responsibilities , of agencies making inefficient and ineffective investment decisions , and of congress and the public being misinformed as to the performance of federal it investments . as part of the budget process , omb is required to analyze , track , and evaluate the risks and results of all major it investments . the dashboard gives the public access to the same tools and analysis that the government uses in conducting this performance oversight . according to omb , dashboard data are intended to provide a near - real - time perspective on the performance of major investments . http: / / www.itdashboard.gov / faq . year , omb decreases the utility of the dashboard as a tool for greater it investment oversight and transparency . of the 80 selected investments at the eight agencies we reviewed , 53 of the cio ratings were consistent with the risks portrayed in the supporting investment performance documents , 20 were partially consistent , and 7 va investments were inconsistent . those that were partially consistent had few instances of discrepancies during the 12-month period . for example , both of commerce's inconsistent investments had a discrepancy during 1 of the 12 months which we reviewed . as previously mentioned , a cio rating should reflect the level of risk facing an investment on a scale from 1 ( high risk ) to 5 ( low risk ) relative to that investment's ability to accomplish its goals . however , seven of the eight agencies we reviewed had at least one instance wherein the dashboard's cio ratings did not consistently reflect the risks identified in agency documents . table 4 summarizes our assessment of the 10 investments at each of the selected agencies during the 12-month period from january 2012 through december 2012 and a discussion of the analysis of each agency's documentation follows the table . agriculture: eight of the 10 investments at agriculture had some inconsistencies with reported risks . in particular , agriculture experienced technical issues uploading its ratings to the dashboard in early 2012 , which impacted the ratings of six investments . agriculture officials identified an issue with these investments after observing that submitted changes were not reflected on the dashboard . they addressed this issue by working with their contractor to determine the cause of the issue , modifying their process to prevent the issue from recurring , and establishing procedures to identify future technical issues . additionally , agriculture's financial management modernization initiative — one of the six investments that experienced the technical issue described above — and human resources line of business's october ratings should have been lower ( higher risk ) in october 2012 . officials stated that these cio ratings were updated at the beginning of november 2012 and attributed the delays in the rating submissions to the annual budget process .