( see fig . in april 2015 , we reported that faa faces cybersecurity challenges in at least three areas: ( 1 ) protecting air - traffic control ( atc ) information systems , ( 2 ) protecting aircraft avionics used to operate and guide aircraft , and ( 3 ) clarifying cybersecurity roles and responsibilities among multiple faa offices . some nextgen improvements have already been deployed . for example , data communications departure clearance services have been deployed at 55 airports — all of the locations for the first phase of the data communications program , including 39 of the 40 busiest commercial airports in the united states . faa has segmented the implementation of some of its nextgen programs into time frames during which faa will implement certain portions of the programs . by segmenting implementation , faa divides each program into defined parts that require less funding than the entire program . in many cases , achieving the desired nextgen outcomes depends on the successful implementation of multiple programs or capabilities . the results of our interviews are not generalizable to all industry stakeholders . for more information on our scope and methodology , including a listing of faa divisions and industry stakeholders we interviewed , see appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from november 2015 to august 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . faa has pursued several different modernization efforts for air traffic control ( atc ) since faa's creation by the federal aviation act of 1958 . these efforts to upgrade the air - traffic control system included the installation of a semi - automated air - traffic control system beginning in the mid - 1960s and an air traffic control modernization program beginning in 1981 . the 1981 modernization program was intended to replace and upgrade the equipment and facilities of the nas to meet an expected increase in traffic volume , enhance the margin of air safety , and increase the efficiency of the air - traffic control system . the centerpiece of the program was the advanced automation system , which would replace computer hardware and software and controller work stations at tower , terminal , and en - route facilities . faa restructured the automation program in 1994 after the estimated cost to deploy it had tripled , capabilities were shown to be significantly less than promised , and delays were expected to run nearly a decade . in 1995 , we placed faa's air traffic control modernization efforts on our watch list of high - risk federal programs due to the cost , complexity , criticality to faa's mission , and problematic history . by 2003 , the estimated cost of faa's air - traffic control modernization efforts had grown from $12 billion to $51 billion . in the early 2000s , the u.s airspace system was experiencing significant congestion and delays , with about one in every four flights delayed .