continued on - site storage . we have reported on the following benefits of continued on - site storage: requires minimal near - term effort . continued on - site storage is the de facto approach for managing nuclear waste . reduces transportation risks . the waste will only have to be transported once , to a final disposal site , and it will become cooler and less radioactive over time . continued on - site storage also presents challenges , including the following: the continued on - site storage option , assuming geologic disposal in 100 years , would cost from $20 billion to $97 billion . it would also result in costs to the federal government such as exposure to liabilities resulting from lawsuits against doe , which committed to take custody of commercial nuclear waste in 1998 , as required by nwpa , as amended . the federal government has paid $956 million through the department of treasury's judgment fund , and doe estimates future liability to be about $15.4 billion through 2020 , plus $500 million every year after that . potential penalties of $75,000 per day , or about $27.4 million per year if doe and the navy fail to meet commitments to remove their spent nuclear fuel from doe - sites in idaho and colorado by january 1 , 2035 . although some past efforts have had local community support , they have also faced public opposition , including yucca mountain . it could raise national security concerns , according to navy officials , if idaho can suspend further shipments of navy spent nuclear fuel to doe's idaho site until the agreement with the state for removal of such fuel is met , because the navy depends on this site as part of the process of refueling its nuclear warships . interim storage at a centralized facility . potential benefits of centralized interim storage include the following: nuclear waste from decommissioned reactors could be consolidated , decreasing the complexity of monitoring and securing the waste and freeing the land for other uses . doe could fulfill its obligation to take custody of spent nuclear fuel until a long - term strategy is implemented , thus avoiding additional liabilities as the result of lawsuits . reactor operators may choose to thin out spent nuclear fuel assemblies from densely packed pools , which could reduce risk and may save reactor operators the cost of building dry storage cask systems at each reactor location . centralized interim storage also poses challenges , including the following: interim storage could take years to site and construct . we have reported that a federal centralized storage option with two locations , assuming geologic disposal in 100 years , would take about 19 years to implement and would cost from $23 billion to $81 billion , although private industry could likely develop centralized interim storage in less time and for less cost . provisions in nwpa , as amended , that would allow doe to arrange for centralized storage have either expired or are unusable because they are tied to milestones in repository development that have not been met .