design may be inadequate . steel design may be inadequate . medical technology may change . work may be misfabricated . equipment may not meet design requirements . subcontractors may fail . suppliers may not deliver equipment on time . resident engineer ( re ) staffing may be inadequate . contractor field office staffing may be inadequate . architect / engineer ( a / e ) staffing may be inadequate . all projects , and whether they experienced a cost increase , a schedule delay , or both , are in table 12 . in addition to the contact person named above , tisha derricotte , colin fallon , hazel s. gumbs , ed laughlin , jason t. lee , susan michal - smith , karen richey , john w. shumann , and frank taliaferro also made key contributions to this report . labor may not be available . contractor coordination problems may exist . communication between re , contractor , and a / e may be ineffective . may experience problems testing systems . construction disciplines may not be coordinated . vendor drawings may not be submitted on time . change orders under $100,000 may affect schedule . most risks received multiple responses during the interviews . during data analysis , we combined and analyzed data from the interviews to create ranges and probabilities for each of the 18 risk drivers . because risks are multiplicative , several risks occurring on the same activity may overestimate the true risk . that is , in the monte carlo simulation , risks occur in a series , one after another , so that an activity that has several risks may be unrealistically extended if all risks occur . for example , drawing approval activities may possibly be affected by re , contractor field office , or a / e staffing being inadequate , as well as the schedule duration risk . if all risks occurred , drawing approval activities will most likely be overestimated . in reality , an activity may successfully recover from two or more risks simultaneously , so that the actual risk is not multiplicative . therefore , to avoid overestimation of risk , the impact ranges of risks that occur together are reduced . that is , the 3-point duration estimates for risks that occur together frequently were reduced ; in this particular analysis , we decreased the estimated duration impact ranges by a factor of 0.3 . we believe that the evidence obtained meets these standards . the major construction project in cleveland includes consolidating the brecksville veterans affairs medical center and the wade park veterans affairs medical center , which are 26 miles apart . as part of this consolidation , a new bed tower is being built at the wade park medical center . this bed tower will contain a nursing home and space for psychiatric patients . the project is divided into two phases . phase i includes the construction of an energy center and phase ii includes the construction of a bed tower addition . the project was first initiated by the va under the capital asset realignment for enhanced services ( cares ) process in 2004 to save money through consolidation and to provide better health care for veterans .