report . however , during further discussion with ssa officials in charge of the system on january 17 , 2019 , the officials confirmed that the agency had not yet identified all of the potential benefits related to the use of cloud services as a result of a change in their vendor solution . thus , we removed the profile from our report in order to be consistent with our methodology for reporting examples of systems that had realized benefits from the acquisition of cloud services , and notified ssa of this decision . software as a service . the service provider delivers one or more applications and all the resources ( operating system and programming tools ) and underlying infrastructure to run them for use on demand . nist has also defined four types of cloud deployment models , including: private cloud . service is set up specifically for one organization , although there may be multiple customers within that organization and the cloud may exist on or off the customer's premises . community cloud . service is set up for organizations with similar requirements . the cloud may be managed by the organizations or a third party and may exist on or off the organization's premises . public cloud . service is available to the general public and is owned and operated by the service provider . hybrid cloud . platform as a service . the service provider delivers and manages the infrastructure , operating system and programming tools and services , which the consumer can use to create applications . service is a composite of two or more of the three deployment models ( private , community , or public ) that are bound together by technology that enables data and application portability . according to nist guidance , these deployment models impact the number of consumers and the nature of other consumers' data that may be present in the cloud environment . a public cloud should not allow a consumer to know or control other consumers of a cloud service provider's environment . however , a private cloud can allow for ultimate control in selecting who has access to a cloud environment . community clouds and hybrid clouds allow for a mixed degree of control and knowledge of other consumers . additionally , the cost for cloud services typically increases as control over other consumers and knowledge of these consumers increase . in december 2010 , omb made cloud computing an integral part of its 25 point implementation plan to reform federal information technology management . the plan called for the development of a government - wide strategy to hasten the adoption of cloud services . to accelerate the shift , omb required agencies to identify three systems to migrate to cloud services , create a project plan for migration , and migrate all three systems by june 2012 . in february 2011 , omb issued the federal cloud computing strategy , as called for in its 25-point plan . the strategy provided definitions of cloud services ; benefits of cloud services , such as accelerating data center consolidations ; a decision framework for migrating services to a cloud environment ; case studies to support agencies' migration to cloud services ; and roles and responsibilities for federal agencies .