how fta plans to evaluate the program . to address these objectives , we reviewed relevant laws and regulations and interviewed fta officials , jarc recipients , and stakeholders . we obtained and analyzed data from fta's transportation electronic awards management ( team ) system to determine the extent to which fta awarded jarc funds , and assessed the reliability of these data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report . the coordinated planning process must include representatives of public , private , and nonprofit transportation and human services providers and participation by the general public . some designated recipients have required these agencies to participate in the coordinated planning process in order to receive funds . in general , among the states we contacted , either the designated recipient or mpo has taken the lead in developing coordinated plans in large urbanized areas . for small urbanized and rural areas , some designated recipients at the state level have generally delegated responsibility to develop plans to agencies at the local level , while in others the designated recipients have taken the lead . local officials must ensure that appropriate transportation and human services providers participate in the process . under safetea - lu , designated recipients at the state level must develop a solicitation process for small urbanized and rural areas to apply for funds . states must use a competitive selection process to select projects for these areas . large urbanized areas must also develop and conduct a competitive selection process for their projects . after projects are selected , states and large urbanized areas must apply to fta to fund the projects and certify that selected projects were derived from a locally developed , coordinated public transit - human services transportation plan . safetea - lu allows states and large urbanized areas to use 10 percent of jarc funds for administrative activities , including planning and coordination activities . the amount of available jarc funds is relatively small compared to fta's primary grant programs . for example , fta's urbanized area formula grant program ( section 5307 ) , which provides transit funding for large and small urbanized areas , was apportioned $3.9 billion for fiscal year 2008 , while fta's rural area formula grant program ( section 5311 ) was apportioned about $416 million in fiscal year 2008 . in contrast , the total amount of jarc funds available for the 3 fiscal years 2006 through 2008 is $436.6 million . in general , standard practice includes pretesting and technical review of the instrument before administering to help minimize measurement error . although the researchers indicated that they pretested the survey instrument and made changes based on the pretests and believed that the pretest was thorough , we found obvious weaknesses in the survey instrument . for example , we found that some response categories in the survey were not mutually exclusive or exhaustive , questions appeared ambiguous , and instructions for responding were not clear . collectively , we believe that these potential sources of error raise questions about the validity of the survey data as it was used to estimate the economic effect of the jarc program in the 2008 study .