see pub . 110-85 , ยง 101 ( c ) , 121 stat . the performance goals are identified in letters sent by the secretary of health and human services to the chairman of the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions and the chairman of the house committee on energy and commerce , and are published on fda's website . each fiscal year , fda is required to submit a report on its progress in achieving those goals and future plans for meeting them . see 21 u.s.c . are negotiated between fda and industry stakeholders and submitted to congressional committees prior to each reauthorization . fda's authority to collect user fees for drugs expires on october 1 , 2012 , and the prescription drug user fee program will need to be reauthorized in order for fda to continue to collect user fees . in preparation for the reauthorization of the prescription drug user fee program , you requested that we examine fda's prescription drug review process . in this report , we ( 1 ) examine trends in fda's nda and bla review performance for fys 2000 through 2010 , ( 2 ) examine trends in fda's efficacy supplement review performance for fys 2000 through 2010 , and ( 3 ) describe the issues stakeholders have raised about the prescription drug review processes and steps fda is taking that may address these issues . we provide additional details on fda's nda and bla review performance in appendix i and efficacy supplement review performance in appendix ii . you also asked us to provide information on the number of full - time equivalent ( fte ) staff involved in the prescription drug review process ; this information is provided in appendix iii . to determine the trends in fda's review performance for ndas , blas , and efficacy supplements to approved ndas and blas for fys 2000 through 2010 , we examined data obtained from fda on the review process for all such applications submitted to fda in those years . additionally , we reviewed data on fy 2011 applications in order to provide preliminary performance results for that year . fda had not yet completed its first review for a majority of the fy 2011 applications at the time we received fda's data ; as these reviews are completed , the we reviewed the data for preliminary results are likely to change.reasonableness and consistency , including screening for missing data , outliers , and obvious errors . we also interviewed fda officials about steps they take to ensure data reliability . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . our analyses focused on the proportion of drug applications in each fiscal year for which fda met or did not meet the applicable performance goal ( s ) ; the fda review time ( i.e. , the time counted toward user fee performance goals , from the date of receipt of an application to the date fda issued an action letter to end the first review cycle ) ; the time to final decision ( i.e.