the part was determined noncommercial . the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 states contracting officers may presume a prior commercial item determination made by a dod component shall serve as a determination for subsequent procurements of an item . these recommendations can be obtained by contacting the office directly . dcma officials stated results of their recommendations are specifically not included in the public database because of concerns that a prime contractor may prefer a subcontractor with a commercial item determination over another without one . most commercial item determinations included in the database go back only to 2016 , since this is when the dcma commercial item group began collecting them . additionally , dcma commercial item group officials said they have no funding to support the database . officials plan to meet with dod's office of defense procurement and acquisition policy to discuss funding and other potential systems to maintain the information as well as provide dod officials with direct access to copies of previous determinations and related information . defense procurement and acquisition policy and dcma officials acknowledged that dod has not yet determined who is responsible for the funding and upkeep of this information . in fact , if a previous determination is not used , a contracting officer must request that the head of the contracting activity review the prior determination and either confirm its validity or issue a revised determination . most contracting officers with whom we spoke indicated that prior determinations should be reviewed to determine if they were made under similar terms and conditions and whether circumstances have changed since the determinations were made . we found diverse opinions among contracting officers on whether they would elevate concerns about a previous determination to the head of the contracting activity . some contracting officers said they would elevate the determination if they had supporting data while others would be hesitant under most circumstances due to the extensive process involved . despite the different factors involved , for most of our case studies , challenges in making the commercial item and price reasonableness determinations did not ultimately affect the government's ability to award the contract as planned . the time it took for the contractor to provide information to the government and the government to make a determination ranged from a few days to over a year . in most of our case studies , contracting officials said that this time did not solely affect the contract award because other factors , such as staff changes or awarding multiple contracts at the same time , also delayed the process . the navy obtained information from the air force , which was procuring the same radio and which had performed a review in january 2017 that it shared with the navy . the review noted that other similar commercial radios existed and that a comparison of this radio to these other commercial radios could help determine that the radio is commercial . navy contracting officials , using the air force's review as well as their own technical analysis , determined the radios were a modified commercial item .