price was not available . to determine whether supplemental funding was being spent in the most economical fashion , we randomly selected 17 items of replacement equipment that had already been purchased for further review . of the 17 selected items , 6 were different brands or models of desktop computers , 3 were different brands of laptop computers , 6 were different brands or models of printers , and 2 were different models of digital cameras . for each item , we requested a report from los alamos' property management system regarding the item and the item's purchase invoice . we used this information to determine the performance specifications , procurement source , and price paid for each item . we also , to the extent possible , examined each item and interviewed the employee to whom each item had been assigned . specifically , these officials indicated that people who use purchase cards now receive training on how to use gsa advantage ! and will be encouraged to use gsa as an alternative to the laboratory's just - in - time program when appropriate . ( see app . ii for details of our scope and methodology. ) the los alamos national laboratory , located in new mexico , is charged with enhancing the security of nuclear weapons and nuclear materials worldwide . on thursday , may 4 , 2000 , bandelier national monument workers in the cerro grande mountain area set fire to a portion of the monument's land to thin uncontrolled forest growth . the fire rapidly grew out of control , and during the 2-week period that followed , over 47,000 acres of national forest , county , pueblo , and laboratory land burned . the laboratory later reported that 8,000 acres of its land had been damaged , 39 structures had been destroyed , and almost $130 million in fire - related costs had been incurred . the laboratory was officially closed from may 8 until may 22 but , according to los alamos officials , remained in a state of emergency because of damage caused by the fire and the threat of flooding until august 2000 . after the fire , the laboratory's cerro grande rehabilitation project office contacted divisions that had lost equipment in the fire and required that they submit detailed lists of their losses to obtain the release of fire recovery funds from doe . seven divisions indicated that they needed a total of $13.2 million in fiscal year 2000 and $15 million in subsequent years to recover from the fire . each division provided information on the equipment that had been damaged or destroyed by the fire , the estimated cost of replacement equipment , and the actual cost of replacement equipment that had already been purchased . the equipment needing replacement included desktop and laptop computers , printers , cameras , office furniture , scientific equipment , and related supplies . the contractor also adopted and implemented a policy that stipulates , in part , that only the contractor's information resources management director can approve deviations from the standard . because doe's idaho contractor reported cost savings at that laboratory , using mandatory performance standards may represent a best practice that could be used by los alamos .