the project life - cycle costs had increased . at contract award in march 2006 , the total cost of fdca was estimated not to exceed $596 million . in may 2007 , the life - cycle cost rose by a further $23 million because of increasing system requirements , which resulted in an estimated life - cycle cost of about $647 million . table 2 shows the life - cycle cost estimates for fdca as of october 2007 . in addition , fdca had already experienced $6 million in cost overruns , and both our analysis and the contractor's analysis expected fdca to experience additional cost overruns . operational testing helps verify that systems function as intended in an operational environment . however , for operational system testing to be comprehensive , system functionality must be completed . further , for multiple interrelated systems , end - to - end testing is performed to verify that all interrelated systems , including any external systems with which they interface , are tested in an operational environment . however , as described above , two of the projects had delayed planned functionality to later phases , and one project contract had just recently been awarded in september 2007 . as a result , the operational testing that is to occur during the dress rehearsal period around april 1 , 2008 , will not include tests of the full complement of decennial census systems and their functionality . as of october 2007 , the bureau had not yet finalized its plans for system tests . if further delays occur , the importance of these system tests will increase . delaying functionality and not testing the full complement of systems increases the risk that costs will rise further , that decennial systems will not perform as expected , or both . the project teams varied in the extent to which they followed disciplined risk management practices . for example , three of the four project teams had developed strategies to identify the scope of the risk management effort . however , three project teams had weaknesses in identifying risks , establishing adequate mitigation plans , and reporting risk status to executive - level officials . these weaknesses in completing key risk management activities can be attributed in part to the absence of bureau policies for managing major acquisitions , as we described in an earlier report . without effective risk management practices , the likelihood of project success is decreased . the dads ii program is expected to provide comprehensive support to dads . replacement of the legacy systems is expected to maximize the efficiency , timeliness , and accuracy of tabulation and dissemination products and services ; minimize the cost of tabulation and dissemination ; and increase user satisfaction with related services . the report contains a detailed overview of the scope and methodology we used . responsibility for these acquisitions lies with the bureau's decennial management division and the geography division . each of the four acquisitions is managed by an individual project team staffed by bureau personnel . additional information on the contracts for these four systems is provided in appendix i of the report .