( see fig . in addition to employers offering health insurance , the costs of such insurance play an important role in the extent to which individuals accept such insurance . based on an analysis of meps , lower - income households paid less for insurance premiums — either individual or family health insurance — than did households with higher incomes ( see fig . however , the estimated premiums paid by lower - income households constituted a larger percentage of the total income for these households ( see fig . cms provided guidance to states regarding activities to minimize crowd - out in schip , and the information it collected was of limited use in assessing the extent to which crowd - out should be a concern . in issuing guidance to states , cms instituted specific requirements for program designs the agency identified as being at greater risk of crowd - out , including programs with higher income eligibility thresholds . cms officials told us that they reviewed states' schip annual reports , analyzed national trends in public and private health insurance , and commissioned studies on schip , and on this basis believed crowd - out was occurring . however , each of the approaches cms used was limited in providing information on the occurrence of crowd - out and the extent to which it should be a concern . in particular , cms did not collect certain indicators in the schip annual report — such as whether applicants' employers made private health insurance for families available and at what cost to the applicant — that could help show the potential for crowd - out . moreover , information cms did collect was not provided consistently by states . cms established specific requirements for schip program designs it identified as being at a greater risk for crowd - out . in issuing the schip final rule , cms outlined broad regulatory requirements regarding substitution of private health insurance with schip and stated that it planned to incorporate additional flexibility into its review of state plans in this area . cms could not apply eligibility - related crowd - out prevention requirements to medicaid expansion programs except those operating under an 1115 demonstration waiver . cms did outline specific requirements for separate child health programs with higher income eligibility levels , explaining that there is a greater likelihood of crowd - out as incomes increase . for example , the agency required separate child health programs at all eligibility thresholds to monitor crowd - out , and it required states with schip eligibility thresholds from 201 to 250 percent of fpl to implement policies to minimize crowd - out should an “unacceptable level” of crowd - out be detected . cms officials told us that they did not define an “unacceptable level” for all states , but rather negotiated with states individually . cms viewed waiting periods as a policy to minimize crowd - out ; therefore , states with waiting periods were not required to monitor for an “unacceptable level” of crowd - out , and only three states currently do so . cms also required that states institute a number of requirements for premium assistance programs , including a waiting period .