enrollment determination . the enrollment system makes all enrollment determinations , including those for applications processed at vamcs . specifically , the enrollment system determines whether veterans are enrolled , rejected , or ineligible for health care benefits . veterans who are enrolled or rejected are placed in a category based on type of eligibility — called a priority group — established to manage the provision of care . for example , priority group 1 consists of veterans who are rated 50 percent or greater based on service - connected disabilities . priority group 5 consists of veterans who are eligible because their incomes are at or below vha's eligibility thresholds ; and priority group 8g consists of non - service connected veterans whose incomes are above the thresholds , and thus are rejected for health care benefits . hec sends a letter and a personalized handbook to each veteran once it has made an enrollment determination with the decision and a description of benefits , if applicable . resolving pending applications . if vamc or hec enrollment staff cannot verify veterans' eligibility for making an enrollment determination , the application is categorized as pending . to resolve a pending application , vamc or hec staff are to contact the veteran to obtain the missing information ( eg , military service or financial information ) . vamc and hec staff share responsibility for resolving pending applications . for instance , hec staff may send a pending application for vamc staff to help process . verification of eligibility . after the intake of an application , vamc and hec staff attempt to verify whether veterans meet eligibility requirements based on their military service and , if applicable , financial information . vamc staff attempt to verify military service by reviewing supporting documentation provided by veterans ( eg , military discharge or separation papers ) . if veterans do not provide any documentation of military service , staff will try to verify this information through military service databases . for application information that hec staff have entered into the enrollment system or for those applications that have been submitted online with information transmitted directly to the enrollment system , the system assesses eligibility based on the information entered . both vista and the enrollment system automatically assess whether a veteran's self - reported income meets vha income thresholds for eligibility , as applicable . vamc staff are required to ensure that application information is accurately entered into vista . application information that is entered into local vista systems is transmitted nightly into the enrollment system . vamc staff may also contact hec staff for assistance in collecting missing information because , for example , according to officials , hec has greater access to military service databases . vha enrollment staff , both from hec and vamcs , frequently did not process enrollment applications in accordance with vha's timeliness standards and made incorrect enrollment determinations . vha , through hec , is assessing efforts to improve its enrollment processes . prior studies show that vha enrollment staff , whether from hec or vamcs , frequently did not process enrollment applications within 5 business days in accordance with vha timeliness standards .