gao - 02-901t . washington , d.c.: july 3 , 2002 homeland security: intergovernmental coordination and partnership will be critical to success . is it the primary mission of the agency or program ? similar goals and objectives: does the agency or program being considered for the new department share primary goals and objectives with the other agencies or programs being consolidated ? leverage effectiveness: does the agency or program being considered for the new department create synergy and help to leverage the effectiveness of other agencies and programs or the new department as a whole ? in other words , is the whole greater than the sum of the parts ? gains through consolidation: does the agency or program being considered for the new department improve the efficiency and effectiveness of homeland security missions through eliminating duplications and overlaps , closing gaps and aligning or merging common roles and responsibilities ? integrated information sharing / coordination: does the agency or program being considered for the new department contribute to or leverage the ability of the new department to enhance the sharing of critical information or otherwise improve the coordination of missions and activities related to homeland security ? compatible cultures: can the organizational culture of the agency or program being considered for the new department effectively meld with the other entities that will be consolidated ? field structures and approaches to achieving missions vary considerably between agencies . impact on excluded agencies: what is the impact on departments losing components to the new department ? what is the impact on agencies with homeland security missions left out of the new department ? federally sponsored research and development efforts , a key focus of the proposed legislation , enhance the government's capability to counter chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear terrorist threats by providing technologies that meet a range of crisis - and consequence - management needs . research and development efforts for these technologies , however , can be risky , time consuming , and costly . such efforts also may need to address requirements not available in off - the - shelf products . these factors limit private and public research and development efforts for these technologies , necessitating federal government involvement and collaboration . many federal agencies and interagency working groups have recently deployed or are conducting research on a variety of technologies to combat terrorism . recently deployed technologies include a prototype biological detection system used at the salt lake city olympics and a prototype chemical detection system currently being used in washington d.c.'s metro system that was developed by doe . technologies under development include new or improved vaccines , antibiotics , and antivirals being developed by the national institutes of health . in addition , the centers for disease control and prevention , in collaboration with other federal agencies , are conducting research on the diagnosis and treatment of smallpox . moreover , the food and drug administration is investigating a variety of biological agents that could be used as terrorist weapons . other federal agencies such as the department of defense and intelligence community are engaged in similar research and development activities , such as research on technology to protect combatants from chemical and biological agents .