we disagree . developing future cost and funding estimates for programs is central to effective interagency planning efforts . the efforts described in nnsa's 2018 nuclear verification and monitoring plan span a diverse range of activities that are implemented across multiple agencies . the absence of cost and funding estimates for these efforts in nnsa's plan raises questions as to whether there is an effective interagency process to coordinate these efforts and if the process is taking adequate account of resource constraints and making realistic assessments of program resource needs . in addition , information on future cost and funding estimates of federal programs provides congress with a better understanding of the potential long - term funding needs and costs of the diverse efforts supporting the proliferation verification and monitoring mission . we believe this big picture view is important given the multiple congressional committees of jurisdiction — including appropriations , authorization , and oversight committees — for the efforts identified in nnsa's plan . regarding the feasibility of providing 10-year cost and funding estimates , we recognize the difficulty and uncertainty agencies face in estimating future funding needs . however , we do not believe developing such estimates is impossible . as we reported , the department of defense ( dod ) and the department of energy ( doe ) prepare an annual plan with 10 year cost and funding estimates for their ongoing nuclear sustainment and modernization efforts , including r&d efforts . nnsa also provided general technical comments addressing our findings on the cost and funding estimates that were not included in the plan , including comments on nnsa's authority to obtain 10-year estimates from other agencies , and on the examples we cited of other interagency plans that include similar estimates . nnsa stated that it did not have authority to require other agencies to submit 10-year budget estimates for their efforts that are included in the plan . we noted in our report that congress directed the president to include this element in the nuclear proliferation verification and monitoring plan . however , responsibility to prepare and submit the plan was delegated by the president to doe . nnsa commented that the joint dod - doe annual nuclear sustainment and modernization plan is not comparable to the nnsa plan because the former primarily addresses capital projects and other material products , while the latter primarily addresses r&d activities . the reporting requirements for nnsa's nuclear proliferation verification and monitoring plan were not limited to r&d efforts , but included cost and funding estimates for related activities and capabilities , including policy , operations , testing , and evaluation . nnsa's comment focuses only on the difficulty of addressing cost and funding estimates for only one aspect ( r&d ) of nuclear proliferation verification and monitoring and ignores the possibility that estimates for non - r&d efforts may be more feasible and less difficult to report . moreover , we have reported that the joint dod - doe plan on nuclear modernization includes 10-year dod and doe estimates for r&d , as well as estimates for related modernization efforts , including infrastructure , nuclear weapon life extension programs , delivery systems , nuclear command , control , and communications systems , and other related activities .