( see fig . the resource demands that come from the events of september 11 — and the need to address the gaps these events surfaced — will demand tough choices . what are the specific homeland security goals and objectives ? how can the coordinator identify and prioritize programs that are spread across numerous agencies at all levels of government ? what criteria will be established to determine whether an activity does or does not qualify as related to homeland security ? how can the coordinator have a real impact in the budget and resource allocation process ? should the coordinator's roles and responsibilities be based on specific statutory authority ? and if so , what functions should be under the coordinator's control ? depending on the basis , scope , structure , and organizational location of this new position and entity , what are the implications for the congress and its ability to conduct effective oversight ? a similar approach was pursued to address the potential for computer failures at the start of the new millennium , an issue that came to be known as y2k . a massive mobilization , led by an assistant to the president , was undertaken . this effort coordinated all federal , state , and local activities , and established public - private partnerships . in addition , the congress provided emergency funding to be allocated by the office of management and budget after congressional consideration of the proposed allocations . many of the lessons learned and practices used in this effort can be applied to the new homeland security effort . at the same time , the y2k effort was finite in nature and not nearly as extensive in scope or as important and visible to the general public as homeland security . the long - term , expansive nature of the homeland security issue suggests the need for a more sustained and institutionalized approach . i would like to discuss some elements that need to be included in the development of the national strategy for homeland security and a means to assign roles to federal , state , and local governments and the private sector . an effective homeland security strategy must involve all levels of government and the private sector . while the federal government can assign roles to federal agencies under the strategy , it will need to reach consensus with the other levels of government and with the private sector on their respective roles . in pursuing all elements of the strategy , the federal government will also need to closely coordinate with the governments and financial institutions of other nations . as the president has said , we will need their help . this need is especially true with regard to the multi - dimensional approach to preventing , deterring , and responding to incidents , which crosses economic , diplomatic , and military lines and is global in nature . the united states does not currently have a comprehensive risk management approach to help guide federal programs for homeland security and apply our resources efficiently and to best effect .