guam . ppaca section 2005 funding partly alleviated the financial shortfall of guam's medically indigent program , according to a territory official . the medically indigent program pays for health care costs of primarily non - u.s. citizens living in guam , including compact migrants , who do not have other health insurance . most compact migrants in guam qualify for this program after meeting the 6-month residency requirement , according to guam officials . in fiscal year 2019 , compact migrants participating in the program numbered 8,616 , according to guam officials , and made up 73 percent of the program's total participation . the officials said that the program is also funded through guam local appropriations and federal medicaid undocumented emergency services funding . cnmi . territorial hospital officials said that ppaca section 2005 funding available in fiscal years 2011 through 2019 partially covered patient care costs in excess of the territory's annual medicaid cap , including care for compact migrants . the cnmi medicaid program uses federal disaster relief assistance funding to reimburse the hospital for emergency services provided to compact migrants , according to cnmi officials . other health care services available to compact migrants non - u.s. citizens , including compact migrants , may access health care through the u.s. department of health and human services health resources and services administration's health center program and through state government – supported clinics . in addition , the university of arkansas for medical sciences northwest campus facilitates research and community health programs in the marshallese community and has established a clinic focused on diabetes . the budgetary effects of compact migration in the u.s. areas we visited include contributions by compact migrants , such as payment of federal and state taxes and fees , and also include several types of government program costs related to compact migration . budgetary contributions . compact migrants pay payroll taxes , including income taxes , and contributions to social security and medicare . they also pay fees associated with state or territorial documentation or licensing , including driver's licenses . in general , reliable data on budgetary contributions of compact migrants are not available , because state and territorial tax filings and related databases do not provide data on citizenship or ethnicity , according to state and territorial officials . however , the hawaiian government reported that in 2017 , compact migrants generated an estimated $36.6 million in state revenue from fees and taxes , such as the individual income tax , general excise taxes , and taxes generated from state government spending . according to university of guam officials and an fas community member , the presence of fas communities may have helped guam institutions obtain funding , including funding for research . budgetary costs . state and territorial officials identified budgetary costs related to compact migration . for example , officials cited costs of providing translators or interpreters for government programs and costs associated with compact migrant interactions with police and the justice system . some states have elected to extend state - level programs for food or cash - based assistance to compact migrants who are ineligible for the federal equivalents .