( recommendation 1 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dod . in written comments , which are reprinted in their entirety in appendix vi , dod partially concurred with our recommendation . dod partially concurred with our recommendation to improve its cost estimating guidance by fully incorporating all 12 steps needed for developing high - quality , reliable estimates . dod stated that it did not believe that it is suitable to fully apply all 12 steps to any construction project due to characteristics of the military construction program that dod believes differ from those of major system or weapon acquisition programs . however , dod also stated that it concurred with the intent and general applicability of the twelve steps to military construction and that dod cost estimating guidance lacks specificity in several of these areas . dod acknowledged that expanding its cost guidance to more fully incorporate these steps would benefit the military construction program , and that it is planning to address this by revising its cost guidance during fiscal year 2019 . in our report , we recognize that it may not be appropriate to fully apply all 12 steps to each construction project . for example , it may not be realistic or to the military departments' benefit to conduct a sensitivity and uncertainty analysis or develop an independent cost estimate for all the construction projects they initiate every year , especially for low - cost projects . accordingly , we did not recommend that dod fully apply all 12 steps to each construction project , but rather that it fully incorporate the 12 steps into the unified facilities criteria so that , at least , each step is considered for each project . dod could then choose to establish thresholds — based on , for example , the dollar values of the projects — to determine for which the 12 steps should be fully applied or other circumstances in which some steps might not be applicable . we believe dod's planned revisions will meet the general intent of our recommendation . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense , the secretaries of the army , navy , and air force . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4523 or leporeb@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi . to examine the active component's military construction ( milcon ) obligations and expended balances , we reviewed milcon appropriations found in appropriations acts , including accompanying explanatory statements and conference committee reports from fiscal year 2005 through 2016 . further , we analyzed the obligation and disbursement data of the active component‘s milcon accounts , appropriation status reports , bid savings reports , as well as annual reports from the u.s. department of the treasury .