decatur . fleet technical support center pacific officials also assessed the operational functionality of each ship's equipment and found that the u.s.s . higgins was not as capable . this assessment measured the equipment operational capability of each ship in order to quantitatively determine whether the ship's systems were performing in accordance with navy requirements . the assessment results showed that the u.s.s . ( 3 ) how does ship maintenance affect implementation of rotational crewing ? to assess whether the navy has systematically evaluated the feasibility and cost - effectiveness of rotational crewing concepts for existing and future classes of surface ships , we reviewed rotational crewing studies performed by and for the navy , including a recent study by the center for naval analyses ; compiled and analyzed sailor reenlistment data ; interviewed department of defense ( dod ) and navy headquarters and fleet officials ; met with cost analysis experts in the government and the private sector ; and reviewed key acquisition documents and crew employment plans . to assess whether the navy has effectively implemented rotational crewing on surface ships and leveraged lessons learned , we conducted over 40 focus group meetings with rotational crews ; interviewed pacific and atlantic fleet officials responsible for personnel , operations , maintenance , and training ; and reviewed navy lessons learned system instructions and queried the system to determine relevant lessons recorded . we used the strategic ballistic submarine community as a best practice based on its long - standing successful use of rotational crewing . to assess how maintenance on ships homeported in the united states might be affected by extended deployments , we reviewed ship maintenance directives and instructions , reviewed ship maintenance reports , and conducted focus group meetings with the three crews on the arleigh burke - class destroyers involved with the sea swap destroyer demonstration project and several crews that had rotated on patrol coastal ships . while we did not validate the maintenance reports and sailor reenlistment data used in this report , we discussed the data with dod officials to determine that the data were sufficiently reliable for our analysis . we did validate the navy lessons learned system data and determined the data were sufficiently reliable for our analysis . we conducted our review from july 2003 through july 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the scope and methodology used in our review are described in further detail in appendix ii . maintaining an overseas military presence that is prepared to deter threats and engage enemies remains an enduring tenet of u.s. national military strategy and priorities . for example , the national military strategy notes that an overseas presence supports the ability of the united states to project power against threats and support the establishment of an environment that reduces the conditions that foster extremist ideologies . the strategy also notes that keeping an overseas presence serves to assure u.s. allies ; improves the ability to prosecute the global war on terrorism ; deters , dissuades , and defeats other threats ; and supports transformation .