ii ) . treasury officials have pointed out that being the subject of an investigation may have negative connotations for a company , and that the committee tries to avoid initiating investigations . by eliminating the distinction between investigations and reviews , this negative connotation and the potential impact on investment would no longer exist . the under secretary expressed concern that extending the time frames would deter filings but did not explain the basis for his concern . however , the committee need not rely solely on voluntary filings . the implementing regulations state that “any member of the committee may submit an agency notice of a proposed or completed acquisition to the committee through its staff chairman if that member has reason to believe , based on facts then available , that the acquisition is subject to section 721 and may have adverse impacts on the national security . in the event of agency notice , the committee will promptly furnish the parties to the acquisition with written advice of such notice.” 24 . the congress has made numerous efforts to conduct oversight of the committee's activities — first in the original exon - florio legislation by requiring a report when the president prohibited an acquisition , and again in 1992 by passing the byrd amendment to require a report when the president makes any decision regarding a foreign acquisition . in addition , in requesting our review , the senate banking committee cited the “opaque nature” of the exon - florio process as a reason for its request , which suggests that the committee on foreign investment in the united states has not been successful in keeping the congress adequately informed . we agree that the confidentiality afforded to the companies under exon - florio should not be compromised . however , subsection ( c ) of the statute provides that the confidentiality provisions “shall not be construed to prevent disclosure to either house of congress or to any duly authorized committee or subcommittee of the congress.” therefore , we stand by our suggestion that the congress may wish to revisit the congressional reporting requirement . as we stated in our 2002 report , the regulations should not call for negotiating interim measures , but rather for the committee to use its authority to impose them as a condition of withdrawal where the transaction has been completed or will be completed during the withdrawal period . further , as we state in our report , “the committee's guidance to member agencies specifically states that treasury will manage activities during withdrawal by specifying time frames and goals to be achieved.” because treasury has declined to implement our recommendation , we are including our recommendation as a matter that congress may wish to consider . in addition to the contact named above , thomas j. denomme , assistant director , allison bawden , gregory k. harmon , paula j. haurilesko , karen sloan , john van schaik and michael zola made key contributions to this report . defense trade: mitigating national security concerns under exon - florio could be improved . gao - 02-736 . washington , d.c.: september 12 , 2002 . defense trade: identifying foreign acquisitions affecting national security can be improved . gao / nsiad - 00-144 .