during our interviews , we discussed 57 agreements . doj did not provide official written comments to include in the statement . however , in an email sent to us on november 17 , 2009 , doj provided technical comments , which we incorporated into the statement , as appropriate . for questions about this statement , please contact eileen r. larence at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or larencee@gao.gov . since we surveyed company officials involved with agreements that had been completed , the information we obtained is not generalizable ; however , the survey responses provided useful insights into company perspectives on monitor contracts and performance . we also spoke with companies' legal representatives and compliance officials regarding the types of issues that may arise between companies and monitors in negotiating the monitor contracts and carrying out the monitorship . we discussed with senior counsel to the odag what role , if any , doj should play in resolving any conflicts between companies and monitors . we compared our findings on doj's role in resolving conflicts between companies and monitors with criteria on internal control standards in the federal government . we conducted this performance audit from september 2008 to november 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our objectives . in summary , doj issued guidance in march 2008 — known as the morford memo — to help ensure that the monitor selection process is collaborative and merit based . doj prosecutors adhered to the morford memo in selecting 4 of the 6 monitors required under agreements entered into march 2008 ; doj has not yet selected the remaining 2 monitors . the final results of this review wi issued later this year . to address all 3 objectives , we identified 152 dpas and npas that doj prosecutors had negotiated from 1993 ( when the first two were signed ) through september 2009 ( which was the end of our review period ) , and reviewed copies of all but one of the agreements . of the 152 agreements 48 required the appointment of an independent monitor . we interviewed prosecutors from doj's criminal division and 12 u.s . the morford memo requires usaos and other doj litiga divisions to establish ad hoc or standing committees consisting of the office's ethics advisor , criminal or section chief , and at least one other experienced prosecutor to consider the candidates — which may be proposed by either prosecutors , companies , or both — for each monitorship . doj components are also reminded to follow spec ified federal conflict of interest guidelines and to check monitor candidates for tion potential conflicts of interest relationships with the company . in addition , the names of all selected monitors for dpas and npas must be submitted to odag for final approval . however , in an email sent to us on november 17 , 2009 , doj provided technical comme which we incorporated into the statement , as appropriate .