all agencies provided their views . we analyzed agencies' narrative responses to illustrate examples of the experiences agencies reported . we also analyzed and summarized the closed - ended question response data agencies reported on how likely potential changes would improve use of special payment authorities . we followed up with five agencies that identified the three most common potential changes that would very likely or certainly improve their ability to effectively use special pay authorities — changes to training for agency managers , training for agency human resources employees , and opm regulations . in what ways has your agency identified and responded to challenges related to the use of special pay authorities ? ( please provide at least one specific example ) . the following six tables present data on the responses reported by chco agencies on the impacts on selected areas of operation from using the following special payment authorities — superior qualifications , critical position pay , recruitment incentives , retention incentives , relocation incentives , and student loan repayment . our analysis of opm data found that , overall , agencies used five special payment authorities — special rates ; superior qualifications and special needs pay setting ; and the recruitment , relocation , and retention ( 3r ) incentives — to varying extents for different occupational families . when we analyzed opm data to identify the top five occupational families for each of these five special payment authorities , we found certain occupational families appeared among the top groups for multiple authorities ( see those highlighted in table 14 ) . specifically , we found that two occupational families — ( 1 ) medical , hospital , dental , and public health ; and ( 2 ) engineering and architecture — were among the top five families for four and five of these special payment authorities , respectively . the medical family was the top occupational family for four of the five authorities — superior qualifications and special needs pay setting , and the 3r incentives . further , we found that certain occupational families were among the top five for one or two authorities but not for the other authorities . for example , the information technology and copyright , trademark , and patent occupational families were among the top five families for special rates and superior qualifications and special needs pay setting , but not for the other three authorities . yvonne d. jones , director , ( 202 ) 512-2717 or jonesy@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , signora may , assistant director ; ronald w. jones , analyst - in - charge ; melinda cordero , ann czapiewski , sara daleski , christopher falcone , karin fangman , kerstin hudon , john hussey , steven putansu , alan rozzi , and albert sim contributed to this report . opm concurred with the recommendation . opm does not provide guidance on assessing effectiveness of special payment authorities in the agency's handbook on human capital flexibilities for any of the authorities we reviewed . for example , opm does not offer examples of assessments to illustrate what data are needed and what methodologies are available for determining whether special payment authorities improve recruitment and retention .