needed . accordingly , the corporation's board , after what it terms extensive consultation with the public television station community , approved the funding of the television future fund using monies from the system support and the csg pools . the corporation views television future fund awards as a special category of grant that is neither exclusively a csg grant nor a system support expenditure . the corporation notes that while csgs typically are utilized only as determined by an individual station recipient for its own benefit , television future fund grants can be used as determined or directed by more than one station for the benefit of multiple stations and , potentially , for the benefit of public television as a whole . how would you prioritize your reasons for your plans to run 30-second underwriter acknowledgements ? % ranking 1  % ranking 2  % ranking 3  ( percent )   ( percent )   ( percent ) q53 . would you favor or oppose a federal requirement that limits the length of underwriter acknowledgements ? oppose a federal  requirement that  limits the length of  underwriter  acknowledgements  acknowledgements  ( percent )   ( percent ) don't know  ( percent ) q54 . please provide the reasons for your answer to question 53 . the following are gao's comments on the corporation for public broadcasting's letter dated march 12 , 2004 . our legal opinion on this issue remains unchanged . see our comments below on the attached legal memorandum from covington and burling . the corporation notes that its ability to support projects designed to improve the system as a whole could decrease if it had to depend only on system support funds . we recognize the corporation's concern . however , we continue to believe that this is a matter that should be addressed to the congress . the point of the cited paragraph of our report is limited to historical background and is not a characterization of congressional commitment to public television . to restate , when the public broadcasting act of 1967 was passed , annual congressional appropriations were seen as a temporary measure pending the development and adoption of a long­ term financing plan for public broadcasting . absent the development of such a plan , the congress has in fact continued to support public broadcasting with annual appropriations at the levels indicated in figure 3 . we agree with the corporation that when the congress deferred the development of a long - term financing plan at the time the 1967 act was passed , it did not intend that federal funding for the corporation would be discontinued . congressional committee reports accompanying the 1967 legislation and subsequent reauthorization legislation suggest the need for ongoing federal funding to enable the corporation to fulfill its mission . we do not agree with the corporation that our report implies that its policy decisions should be made on the basis of our survey of licensees . although we recognize that the views of licensees are , by statute and in practice , central to the making of policy decisions by the corporation , the survey served as only one source of evidence for our review .