washington , d.c . we provided a draft of this report to hhs for review and comment . you asked us to examine the miechv program's moe requirement . this report examines ( 1 ) what is known about the moe spending reported by states that receive federal miechv program funds and ( 2 ) how hhs monitors states to ensure the moe requirement is met . to address these objectives , we reviewed relevant documentation and interviewed hrsa officials . specifically , we reviewed notices of funding opportunity ( nofo ) for miechv program formula grants from federal fiscal years 2013 through 2018 to examine the moe guidance that hrsa provided to states on how to demonstrate compliance with the moe requirement . we also compiled and analyzed data on state - reported moe spending in miechv program formula grant applications for the three most recent fiscal years , 2016 through 2018 . to assess the reliability of the data , we spoke with knowledgeable hrsa officials and confirmed the data we compiled with the agency . we found the reported moe spending data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . although miechv program funds are provided to states as both formula and competitive grants , we focused our review on formula grant nofos and applications because in recent years hrsa provided the majority of its miechv grant funding through formula grants . in addition , our review focused on state miechv programs and did not include territories or tribal miechv programs . we also reviewed relevant hhs grants monitoring documentation to determine the extent that moe is included in these documents , including its grants policy and administration manual and monitoring reports . in addition to the contact named above , elizabeth morrison ( assistant director ) , andrea dawson ( analyst in charge ) , david reed , and kelly snow made key contributions to this report . in addition , key support was provided by jennifer cook , sarah cornetto , thomas james , jean mcsween , mimi nguyen , stacy ouellette , michelle sager , almeta spencer , and matthew valenta . we also interviewed relevant hrsa officials to obtain a better understanding of the moe instructions in the nofos , state - reported moe spending , types of monitoring conducted , and officials' experiences assessing compliance and addressing potential non - compliance with the miechv program's moe requirement . state - reported moe spending does not necessarily reflect all state spending on all home visiting services . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . from fiscal years 2013 through 2018 , the number of families served and number of home visits conducted nearly doubled ( see table 1 ) . the miechv program is the primary federal program focusing exclusively on evidence - based home visiting , according to hhs . in addition to reporting their moe spending in grant applications , some states also noted that they spent funds on home visiting services that did not meet those criteria .