i will discuss each of these challenges in more detail . dod's ability to manage jieddo is hindered by its lack of full visibility over counter - ied initiatives throughout dod . although jieddo and various service organizations are developing and maintaining their own counter - ied initiative databases , jieddo and the services lack a comprehensive database of all existing counter - ied initiatives , which limits their visibility over counter - ied efforts across the department . jieddo is required to lead , advocate , and coordinate all dod actions to defeat ieds . also , jieddo is required to maintain the current status of program execution , operational fielding , and performance of approved joint ied defeat initiatives . despite the creation of jieddo , most of the organizations engaged in the ied defeat effort in existence prior to jieddo have continued to develop , maintain , and in many cases , expand their own ied defeat capabilities . for example , the army continues to address the ied threat through such organizations as the army's training and doctrine command , which provides training support and doctrinal formation for counter - ied activities , and the research , development & engineering command , which conducts counter - ied technology assessments and studies for army leadership . furthermore , an army official stated that the center for army lessons learned continues to maintain an ied cell to collect and analyze counter - ied information . the marine corps' training and education command and the marine corps center for lessons learned have also continued counter - ied efforts beyond the creation of jieddo . at the interagency level , the technical support working group continues its research and development of counter - ied technologies . my testimony today will discuss our observations in two main areas . first , i will describe the steps that jieddo and dod have taken to manage counter - ied efforts . second , i will highlight the challenges that affect dod's ability to oversee jieddo . in preparing this testimony , we relied on the report we are issuing today regarding actions needed to improve visibility and coordination of dod's counter - ied efforts . we met with officials from several dod organizations including jieddo , the army asymmetric warfare office , the army national training center , the marine corps warfighting laboratory , the training counter - ied operations integration center , joint forces command , the jieddo joint center of excellence , u.s. central command ( centcom ) , the technical support working group , and the office of the secretary of defense . we also examined documentation including dod directive 2000.19e , which established jieddo , other documentation and briefings relating to jieddo's evolution , and jieddo instruction 5000.01 , which established jieddo's rapid acquisition process , as well as other documents and briefings from jieddo , the services , and other dod entities . this work was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in addition , we are providing preliminary observations from our ongoing work regarding jieddo's management of its internal processes , its strategic planning , initiative development , and internal controls .