retrospective reviews . ( 1 ) egrpra directs three depository institution regulators — the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) , the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , and the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) — to review regulations at least every 10 years and identify areas that are outdated , unnecessary , or unduly burdensome on insured depository institutions . ( 2 ) rfa requires agencies to review within 10 years of publication those rules assessed as having a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities . agencies are to determine if rules should be continued without change , amended , or rescinded to minimize such impacts . my remarks today are based on our january 2018 report on rfa implementation and our february 2018 report that includes an analysis of the egrpra review process . my statement will focus on ( 1 ) regulations community banks and credit unions regarded as most burdensome and why ; ( 2 ) the extent to which financial regulators performed analyses required by rfa and established policies and procedures for complying with rfa requirements ; ( 3 ) efforts to reduce regulatory burden on community banks and credit unions during egrpra reviews ; and ( 4 ) retrospective reviews required by rfa . for the january 2018 report , our work included a review of the rfa section of the federal register notices and financial regulators' internal workpapers for all rfa certifications made in the final rule ( 66 ) and all rules for which agencies performed an initial regulatory flexibility analysis in the proposed rule and a final regulatory flexibility analysis in the final rule ( 39 ) in calendar years 2015 and 2016 . we also reviewed internal agency policies , procedures , and guidance for rfa analyses and certifications and documentation of retrospective reviews required by rfa ( section 610 reviews ) performed from calendar years 2006 through 2016 . for the february 2018 report , our work included reviewing the egrpra report the federal reserve , fdic , occ , and the national credit union administration ( ncua ) issued in 2017 . to identify regulations that community banks and credit unions viewed as most burdensome , we obtained opinions from a non - probability selection of more than 60 community banks and credit unions . we also reviewed comment letters received and transcripts of public meetings held as part of the review . we compared the requirements of executive orders 12866 , 13563 , and 13610 with actions regulators took implementing reviews . however , the regulators generally have not developed comprehensive policies and procedures to assist staff in complying with rfa , which may contribute to the weaknesses we identified in some certifications and regulatory flexibility analyses . federal internal control standards state the importance for agency management to establish through policies and procedures the actions needed to achieve objectives . the extent to which regulators' guidance included policies and procedures varied .