loan categories . based on our analysis , the loan categories used by consultants for their analysis varied from review to review . for instance , although all the consultants analyzed the files for errors related to loan modifications , some categorized loans by the loan modification program ( eg , home affordable modification program ( hamp ) or proprietary ) and others categorized loans for reasons modifications were denied . review parameters: for similar loan categories , some consultants anticipated conducting 100 percent review of all files in that category whereas other consultants planned to sample files . for example , some third - party consultants planned to review all rescinded foreclosures , whereas others proposed reviewing a sample of those loans . according to regulator staff , differences in the sampling plans reflected differences in the size and characteristics of the servicers' loan portfolios and data systems . regulator staff explained that they reviewed each proposed sampling plan to help ensure it met the parameters outlined in the guidance and would result in statistically valid results . however , according to occ staff , they recognized that some consultants had not fully implemented the sampling approach as expected , and occ is taking steps to address these differences for one of the servicers that is not subject to an amended consent order and must continue its review . our analysis of the may 2011 sampling guidance provided by regulators found that the guidance was ambiguous about a key parameter that affected consultants' sampling methodologies and contributed to differences in those methodologies . specifically , in their may 2011 guidance , regulators did not indicate whether consultants should explicitly set an expected population error rate or provide consultants with direction on the factors they should consider when setting an appropriate expected population error rate to determine the size of the sample used for their analysis . gao's financial audit manual and the standards of the american institute of certified public accountants ( aicpa ) have found that a key element of effective sampling is the determination of an appropriate sample size based on specified precision and reliability levels and an expected population error rate or frequency of errors . regulators' may 2011 guidance on sampling specified that consultants should use 3 percent precision and 95 percent reliability levels to determine their sample size . according to regulator staff , these precision and reliability levels were selected to provide a high - level of confidence in the sampling results . however , the guidance did not specify an expected population error rate for consultants to use in determining sample size . generally , the expected population error rate , like precision and reliability levels , is determined based on professional judgment and includes consideration of factors such as results of prior reviews and knowledge about any potential risks in servicing and foreclosure processing errors . according to regulators , they expected consultants to find errors in their sampled files , because the consent orders that required the foreclosure review process arose out of assessments conducted by regulators that identified the potential for servicing and foreclosure - related errors .