limitations of the data . nass does not discuss data limitations in the census reports we reviewed . impact of imputations , by item . when a statistical agency receives a report form with missing values , it normally estimates or “imputes” those values based on comparable data sources such as a similar farm operation . although nass uses a complex editing and imputation process to estimate missing values , and describes this process in the united states summary and state data report appendix , it does not quantify the impact of imputations by item in reports . whether any of the collected data have been suppressed for data quality reasons . without information on whether any of the data had been suppressed because the quality was lacking , data users must assume that reports include all data items collected in the census had met agency publication standards . although nass appropriately recognizes the variation in data user needs by publishing several types of specialized reports , none of the reports we reviewed direct data users where to find either a complete set of documentation or additional documentation . for example , given the short length and summary format of the county profile reports , it is not surprising that they lack documentation . however , in order for users to assess the quality of the data contained in the reports , it is important for nass to at least provide links on its web site or to other publications where users can access definitions , response rates , and other relevant information . nass has two methods for handling data correction requests , depending on how they are submitted: a formal approach prescribed by omb for correction requests filed under iqa , and an informal approach that nass uses to address correction requests that are not filed under iqa . nass's informal correction procedures lack transparency because they are not documented and individual cases are not tracked . questionnaire testing . nass produced a separate , internal report that discusses questionnaire testing in detail ; however , publicly available census publications do not address this topic . as a result , we could not determine the nature of these correction requests or whether or how they were addressed . consistent with omb's guidelines , nass detailed its procedures to request corrections under iqa on its web site , and posted appropriate federal register notices . for example , nass's web site explains that to seek a correction under iqa , petitioners must , among other steps: ( 1 ) state that their request for correction is being submitted under iqa , ( 2 ) clearly identify the information they believe to be in error , and ( 3 ) describe which aspects of nass's iqa guidelines were not followed or were insufficient . according to the instructions posted on its web site , nass's iqa procedures are triggered only when petitioners explicitly state they are submitting a correction request under iqa . to date , none have done so . nass addresses all other correction requests using informal , undocumented procedures that were in place before iqa was enacted .