reconciliation of payroll to personnel . we found that the air force performed a monthly reconciliation between the payroll system and personnel system and generally resolved mismatches within 45 days . to determine this , we reviewed documentation covering 1 month of the air force's monthly reconciliation between the individual pay records in the payroll system and personnel system . this reconciliation helps reasonably assure that payees are actual servicemembers and that the characteristics that drive their pay , such as years of service and rank , match what is recorded in the personnel system . we reviewed the air force's reconciliation for 1 month to gain an understanding of how the air force matches data elements . for data mismatches between the individual payroll records and personnel records that cannot be immediately resolved , the air force creates a tracking record to help reasonably assure that they are researched and resolved within 45 days , in accordance with air force guidelines . we tested the air force's process by reviewing documentation detailing the monthly mismatch and aging statistics for open tracking records internally reported by the air force and found that the air force researches the mismatches . reconciliation of payroll system to accounting system . we reviewed each of dfas's fiscal year 2014 quarterly reconciliations between the payroll and accounting systems and found that they accurately imported data from the payroll system and compared them to disbursement data in the accounting system , helping to reasonably assure that the population of transactions was completely reported in the accounting system . because the payroll system does not interface directly with the accounting system , dfas developed the military pay reconciliation tool ( reconciliation tool ) , a microsoft access application , to facilitate this reconciliation process . the reconciliation tool tracks payroll data from the payroll system to the disbursements recorded in the accounting system . the reconciliation tool also allows dfas to compare an individual servicemember's leave and earnings statement with detailed data in the payroll system . we tested the reconciliation process by reviewing documentation provided by the air force that demonstrated how data are processed through the payroll system in the form of vouchers and subsequently reconciled to the accounting system . reconciliation of military pay to fund balance with treasury ( fbwt ) . we reviewed the monthly reconciliation dfas performs for the air force between the accounting system and treasury's government - wide accounting system . according to air force officials , this multi - tiered reconciliation helps to assure that the recorded military payroll transactions were actually disbursed through treasury accounts . we reviewed key documentation with air force personnel to understand the nature , timing , and frequency of the reconciliations . the documentation showed that the air force was able to tie military payroll to its fbwt reconciliation . in addition , we traced and agreed payroll system totals that included each of the 10 months to treasury records . however , our scope did not include tests for all elements of the reconciliation , and we did not assess the accuracy of the recorded balance of fbwt . reconciliation of accounting records to the statement of budgetary resources .