( see fig . 1 to ensure that small suppliers are considered when selecting contract suppliers , cms set a target that 30 percent of the qualified suppliers in each product category in each competitive bidding area are small . cms defines small suppliers as those that generate gross revenue of $3.5 million or less in annual receipts that include both medicare and non - medicare revenue . in cases where the small supplier target goal is not met , cms can award additional cbp contracts to small suppliers after it determines the number of suppliers needed to meet or exceed cms's estimated beneficiary demand . between 2 to 20 small suppliers are allowed to group together as a network to submit a bid as a single entity under cbp , and to provide services as a contract network if awarded a cbp contract . the suppliers involved must certify that they cannot independently furnish all the competitively bid items in the product category to beneficiaries throughout the entire competitive bidding area for which the network is submitting a bid . some suppliers not awarded contracts have the option to choose to continue to furnish certain cbp - covered rental items to beneficiaries who were their customers when cbp began on january 1 , 2011 , and who are residing in the competitive bidding areas . these suppliers are referred to as grandfathered suppliers . it is the beneficiaries' choice whether to remain with their grandfathered supplier or to select a cbp contract supplier . many cbp - covered items that are rented can be grandfathered including , for example , oxygen and oxygen equipment , capped rental dme — such as hospital beds — and inexpensive and routinely purchased dme for the remaining rental months . once the relevant rental periods expire or a beneficiary decides to select a contract supplier , the grandfathered supplier can no longer provide the cbp - covered items and services to the beneficiary . subcontracting allows contract suppliers to work with suppliers that are medicare - accredited to provide limited services to cbp - covered beneficiaries . a supplier that subcontracts may perform only three services: ( 1 ) purchase inventory and fill orders , fabricate or fit items from its own inventory or contract with other companies to purchase items necessary to fill an order , ( 2 ) deliver cbp - covered items to beneficiaries , and ( 3 ) repair rented equipment . for cbp , subcontracting suppliers may include suppliers that did not bid , that bid and lost , or that won contracts but subcontract with other contract suppliers for a product category not won . the contract suppliers are responsible for billing medicare for any services that their subcontract suppliers perform since subcontract suppliers are not eligible to bill medicare themselves . contract suppliers are to disclose to cms each subcontracting agreement and are also responsible for ensuring that their subcontractors are medicare - accredited for the product categories covered by the subcontracting agreement . are the only skilled nursing facilities ( snf ) entities that can bid to win a cbp contract as a cbp specialty supplier .