program site . the young center is contracted to provide child advocate services for children in orr custody . these sites were selected based on variation in the number of children served , amount of time the advocate program has been operational , and types of orr care facilities in operation . in chicago , we interviewed staff from three orr care facilities ( two shelters and one staff - secure facility ) , one immigration judge , two groups of volunteer child advocates , and the young center's staff attorneys , social worker , and management team . in the washington , d.c. area , we interviewed staff from one orr facility with secure and staff - secure beds , one immigration judge , and young center staff attorneys . for the brownsville , tex . area , we interviewed care providers from two orr facilities ( one foster program and one shelter ) , one immigration judge , one group of volunteer child advocates , and young center staff attorneys . in addition , we interviewed three legal services providers — located in chicago , ill. , corpus christi , tex. , and washington , d.c. — that had experience representing children with an advocate . unserved referrals . even with the young center's efforts to modify referral criteria and prioritize cases , the young center continues to receive referrals for more children than they have the resources to serve . five of six care providers we interviewed reported identifying more vulnerable children in need of child advocate services than the young center can serve . further , our analysis of program data found that the young center was unable to serve an increasing number of referred cases . for example , from august 2013 to july 2014 , the young center received 279 referrals and was unable to serve 60 of those cases . from august 2014 to july 2015 , the young center received 433 referrals and was unable to serve 116 cases . according to the young center , children referred were not appointed advocates because no advocates were available or children were released or transferred before an advocate could begin working with them . for example , one care provider said that their local young center office was short on volunteer advocates and they experienced an average wait time of 4 weeks or more for a referral decision from the young center . care providers in chicago told us that in one shelter , 30 to 40 percent of children referred to the young center left orr custody before an advocate could be appointed . orr has not taken steps to monitor initial referrals to the young center to determine the extent to which eligible vulnerable children are referred , nor has orr taken steps to monitor which children the young center has determined it is unable to serve . federal standards for internal control state that ongoing monitoring should be performed continually , be ingrained in agency operations , and include regular management and supervisory activities , comparisons , and reconciliations , among other actions .