acr and iac concurred with the report's findings and recommendations . the three accrediting organizations also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . tjc stated that the report's methodology was flawed and that it provided an incomplete portrayal of the necessary components of an adi accreditation program . tjc indicated that the 11 organizations from which we obtained information on standards focused only on imaging and did not include organizations that focus more broadly on quality and safety . as a result , tjc stated that the report excluded other factors that affect quality oversight and improvement , and indicated that we lacked data to analyze the effectiveness of the different approaches used by each of the three organizations . our purpose was not to compare the effectiveness of the three adi accreditation programs , but rather to assess the adi standards currently in use and determine whether cms has adequate assurance that all accredited suppliers meet a minimum level of quality and safety . further , we did not intend to conduct a comprehensive evaluation of tjc's overall accreditation program , which considers aspects of quality and safety that go beyond criteria outlined in mippa for imaging accreditation , such as examining whether a supplier creates and maintains a culture of safety and quality throughout the organization . rather , because our study is focused on imaging in particular , we determined whether the three cms - selected accrediting organizations use standards specific to imaging that were recommended by organizations with expertise in this area . tjc also questioned our threshold for presenting standards that were recommended by 5 of 11 of the organizations , indicating that this represented agreement from less than 50 percent of the organizations . because the 11 organizations have expertise in different areas of imaging , not all organizations commented on all sections of the questionnaire we sent to them . each of the modalities using ionizing radiation uses different amounts of such radiation . for example , conventional x - ray imaging , in which x - rays are projected through a patient's body to produce two - dimensional pictures of organs and tissue , uses relatively low amounts of radiation in order to render a diagnostic - quality radiographic image . because ct and nm services can involve repeated or extended exposure to ionizing radiation , they are associated with the administration of higher radiation doses than conventional x - ray imaging systems . in its 2010 initiative to reduce unnecessary radiation , fda reported that the effective dose from a ct is roughly equivalent to 100 to 800 chest x - rays , whereas a nm service is equivalent to 10 to 2,050 chest x - rays.higher - resolution images , fda advises that an optimal radiation dose is one that is as low as reasonably achievable while maintaining sufficient image quality to meet the clinical need .