basel i . adopted in 1988 , the basel capital accord ( basel i ) aimed to measure capital adequacy ( that is , whether a bank's capital is sufficient to support its activities ) and establishes minimum capital standards for internationally active banks . including any federal reserve - regulated institution such as state member banks and top - tier bank holding companies — subject to its supervision to comply with the u.s. basel iii capital regulations . exceptions include small bank holding companies and foreign - owned u.s. bank holding companies relying on a capital exemption ( until it is eliminated ) .requires subsidiary institutions that fall within the defined entities subject to occ's basel iii capital rules to comply with the rules , regardless of whether they are a subsidiary of a foreign banking entity . similarly , fdic requires subsidiary institutions that fall within the defined entities subject to basel iii capital rules to comply with those rules , regardless of whether they are a subsidiary of a foreign banking entity . “capital requirements in a quantitative model of banking industry dynamics” . the capital shortfalls for individual bank holding companies and depository institutions that did not meet the basel iii minimum capital ratios appeared to be relatively modest in some cases but may be significant in others . for example , as shown in table 4 , our analysis suggests that most bank holding companies that did not meet the new minimum common equity tier 1 capital ratio , plus the capital conservation buffer , would need to raise no more than $0.01 billion ( $10 million ) in additional common equity tier 1 capital — about 1.65 percent of assets — to meet the new requirements . however , at least one of these bank holding companies may need to raise at least $1.12 billion — about 3.39 percent of its assets . similarly , most depository institutions that did not meet the new minimum common equity tier 1 capital ratio , plus the capital conservation buffer , would need to raise less than $0.01 billion in additional common equity tier 1 capital , or about 1.52 percent of total assets , to meet the new requirements . however , some of these depository institutions would need to raise capital in excess of 2.4 percent of their assets . finally , as shown in table 5 , our estimates of the total capital shortfall for all bank holding companies and depository institutions are relatively modest . for example , bank holding companies that did not meet the basel iii minimum common equity tier 1 capital ratio , plus the capital conservation buffer , would need to raise about $4.73 billion in common equity tier 1 capital to eliminate the capital shortfall . this amount equals about 0.03 percent of the combined total assets of all the bank holding companies we analyzed . similarly , depository institutions that did not meet the minimum common tier 1 capital ratio , plus the capital conservation buffer , would need to raise about $0.76 billion to eliminate the capital shortfall . this amount equals about 0.01 percent of the combined total assets of all depository institutions .