acos . as noted earlier , acos are groups of physicians — including independent physician practices — hospitals , and other health care providers who voluntarily work together to give coordinated care to the medicare patients they serve . when an aco succeeds in delivering high - quality care and spending health care dollars more efficiently , part of the savings generated goes to the aco and part is kept by medicare . acos participate in models with upside risk only or models with both upside and downside risk . bundled payment models . bundled payment models provide a “bundled” payment intended to cover the multiple services beneficiaries receive during an episode of care for certain health conditions , such as cardiac arrhythmia , hip fracture , and stroke . if providers are able to treat patients with these conditions for less than the target bundled payment amount and can meet performance accountability standards , they can share in the resulting savings with medicare . cms's initiative , bundled payments for care improvement ( bpci ) , tests four broadly defined models of care , under which organizations enter into payment arrangements that include financial and performance accountability for episodes of care . comprehensive primary care models . comprehensive primary care models are designed to strengthen primary care . cms has collaborated with commercial and state health insurance plans to form the comprehensive primary care ( cpc ) initiative . the cpc initiative provides participating primary care physician practices two forms of financial support: ( 1 ) a monthly non - visit - based care management payment and ( 2 ) the opportunity to share in any net savings to the medicare program . in january 2017 , cms will build upon the cpc initiative , which ends december 31 , 2016 , by beginning cpc plus , a comprehensive primary care model that includes downside risk . cms will begin assessing providers' performance in three of the four performance categories in 2017 . cost will not be measured in the first year . the first year that payments will be adjusted is 2019 ( based on the 2017 performance year ) . under the final rule , an alternative payment model will qualify as an advanced alternative payment model if it has downside risk , among other requirements . providers with sufficient participation in advanced alternative payment models are excluded from mips and qualify to receive incentive payments beginning in 2019 ( based on performance in 2017 ) . providers who participate in alternative payment models that do not include downside risk , such as some aco models , will be included in mips . the final rule refers to these models as mips “alternative payment models.” to coincide with the final rule , cms also issued a fact sheet with information on the supports available to providers participating in the quality payment program . in the final rule , cms stated that protection of small , independent practices was an important thematic objective and that in performance year 2017 many small practices will be excluded from the new mips requirements due to the low - volume threshold .