provides training . the office conducts training sessions on a variety of foia - related topics . for example , it conducts an annual training class that provides a basic overview of the act . it also offers a seminar for attorneys that handle foia litigation , which includes lectures and instruction on , for example , a successful litigation strategy . hands - on courses focused on the procedural requirements involved in processing a request from start to finish also are offered . prepares annual reports . as required by foia , the office prepares an annual report — justice's litigation and compliance report . this report , which is submitted to congress , describes the department's efforts during the year to encourage compliance with the act . it also provides a listing of all foia lawsuits filed or decided in that year , along with information on the exemptions involved in each case , the disposition of each case , and any court - assessed costs , fees , and penalties . in addition to the aforementioned responsibilities , justice is responsible for representing federal agencies if they are sued for an action or inaction under foia . the department's attorneys and support staff are assigned to work on each lawsuit . ( the agency subject to the lawsuit also plays a supporting role. ) the agencies described various systems or processes that they used . for example , the internal revenue service stated that it tracked foia litigation cost data in a database that it used to collect information related to all of its lawsuits . similarly , the federal election commission provided cost data and noted that staff members in its office of general counsel were required to file monthly time reports in an electronic case management system that showed the lawsuits on which they had worked . further , the nuclear regulatory commission stated that its staff reported the hours worked on lawsuits and had time codes for the lawsuit in our review . other agencies also reported that they were able to provide cost data by going back to specific lawsuit case files or time and attendance systems to determine the information . for example , social security administration officials stated that agency's attorneys input their time spent on individual lawsuits into a docket management information system . additionally , the general services administration said it based its data on a review of case notes and e - mails from the attorneys that worked on specific cases . however , for the remaining 55 selected lawsuits where the plaintiff substantially prevailed , litigation - related costs were not provided by the responsible agencies . officials representing these agencies generally stated that they did not have mechanisms in place to track foia litigation - related costs where the plaintiffs prevailed . moreover , they pointed to the fact that justice's guidance does not require them to collect and report this information . for example , an associate deputy general counsel at the department of defense noted that the department's attorneys did not track their work on any particular foia cases and that there were no other offices within the department that tracked the hours worked by their staff on individual cases .