gao - 07-415 . washington , d.c.: april 2 , 2007 . ( see app . ii for the legislation in effect during the 2006 qdr. ) among other requirements , the 1999 qdr legislation required that the secretary of defense assess the nature and magnitude of the political , strategic , and military risks associated with executing the missions called for under the national defense strategy . in the 2001 qdr report , dod introduced a new risk management framework that identified four areas of risk — operational , force management , future challenges , and institutional . according to the 2001 qdr report , the framework would enable dod to address the tension between preparing for future threats and meeting the demands of the present with finite resources . further , the framework was intended to ensure that dod was sized , shaped , postured , committed , and managed with a view toward accomplishing the strategic priorities of the 2001 qdr . future qdrs will be affected by the new reporting elements added to the qdr legislation by the john warner national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 . specifically , the legislation requires dod to establish an independent review panel to conduct an assessment of the qdr no later than 6 months before the date that dod's report on the qdr is submitted to congress . the panel is required to submit , within 3 months after the date on which the qdr is submitted , an assessment of the review , including its recommendations , the stated and implied assumptions incorporated in the review , and the vulnerabilities of the strategy and force structure underlying the review . the legislation also specifies that the qdr review should not be constrained to comply with the budget submitted to congress by the president . in addition , the legislation added several specific issues that dod is required to address such as providing the specific capabilities , including the general number and type of specific military platforms , needed to achieve the strategic and warfighting objectives . lastly , the authorization act directs dod to submit to the senate and house armed services committees a report on the implementation of recommendations identified in the 2006 qdr report no later than 30 days after the end of each fiscal year quarter . ( see app . iii for a summary of additions to the qdr legislation , 10 u.s.c . §118 as a result of the john warner national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007. ) dod considers the 2006 qdr a refinement of its predecessor 2001 qdr , which detailed the department's intent to shift the basis of defense planning from the long - standing “threat - based” model , which focused on specific adversaries and geographic locations , to a “capabilities - based” construct that seeks to prepare for a range of potential military operations against unknown enemies . according to the 2001 qdr report , the capabilities - based model focuses on how an adversary might fight rather than specifically who the adversary might be or where the war might occur . the under secretary of defense ( policy ) had the lead role in conducting the 2006 qdr .