( see fig . 1 ) acf's national office has responsibility for overseeing and providing guidance to the regional offices , as well as for administering and collecting annual survey data from grantees . head start grantees include community action agencies , school systems , for - profit and nonprofit organizations , other government agencies , and tribal governments or associations . also , many head start grantees provide services by subcontracting with other organizations , known as delegate agencies . in fiscal year 2002 , head start grantees served more than 912,000 children , a 69 percent increase over the number of children served in 1990 . head start has traditionally been a part - day , part - year program , but currently serves more children on a full - day basis , which is defined as 6 hours or more a day , than on a part - day basis . approximately 47 percent of children served by head start were enrolled in a center - based full - day program for 6 hours or more a day . less than 20 percent of children enrolled in head start receive 8 hours or more of center - based services a day . as of 2001-02 , about 44 percent of head start children were enrolled in a part - day center - based program . figure 2 shows the percentages of head start services provided on a full - day or part - day basis . head start funds are allotted among the states based on their 1998 allocation and , for funds exceeding that amount , by formula based on the number of children in each state under the age of 5 from families whose income is below the federal poverty level . head start grantees are required to provide at least 20 percent of annual program funding , which can include in - kind contributions , such as facilities for holding classes . during the award process , head start grantees receive from acf regional officials their level of funded enrollment — the number of children the grantee is to serve . head start regulations require that at least 90 percent of the children enrolled in head start come from families with incomes at or below the federal poverty guidelines , from families receiving public assistance , or from families caring for a foster child . while the poverty guidelines are firm , grantees have some flexibility in determining income eligibility . for example , grantees can use the 12 months prior to the month the family applied to head start or the previous calendar year as a basis for determining income eligibility . also , once a family is determined to be eligible in 1 program year , it is considered eligible for the subsequent program year , for a total of 2 years . additionally , families that participate in the temporary assistance for needy families program ( tanf ) or the supplemental security income program ( ssi ) or that care for a foster child are eligible for head start services even when family income exceeds the poverty guidelines . grantees may fill up to 10 percent of their slots with children from families that exceed the low - income guidelines .