our study has some limitations . first , we may not have identified all self - referred pt services because cms uses the referring provider identifier on pt claims to identify the provider who certified the beneficiary's plan of care , and in some cases the referring provider may be different from the certifying provider . in addition , medicare claims data do not capture all financial relationships between performing and referring providers . second , we may have understated the occurrence of certain self - referral arrangements , such as referring physician ownership of hospitals , by assuming that all pt services referred to facilities were non - self - referred . third , our analysis that compares pt diagnostic categories for beneficiaries referred by self - referring and non - self - referring providers is based on data that cms does not use to determine payment for pt services . consequently , providers do not have a financial incentive to accurately report diagnostic data for pt services on medicare claims . finally , it is outside the scope of this report to examine the medical necessity , clinical appropriateness , or effectiveness of pt services beneficiaries received . we assessed the reliability of the cms data we used by interviewing officials responsible for overseeing these data sources , reviewing relevant documentation , comparing means and frequencies of selected variables with published data , and examining the data for obvious errors . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we conducted this performance audit from february 2012 through april 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . pt treatment consists of a planned program to relieve symptoms , improve function , and prevent further disability for individuals disabled by chronic or acute disease or injury . health conditions that require physical rehabilitation , such as low back pain , bursitis , stroke , parkinson's disease , or arthritis , may benefit from pt services . beneficiaries are eligible to receive outpatient pt under medicare part b , which covers diagnosis and treatment of impairments , functional limitations , disabilities , or changes in physical function and health status . medicare - covered outpatient pt services are provided in institutional settings such as hospital outpatient departments and skilled nursing facilities , as well as noninstitutional settings such as physicians' offices and pt clinics . to be covered by medicare , outpatient pt services must be medically necessary , furnished while the beneficiary is or was under the care of a physician , and provided under a written plan of care established by an appropriate medical professional , such as a physician or physical therapist . our study has some limitations .