there are three variants . the conventional takeoff and landing ( ctol ) variant , designated the f - 35a , will be an multi - role , stealthy strike aircraft replacement for the air force's f - 16 falcon and the a - 10 thunderbolt ii aircraft , and will complement the f - 22a raptor . the short takeoff and vertical landing ( stovl ) variant , the f - 35b , will be a multi - role stealthy strike fighter to replace the marine corps' f / a - 18c / d hornet and av - 8b harrier aircraft . the carrier - suitable variant ( cv ) , the f - 35c , will provide the department of navy a multi - role , stealthy strike aircraft to complement the f / a - 18 e / f super hornet . lockheed martin is the aircraft contractor and pratt & whitney is the engine contractor . dod began the joint strike fighter program in october 2001 with a highly concurrent , aggressive acquisition strategy with substantial overlap between development , testing , and production . the program was rebaselined in 2004 following weight and performance problems and rebaselined again in 2007 because of additional cost growth and schedule slips . following an extensive department - wide review , the secretary of defense in february 2010 announced a major restructuring of the program due to poor cost and schedule outcomes and continuing problems . dod added time and money for development , provided additional resources for testing , and reduced the number of aircraft to be procured in the near - term . in march 2010 , the department declared that the program exceeded critical cost growth thresholds established by statute — a condition known as a nunn - mccurdy breach — and subsequently certified to the congress in june 2010 that the f - 35 program should continue . due to the cost breach , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics rescinded the program's approval to enter system development and dod began efforts to establish a new acquisition program baseline . the department continued restructuring actions during 2011 and 2012 that added more cost , extended schedules , and further reduced aircraft procurement quantities in the near - term . the quantity of f - 35 aircraft to be procured in total was not changed , but restructured plans have deferred to future years the procurement of 410 aircraft originally planned to be procured through 2017 based on the 2007 revised baseline . through the end of calendar year 2012 , the contractor has delivered a total of 52 aircraft – 14 test and 38 production aircraft . in march 2012 , dod established a new acquisition program baseline for the f - 35 program that incorporated the numerous positive and more realistic restructuring actions taken since 2010 . officials also reauthorized continuation of system development , approved continuation of low rate initial procurement , divided the program for reporting purposes into aircraft and engine subprograms , and took other actions required due to the nunn - mccurdy cost breach .