gao - 16-332 . washington , d.c.: april 4 , 2016 . civil support: dod is taking action to strengthen support of civil authorities . gao - 15-686t . washington , d.c.: june 10 , 2015 . dhs provided technical comments which we incorporated as appropriate . dod partially concurred with our recommendation that the secretary of defense maintain a database that can fully and quickly identify the cyber capabilities that the national guard in the 50 states , three territories , and the district of columbia have and could be used — if requested and approved — to support civil authorities in a cyber incident . in its response , dod stated that it already tracks capability and readiness across the entire force . specifically , dod stated that national guard units assigned to and performing title 10 , u.s. code , missions report readiness through the defense readiness reporting system , and that units assigned to perform title 32 , u.s. code , missions report to their state's adjutant general . however , as we reported — and dod's comments reflect — the defense readiness reporting system does not identify national guard capabilities that could provide cyber support in a cyber incident . while this system could track some national guard capabilities , such as cyber protection teams assigned to u.s. cyber command , this system alone will not provide dod leaders complete information about capabilities they could employ to assist civil authorities . for example , while national guard computer network defense teams could serve as first responders for states for cyber emergencies and may provide surge capacity to national capabilities , the readiness system will not include these teams . in its comments , dod also made reference to an annual report that state adjutants general are to provide to the chief of the national guard bureau regarding the readiness of their respective state national guards . during our engagement , we reviewed the national guard bureau's submission to the july - september 2015 quarterly readiness report to the congress , which the bureau uses to meet its requirement to provide dod leaders a status on the readiness of the national guard to conduct dsca activities . we found that the report identifies the readiness of state national guard units to conduct certain dsca missions — such as hurricane response . however , the national guard has not incorporated other dsca missions — including cyber civil support — in the quarterly readiness report to the congress . consequently , as prepared now , this report does not help dod leaders identify assets that could be used in a cyber crisis scenario . however , if the national guard bureau modifies the report to include the readiness level of national guard units to provide civil support in a cyber incident , dod leaders will potentially have more visibility into cyber capabilities that exist within the national guard across each state .