the ezs . findings are not generalizable to other ez / ec rural or urban sites . annual report and executive summary data were self - of the ez / ec program ; however , recruiting and sustaining citizen participation over the long term is an on - going challenge in rural communities . reported and were not independently verified . a lack of consistency across sites was observed . sustained community participation seems to be influenced by the capacity of existing community - based organizations . effective ez / ec boards are those that represent low - income communities and lessen the role of typical political players . time frames of the study are not completely clear . the participation of local groups , that process was enforced only in the initial planning phase of the program . during the implementation of the ez program in designated cities , federal supervision diminished and local elites asserted their control . the study examined only the first year of the functioning of the ezs . one year into the ez process , there was little evidence that the program had contributed significantly to the development of community capacity . between 1995 and 2000 , employment of ez residents grew faster in zones than in demographically similar neighborhoods in four of the six cities and in the six - city total . it is not possible to determine whether zone designation caused employment rates to increase or whether rates increased for other reasons , such as general economic conditions or local initiatives . more frequently than smaller businesses . many small businesses were not aware of the tax incentives . be biased toward firms that favor the ez . both zone - resident owned businesses and small businesses located in zones were more likely to hire local zone residents . businesses were unaware of financial incentives , it is not plausible that these businesses could have been motivated by the financial incentives of which they were not aware . tax credit and section 179 expensing provision and the percentage change in the number of residents employed . sample and cannot be generalized to ecs that were not studied . particular cases in the analysis are identified as successes participate in zone governance has been extremely uneven . or failures , but the criteria for determining success or failure are not specified . residents and community - based organization representatives combined constitute typically 50 percent of board memberships . zone governance was difficult to monitor . reviews by hud's inspector general stated that they had organized associations , to long - term formalized alliances . little confidence in the accuracy of the performance data . therefore , such findings are not reported here . reported findings on program activities relied entirely on the hud performance management system data . home loans , measured as the loan activities per 1000 dwellings , were almost half as prevalent in the 18 ezs / ecs as in their corresponding metropolitan statistical areas . no discussion of home mortgage disclosure act reliability was included in the report ; however , gao work has found these data to be sufficiently reliable for similar purposes .