regulatory approval . new manufacturers may not be able to quickly enter the market to produce a drug in shortage because fda's approval of an anda — which can take more than a year — is required . further , even existing manufacturers of the drug need fda approval of changes to manufacturing conditions or processes that have a substantial potential to adversely affect factors such as the identity , strength , quality , purity , or potency of the drug before the drug manufactured under the new conditions or processes can be marketed . for example , fda approval of an application supplement may be required for changes in location of a manufacturing site or the source of the raw materials or components for manufacturing a drug . production complexity . costly , specialized equipment is required to manufacture prescription drugs and production processes are complex , particularly for sterile injectables . maintaining sterility throughout the production process is challenging , yet it is particularly important for these drugs as serious injury can occur if contaminated drugs are injected into patients . some generic sterile injectable drugs need to be manufactured on lines or in facilities dedicated solely to those drugs , thus creating challenges for new manufacturers to enter the market . we previously found that sterile injectable anti - infective and oncology drugs require lines , and sometimes whole facilities , that are limited to the production of such drugs . for example , some anti - infective drugs , such as penicillin , can trigger serious allergic reactions at very low levels and as a result , may be limited to specific manufacturing lines . constrained manufacturing capacity . the generic sterile injectable drug industry is highly concentrated and this limited manufacturing capacity has been challenged in recent years as the industry has expanded the number of generic products it manufactures . the pressures to produce a large number of drugs on only a few manufacturing lines leaves the manufacturers that do participate in the generic sterile injectable market with little flexibility when one manufacturer ceases production of a particular drug . for example , manufacturer representatives told us that manufacturing establishments schedule the production of each drug in their product line for specific time periods , often months in advance . an establishment that produces a particular drug may not be able to produce additional quantities in response to a shortage until the next time the particular product is scheduled for production — which could be months after a shortage begins . if a manufacturing establishment has available production capacity , the manufacturer also faces risks when deciding to ramp up production to address a shortage . in particular , one manufacturer representative said that manufacturers do not know how long their competitors will be out of the market . if the manufacturer that left the market quickly restarts production of the drug , the manufacturer that made the investment to ramp up production to address the shortage may face a financial liability if it is unable to sell the additional product it manufactured .