we also interviewed fss contractors for some of the orders . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is presented in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from june 2014 to july 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on audit objectives . for example , the justification for a $360,000 army noncompetitive order for a proprietary closed - circuit television security system used the format for justifications for open market procurements rather than for fss orders and therefore did not use the correct far citation and included a fair and reasonable price determination instead of a best value determination . the fss program consists of 40 schedules providing access to almost 20,000 vendors offering a wide range of goods and services . gsa operates the fss program under authority contained in the federal property and administrative services act of 1949.and a wide range of medical supplies , gsa has delegated to the department of veterans affairs the authority to solicit , negotiate , award , and administer contracts for selected schedules . for instance , while the schedule for human resources and equal employment opportunity services has 276 vendors , only 4 vendors provide the specific category of private shared service centers for core human resources services . we found that , although some schedules have a large pool of vendors , most of the obligations on orders through those schedules go to a smaller subset of vendors . for instance , 308 of the 4,789 vendors under schedule 70 — or 6 percent — received 80 percent of all obligations between fiscal years 2010 through 2014 . figure 5 shows the concentration of work received for the three schedules with the highest obligations in fiscal years 2010 through 2014 . according to fpds - ng data , 75 percent of fss obligations were coded as competitive in fiscal year 2014 . however , only 40 percent of these obligations were on orders for which the government received three or more quotes while 35 percent of obligations were on orders with only one or two quotes . far procedures generally emphasize reviewing three pricelists , soliciting three quotes , or attempting to obtain at least three quotes from vendors , and orders placed that follow these procedures are the far also considered to be issued using full and open competition.describes steps to take when awarding noncompetitive orders . twenty - five percent of obligations were coded as noncompetitive of which 49 percent were coded as orders where only one source could perform the work ( see figure 6 ) . our selected sample of 60 fss orders included 23 competed orders — 8 below and 15 above the sat — for which agencies received three or more quotes or reviewed three pricelists — a number frequently mentioned in the far . the agencies obtained three or more quotes from vendors using a variety of approaches .