dhs concurred with the recommendation . as of april 2018 , dhs has made some progress implementing this recommendation . for example , on september 16 , 2014 , dhs issued an acquisition decision memorandum designating the dhs - funded portions of the headquarters consolidation program as a major acquisition program to be overseen by the departmental acquisition review board ( arb ) . dhs also made progress implementing this recommendation by conducting and documenting an arb of the program in november 2016 . the arb process provided dhs greater oversight of headquarters consolidation , and provided a forum for officials to consider a wide range of issues affecting consolidation efforts , such as funding and project scope . in addition , in january 2018 , dhs officials reported that they were working to align headquarters consolidation program documentation to meet the spirit of dhs acquisition policy guidance . we will reassess the status of this recommendation after the consolidation plan and cost and schedule estimates are updated and submitted to congress per the dhs headquarters consolidation accountability act . at that time , we believe there will be more certainty about the future direction of the project overall , and dhs's funded portion in particular , and we will be better able to assess the level of dhs acquisitions oversight for the project . chairman perry , ranking member correa , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i look forward to responding to any questions that you may have . if you or your staff members have any questions about this testimony , please contact chris currie , director , homeland security and justice issues , at ( 404 ) 679-1875 or curriec@gao.gov . we have previously reported that a reliable cost estimate is critical to the success of any program . specifically , we have found that such an estimate provides the basis for informed investment decision making , realistic budget formulation and program resourcing , meaningful progress measurement , proactive course correction when warranted , and accountability for results . this structure will house the secretary of homeland security and other key leadership . my testimony summarizes the key findings of our september 2014 report on dhs and gsa efforts to manage the dhs headquarters consolidation project , and provides a status update on dhs and gsa implementation of our recommendations . to complete our september 2014 report , we compared dhs and gsa capital planning efforts against applicable leading practices in capital decision making and interviewed dhs and gsa officials responsible for the planning and management of the dhs headquarters consolidation . we also compared dhs and gsa documents on the estimated cost and schedule for the st. elizabeths project with cost - and schedule - estimating leading practices we have identified in our prior work , and relevant gsa guidance . for example , dhs had an overall goal of reducing the square footage allotted per employee across the department in accordance with workplace standards , such as standards for telework and hoteling .