( recommendation 2 ) . in comments , reproduced in appendix ii , dot concurred with our recommendations . we provided a draft of this report to dot for review and comment . dot also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . permanent repairs are undertaken after the occurrence of a disaster to restore the highway to its pre - disaster conditions . permanent repairs receive a federal share , between 80 and 90 percent , depending on the type of roadway being repaired . in that review , we selected a nongeneralizable sample of eligible emergency relief program projects in three states — new york , texas , and washington — that matched criteria such as receiving more than $1 million in obligated federal funds and approval by fhwa between fiscal years 2007 through 2010 . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in 2017 , three sequential hurricanes — harvey , irma , and maria — created an unprecedented demand for federal disaster response and recovery resources . according to the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , these hurricanes ranked among the top five costliest on record , costing $125 billion ( harvey ) ; $90 billion ( maria ) ; and $50 billion ( irma ) . as a result of these storms , florida , texas , and puerto rico faced hardships , including devastation to infrastructure , such as highways and bridges . the island of puerto rico in particular was severely affected , which created multiple challenges for federal response efforts . specifically , within a 2-week period puerto rico was hit by both hurricanes irma and maria , resulting in power outages that lasted up to 11 months and the need for commodities , such as food and water , and requiring one of the largest recovery efforts in history . the federal response was complicated by several factors , including the remoteness of the island , limited local preparedness , outdated infrastructure , and workforce capacity constraints . the emergency relief program provides assistance to repair or reconstruct highways and bridges on federal - aid highways and roads and bridges on federally owned public lands that have sustained serious damage from natural disasters or catastrophic failures . fema is responsible for providing funds to repair and replace roadways damaged as a result of disasters that are not eligible for federal - aid highway funding . for natural disasters or other events to be eligible for emergency relief funding , the president must declare the event to be an “emergency” or a “major disaster” under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act , or the governor must declare an emergency with the concurrence of the secretary of transportation . damage to highways must be severe , occur over a wide area , and result in unusually high expenses to the highway agency . congress has provided funds for highway emergency relief since at least 1938 and , since 1972 , has authorized $100 million annually in “contract authority” for the emergency relief program to be paid from the highway trust fund .