of these , 603 lenders were approved for both programs . the lender's policies normally do not allow loans to new businesses or businesses in the applicant's industry . using data obtained from sba , we ranked 7 ( a ) lenders in each of the selected cities from largest to smallest based on the number of active or outstanding 7 ( a ) loans for each lender . with the exception of chicago and washington , d.c. , we contacted lenders in each city in descending order until we achieved our quota ( at least three in each city ) . ( see table 4. ) for purposes of this report , we considered small lenders to be those with 50 or fewer active or outstanding 7 ( a ) loans . we made three attempts to contact a lender before moving on to the next lender on the list . the applications we reviewed generally covered loans that were approved within calendar years 2007 and 2008 . the number of files we reviewed at each lender was based on the size of the lender's portfolio and gao staff resources . on the basis of a pilot test at one lender , we determined that we could review approximately 20 files during one site visit . as a result , we reviewed between 5 and 25 of each lender's most recently approved loans , depending on the size of the lender . to strengthen the accuracy of the collection of information from lender files , we validated our data entry for 20 percent of all files reviewed at each lender . the sample of lenders we visited was not designed to be generalizable to the population of 7 ( a ) lenders , nor was the sample of loans at each lender designed to be generalizable to the population of 7 ( a ) borrowers at each lender . to assess sba's efforts to ensure lender compliance with the credit elsewhere requirement , we reviewed excerpts from all 97 on - site lender review reports completed from october 1 , 2006 , through march 31 , 2008 . these excerpts documented sba's assessment of the lenders' compliance with the credit elsewhere requirement and personal resources test . we also reviewed correspondence between sba and the 31 lenders that had credit elsewhere or personal resources test findings . this correspondence detailed the corrective actions that the lenders had implemented or agreed to implement to address the identified deficiencies . we interviewed staff from sba's office of credit risk management on their oversight of 7 ( a ) lenders and the sba contractor that performs the on - site reviews on steps taken during on - site reviews to assess compliance with the credit elsewhere requirement and personal resources test . we conducted our work in atlanta , georgia ; chicago , illinois ; houston , texas ; los angeles , california ; new york city , new york ; san francisco , california ; and washington , d.c. , between february 2008 and february 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .