other technologies . this category includes other technologies that capture mercury using approaches such as removing mercury from coal prior to combustion and fixed adsorption devices that rely on precious metals such as gold to separate mercury from flue gas . the intended location of these technologies in a power plant's overall layout may vary . as shown in figure 2 , some may be located between the boiler and the particulate matter collection device , while others may be located further downstream in a plant's process . this figure also shows that some plants can either install sorbent injection upstream of the existing particulate matter removal device or downstream of the device using a supplemental filter to collect the spent sorbent , keeping it separate from the fly ash collected in the particulate matter collection device . the latter configuration may be relevant for those facilities that sell their fly ash as a raw material for use in other applications , such as cement manufacturing , because carbon - based sorbent can render fly ash unsuitable for some of these applications . according to epa , power plants sell about 35 percent of their fly ash for use in other applications , with 15 percent going to uses , such as cement manufacturing , where carbon contamination could pose a problem . the department of energy's ( doe ) national energy technology laboratory partners with the private sector to evaluate the use of mercury control technologies at power plants in tests lasting up to 5 months . the testing program focuses on mercury controls , such as sorbent injection , and ways to better and more consistently capture mercury with technologies for other pollutants . participants in doe's program evaluate concepts in laboratories and develop promising technologies in progressively larger - scale applications , including actual power plants . the duration of the tests that have been completed has varied from several hours to 5 months , with most of the completed doe - funded tests lasting between 1 week and several months . the most recent phase of doe testing has focused on the longer - term performance of mercury control technologies . appendix iii provides more information on the doe tests completed , ongoing , or planned as of february 2005 . power plants in the united states do not currently use mercury controls , but some technologies are available for purchase and have shown promising results in full - scale tests in power plants . these tests have shown that mercury controls known as sorbent technologies — which involve injection of a powdered material that binds to mercury in the plant's exhaust — have shown the greatest effectiveness in removing mercury during tests at power plants . however , long - term test data are limited because most of these tests have lasted less than 3 months . according to all 40 survey respondents , coal - fired power plants were not , as of november 2004 , using mercury controls , although several plants have subsequently announced plans to install them . the coal - fired power industry has not used mercury controls because , prior to epa's march 2005 rule , federal law had not required mercury emissions reductions at power plants .