gao - 05-394 . washington , d.c.: april 15 , 2005 . coast guard: observations on agency priorities in fiscal year 2006 budget request . gao - 05-364t . washington , d.c.: march 17 , 2005 . we plan to report on this later this year . also , we have just begun work on state fusion centers - - which are locations where homeland security - related information can be collected and analyzed - - and their links to their relevant federal counterparts , which we plan to report on in 2007 . according to the coast guard and state and local officials we contacted for our 2005 report , the shared partnership between the federal government and state and local entities may fall short of its potential to fight terrorism because of the lack of security clearances . if state and local officials lack security clearances , the information they possess may be incomplete . according to coast guard and nonfederal officials , the lack of access to classified information may limit these officials' ability to deter , prevent , and respond to a potential terrorist attack . while security clearances for nonfederal officials who participate in interagency operational centers are sponsored by doj and dhs , the coast guard sponsors security clearances for members of area maritime security committees . for the purposes of our 2005 report , we examined in more detail the coast guard's efforts to address the lack of security clearances among members of area maritime security committees . in april 2005 , we reported that as part of its effort to improve information sharing at ports , the coast guard initiated a program in july 2004 to sponsor security clearances for members of area maritime security committees , but nonfederal officials have been slow in submitting their applications for a security clearance . we also reported that as of february 2005 , only 28 of 359 nonfederal committee members who had a need to know had submitted the application forms for a security clearance . as shown in table 1 , as of june 2006 , of the 467 nonfederal committee members who had a need to know , 197 had submitted security clearance applications — 20 received interim clearances , and 168 were granted a final clearance , which allows access to classified material . a key component of a good management system is to have relevant , reliable , and timely information available to assess performance over time and to correct deficiencies as they occur . the coast guard has two databases that contain information on the status of security clearances for state , local , and industry officials . the first database is a commercial off - the - shelf system that contains information on the status of all applications that have been submitted to the coast guard security center , such as whether a security clearance has been issued or whether personnel security investigations have been conducted . we reported in april 2005 that the coast guard was testing the database for use by field staff , but had not granted field staff access to the database . as of june 2006 , the coast guard granted access to this database — named checkmate — to field staff .