its recommendations are then provided to the bap . once the bap receives the p&t committee's recommendations , it provides comments on behalf of beneficiaries . it reviews each recommendation and determines whether it agrees or disagrees with the p&t committee . as of october 2007 , the bap and the p&t committee disagreed about 17 percent of the time , mostly about the length of implementation periods . for example , the p&t committee recommended that formulary and nonformulary designations for drugs used to treat overactive bladder conditions become effective about 60 days after the final formulary decision was made . the bap stated that additional time was needed to notify beneficiaries currently using drugs within the class , suggesting that the formulary designations become effective about 120 days after the final formulary decision was made . finally , the bap's comments are documented and submitted to the director of tma for consideration when making final formulary decisions . after reviewing both the p&t committee's recommendations and the bap's comments , the director of tma makes final formulary decisions . in a decision paper , the director approves or disapproves of the p&t committee's recommendations and may provide written comments explaining his decision . although the director of tma makes the final decision , no drug may be designated as nonformulary unless the p&t committee has recommended the nonformulary designation . as of october 2007 , the director of tma had approved 188 out of the 190 p&t committee recommendations . ( see fig . three overarching factors influenced these trends . first , because federal pricing arrangements that generally result in lower prices were not applied to drugs dispensed at retail pharmacies during this time period , these drugs were generally more expensive for both dod and its beneficiaries than the drugs dispensed at mtfs or the tmop . however , the ndaa for fiscal year 2008 requires that federal pricing arrangements now be applied to tricare prescriptions filled at retail pharmacies . second , the increased use of retail pharmacies has exacerbated the effect of higher retail prices . more beneficiaries are using only retail pharmacies to obtain their prescriptions — about 2 million in fiscal year 2006 , up from about 1 million in fiscal year 2002 ( see fig . further , beneficiaries are obtaining more maintenance drugs — drugs for long - term conditions , such as high blood pressure or cholesterol — at retail pharmacies ( see fig . from fiscal year 2004 through fiscal year 2006 , the number of maintenance drug prescriptions dispensed at retail pharmacies increased by more than 11.6 million . those dispensed at the tmop increased much less , by about 1.5 million , while those at mtfs decreased by about 2.5 million . dod officials cited additional reasons that they believed contributed to the increased use of retail pharmacies , though they could not quantify the effect of these reasons .