we agreed that productivity increases generate savings . irs was unable to quantify the gains from productivity increases in time for this hearing . irs officials also said that most of the savings generated by the productivity increases would be used to handle workload increases in the same area where savings were generated . they said the savings would not be available for reallocation to other areas . as was the case in 2002 , cost increases not included in the 2003 budget request are also limiting irs's ability to fund new investments . according to irs officials , irs will need to fund a total of about $388 million out of existing resources , including about $128 million for pay increases . irs is requesting about $2.1 billion and 7,986 staff years in information technology ( it ) resources for fiscal year 2004 . this includes ( 1 ) $429 million for the agency's multiyear capital account that funds contractor costs for the bsm program and ( 2 ) about $1.67 billion and 7,735 staff years for information systems , of which $1.62 billion is for operations and maintenance . in preparing its fiscal year 2004 budget request for the operations and maintenance of information systems , irs began to implement an information technology portfolio management process patterned after the one used for the bsm program . however , until irs fully implements planned process improvements , its ability to develop supportable information systems budget requests will remain limited . consistent with the clinger - cohen act of 1996 , the government performance and results act of 1993 , omb guidance on budget preparation and submission require that , before requesting multiyear funding for capital asset acquisitions , agencies develop sufficient justification for these investments . this justification should reasonably demonstrate how proposed investments support agency missions and operations , and provide positive business value in terms of expected costs , benefits , and risks . since the bsm appropriation was established in fiscal year 1998 , we recommended that irs put in place an enterprise architecture ( modernization blueprint ) to guide and constrain its business system investments . use of such a blueprint is a practice of leading public and private sector organizations . simply stated , this architecture provides a high - level road map for business and technological change from which agencies can logically and justifiably derive their budget requests and capital investment plans . in response to our recommendations , irs developed an enterprise architecture . this effort was originally projected to save 222 ftes and $14.6 million . according to irs officials , these functions will not be delivered on time due to schedule delays . irs officials have not determined the impact of this delay and are currently assessing other potential approaches to achieve savings in this area . irs officials said the remaining three of the seven most significant efforts will achieve all or more of their projected savings . for example , the effort to improve the efficiency of handling payments and returns , originally projected to save 121 ftes and $4.6 million , is now expected to have more than double the savings , or 235 ftes and $11.9 million , due to greater than expected productivity .