this is important progress . nevertheless , we believe that fda must do more to bolster its oversight of medical products . fda needs to fully implement the provisions in the food and drug administration safety and innovation act cited above and address other outstanding concerns . specifically , fda needs to: strengthen its drug shortage program by assessing program resources , systematically tracking data on shortages , considering the availability of medically necessary drugs as a strategic priority , and developing relevant results - oriented performance metrics to gauge the agency's response to shortages ; improve oversight of medical device recalls by routinely assessing information on device recalls , clarifying procedures for conducting recalls , developing criteria for evaluating the effectiveness of recalls , and documenting the agency's basis for terminating individual recalls ; implement the safe medical devices act of 1990 ; conduct more inspections of foreign establishments manufacturing medical products for the u.s. market and utilize new authority to take a risk - based approach in selecting foreign drug establishments to ensure that they are inspected at a frequency comparable to domestic establishments with similar characteristics ; emphasize the importance of timely medical product reviews , particularly for medical devices ; and track applications to market medical products for children . the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) insures the pension benefits of 43 million american workers and retirees participating in nearly 26,000 private sector defined benefit plans through its single - employer and multiemployer insurance programs . because of long - term challenges related to pbgc's governance and funding structure , pbgc's financial future is uncertain . at the end of fiscal year 2012 , pbgc's net accumulated financial deficit was $34 billion — an increase of more than $23 billion from the end of fiscal year 2008 . both congress and pbgc have taken significant steps to address many of our concerns with the agency's overall management and governance structure , reflecting increased top - level attention to the challenges facing this agency . in july 2012 , the moving ahead for progress in the 21st century act ( map - 21 ) became law , with several provisions pertaining to pbgc . these measures called for stabilizing sponsors' pension contribution requirements , adjusting premium rates , as well as strengthening pbgc's governance in various ways . for example , the law calls for pbgc's board of directors to meet more regularly , four times a year ; pbgc's inspector general to report to the board ; creation of new positions for a risk management officer and a participant and plan sponsor advocate ; an independent peer review of pbgc's insurance modeling system , to be conducted annually ; and a study to be conducted by the national academy of public administration association on possible changes to pbgc's governance structure . we have long recommended that the composition of pbgc's board — currently made up of the secretaries of the treasury , commerce , and labor — be expanded to include additional members with diverse knowledge and expertise useful to pbgc's mission . disaster aid .