pub . ( nepa ) , which requires federal agencies to consider any significant environmental impacts that may result from their actions . initially , good neighbor authority was slated to expire at the end of fiscal year 2004 , but congress passed legislation that year extending the authority until the end of fiscal year 2009 . the 2004 legislation also expanded good neighbor authority to include lands in colorado managed by the department of the interior's bureau of land management ( blm ) ; this authority also expires in 2009 . the same legislation also established similar good neighbor authority concerning u.s. forest service land in utah , but did not require the state to conduct similar work on adjacent state or private land ; u.s. forest service authority in utah expired at the end of fiscal year 2008 . as good neighbor authority nears its expiration in colorado and awaits reauthorization in utah , congress has considered potential expansion of the authority to other states . legislation was introduced in the 110th congress that would expand this authority to include u.s. forest service land in wyoming , or to include all u.s. forest service and blm land in the western united states . in this context , you asked us to determine ( 1 ) the activities conducted under good neighbor authority , including the number , type , and scope of projects undertaken ; ( 2 ) the federal and state guidance , procedures , and controls being used to conduct good neighbor projects , including contracting requirements and timber sale procedures ; and ( 3 ) the successes , challenges , or lessons learned , if any , that have resulted from the use of good neighbor authority . to determine the activities conducted under good neighbor authority in colorado and utah , we reviewed and analyzed documentation from the u.s. forest service ; blm ; csfs ; and the utah division of forestry , fire and state lands ( udffsl ) . we also visited several completed or ongoing good neighbor project sites in both colorado and utah and interviewed federal and state officials to obtain an understanding of the type and scope of work being conducted under the authority . to determine the federal and state guidance , procedures , and controls used to conduct projects under good neighbor authority , we reviewed project operating procedures , federal and state procurement requirements , and federal and state timber sale requirements , comparing the requirements in several areas to identify similarities and differences . finally , to determine the successes , challenges , and lessons learned resulting from the use of good neighbor authority , we interviewed federal and state officials involved with the authority's use in colorado and utah and discussed the potential uses of good neighbor authority with state officials in idaho , oregon , and wyoming . we also spoke with other interested parties , including environmental groups and industry representatives based in colorado , utah , other western states , and washington , d.c . appendix i contains more detailed information on the objectives , scope , and methodology of our review . we conducted this performance audit from june 2008 through february 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .