uscis . to address the lower - than - expected participation rate of certain groups in the permanent workforce — for example , white males and females and hispanic males — planned activities include conducting comprehensive applicant flow data analysis of the top five major occupational categorizes , and administering and analyzing a bi - annual eeo and diversity climate survey . dhs has provided training for its components on how to conduct eeo barrier analysis . in 2016 and 2018 , dhs trained dhs component eeo officials on methods for identifying the root of specific triggers in the workplace , as well as steps for eliminating identified barriers . according to dhs's analysis of participant training evaluations , the majority of participants believed they would be able to apply what they learned from the training . in 2017 , dhs provided a 2-day barrier analysis training to agency and component affirmative employment practitioners that introduced various barrier analysis methods . it included an exercise involving a hypothetical federal agency . based on our review of participant evaluations , participants were satisfied with the training . dhs reported improvements in eeo indicators in its md - 715 reports from fiscal years 2014 through 2017 . dhs cited its higher fevs scores under employee engagement . for example , although dhs's employee engagement remained 7 percent below the government - wide average , it increased from 54 percent in 2014 to 60 percent in 2017 . according to dhs , this score was largely driven by tsa and u.s. customs and border protection employees , who accounted for 46.8 percent of dhs's completed surveys . our review of dhs's workforce data from fiscal years 2014 through 2017 showed that every minority group as well as individuals with disabilities and individuals with targeted disabilities had been trending in a positive direction since fiscal year 2014 . further , dhs officials told us that minority representation was up 3 percent and female representation was up 2 percent since 2015 . in addition , dhs has produced barrier analysis reports that address underrepresentation of women and various ethnic and racial groups . in 2018 , dhs completed a barrier analysis report on hispanic employment in general schedule pay scale grades 12 and higher , as required by eeoc and the u.s. office of personnel management . the report identified several potential triggers , such as hispanic women separating from dhs , and related barriers , such as possible harassment of hispanic employees and women , and glass walls . dhs also developed action plans focused on enhancing elder and family care programs , offering training on preventing harassment in the workforce , increasing recruitment into job series with substantial promotion opportunities , and ensuring interview panels were diverse and interviewers properly trained . although dhs has reported positive trending in various underrepresented groups , dhs officials said they were unable to fully identify the barriers contributing to the underrepresentation of women in its workforce despite conducting the required barrier analysis . in 2014 , dhs conducted a barrier analysis of women in law enforcement to help identify any barriers .