monitoring of expenditures . similarly , certain hhs components and doj did not have written procedures that incorporated controls for reconciling or comparing hcfac staff hours to verify the accuracy of payroll expenditures charged against the hcfac account . specifically , hhs's administration on aging did not have controls for monitoring hcfac actual payroll hours . hhs's administration on aging charges payroll expenditures based on estimates made prior to or after the beginning of the year . criminal fines . doj prosecutes entities or persons that are involved in commission of a federal health care offense , such as mail fraud related to a health care program . courts assess criminal fines upon which the criminal debtor is ordered to submit payment ( s ) to the united states district court where the case was prosecuted . each district court coordinates with doj's local united states attorneys office ( usao ) to communicate collections received . the executive office for united states attorneys report collection data on a quarterly basis to the bureau of the public debt for deposit into the hi trust fund . civil monetary penalties . the social security act authorizes the secretary of hhs to impose civil monetary penalties for improper claims and other violations by health care providers , facilities , and other parties . centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) regional offices impose some civil monetary penalties . cms's office of financial management collects the civil monetary penalties imposed on behalf of the secretary of hhs and allocates payments received based on information the regional offices record in their data collection system . the office of financial management reports collections for civil monetary penalties on a daily basis to the bureau of the public debt for deposit into the hi trust fund . forfeitures of property . doj prosecutions of entities or persons that are involved in a federal health care offense can result in the forfeiture of property . hhs and doj reported no property forfeitures creditable to the hi trust fund under hipaa in the hcfac reports for fiscal years 2008 and 2009 . penalties and multiple damages . courts can impose penalties and multiple damages as a result of hhs and doj civil suits against those who have knowingly made false health care claims against the government , such as submitting claims for medical services that were not provided . of all civil debt collections received , doj is entitled to keep 3 percent in its working capital fund for expenses incurred in processing and tracking civil and criminal debt collection litigations . both cms and doj report collections for penalties and multiple damages on a continuous basis to the bureau of the public debt for deposit into the hi trust fund . gifts and bequests . cms occasionally receives gifts and bequests and equally splits the amount received between its medicare part a and medicare part b programs . gifts and bequests are donations received from individuals or entities , usually in the form of checks . upon receipt of a donation , cms records the amount in its accounting system and reports it to the bureau of the public debt for deposit into the hi trust fund .