( see app . i for more detail on our scope , methodology , and data reliability. ) to identify the factors that clinicians and researchers indicate are likely to result in a higher - than - average dose of injectable esrd drugs ( specifically , esas , iv iron , and iv vitamin d ) for a dialysis patient , we developed a structured data collection approach that included interviews with representatives of relevant industry groups , clinicians , and researchers with expertise in esrd as well as the administration of a web - based data collection instrument to selected nephrology clinicians and esrd researchers . specifically , we conducted 20 structured interviews with representatives of dialysis organizations and dialysis - related professional organizations , nephrology clinicians , and researchers with expertise in esrd to develop the data collection instrument and provide context for our findings . we also reviewed the clinical literature related to the use of these three types of injectable drugs . we used information from these interviews and our analysis of medicare expenditures on injectable esrd drugs to compile a list of factors that may affect the dose of each of the three types of these drugs in our review . our web - based data collection instrument asked clinicians and researchers to identify which demographic and clinical factors were more likely to result in a higher - than - average dose for each type of drug . in august and september 2009 , we sent our data collection instrument to 131 clinicians and researchers based on referrals from dialysis - related professional organizations and a systematic review of the literature . a diagnosis of anemia is determined through a measurement of the level of hemoglobin in the blood . to treat anemia , providers may administer esas intravenously in conjunction with iv iron.28,,29 30 another complication of esrd is hyperparathyroidism , which can result from a deficiency of vitamin d. hyperparathyroidism is typically diagnosed based on the level of parathyroid hormone ( pth ) in the blood and can lead to elevated phosphorus levels and low calcium levels in the blood as well as softening of the bones . the treatment of hyperparathyroidism includes the administration of iv vitamin d and oral drugs such as phosphate binders and calcimimetics . as another example , a beneficiary's prior esa use was not proposed as a case - mix adjuster because , according to cms officials , this factor would introduce inappropriate incentives for providers . specifically , they concluded that if the extent of prior esa use were a case - mix adjustment factor , a provide r would have the incentive to increase a beneficiary's esa dose to obta higher medicare payments under the new bundled payment system . cms also considered including race and ethnicity in the proposed case - mix adjustment model , but chose not to include these factors . cms invited public comment on this decision , noting that an adjustment based on race and ethnicity may be warranted . one of the reasons cms cited in its proposed rule for not including race and ethnicity in the proposed model was the lack of objective guidelines for classifying beneficiaries' race or ethnicity .