we will continue to monitor dhs's efforts in this area . chairman meehan , chairman buschon , ranking member clarke , ranking member lipinski , and members of the committees , this completes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time . if you or your staff members have any questions about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9627 or maurerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . key contributors to this statement include adam hoffman , assistant director , and emily gunn . aditi archer , charlotte gamble , and gary malavenda also made contributions to this testimony . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . dndo r&d is different from the r&d of s&t for many reasons . for one , a dndo project may start at a basic research level , and may end up being merged into other similar efforts in order to achieve a higher project goal . we reported in july 2013 that the white house had not yet approved that draft . to report r&d - related spending , dhs uses several mechanisms , including budget authority ( the legal authorization to obligate funds ) , obligations ( binding agreements to make a payment for services ) , and outlays ( payments to liquidate obligations representing amount expended ) . the reports cited provide detailed explanations of our scope and methodology.based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . further , omb requires agencies to submit data on r&d programs as part of their annual budget submissions on investments for basic research , applied research , development , r&d facilities construction , and major equipment for r&d using omb's definition of r&d . r&d is further broken down into the categories of basic research , applied research , and development . my testimony today is based on previously issued reports and addresses ( 1 ) how much dhs invests in r&d and the extent to which it has policies and guidance for defining r&d and overseeing r&d resources and efforts across the department ; ( 2 ) the extent to which r&d is coordinated within dhs to prevent overlap , fragmentation , and unnecessary duplication across the department ; and ( 3 ) the results of dhs's border and maritime security r&d and the extent to which dhs obtained and evaluated feedback on these efforts . further , we found that the data for fiscal years 2010 through 2013 dhs submitted to omb also underreported dhs's r&d budget authority and outlays because dndo did not properly report at least $293 million in r&d budget authority and at least $282 million in r&d outlays .