audits . hrsa audits 200 covered entities — a combination of hospitals and federal grantees — per year . hrsa's audits include covered entities ( including hospitals ) that are selected based on risk - based criteria ( approximately 90 percent of the audits conducted each year ) , and entities that are targeted based on , for example , stakeholder allegations of noncompliance ( 10 percent of audits conducted ) . the criteria for risk - based audits include a covered entity's changes in the volume of 340b program drug purchases , time in the program , complexity of its program , and history of violations or allegations of noncompliance . among other things , hrsa's audits include assessments of each hospital's 340b eligibility status . for a nongovernmental hospital , hrsa's guidance indicates that auditors are expected to review the hospital's contract with the state or local government to ensure that it is for serving the 340b - specified low - income population and is signed by both a hospital and state or local government official . auditors are also expected to review the contract's start and end dates to ensure that it is effective during a specific period of review . hrsa defines the audit's period of review as the time frame beginning the first day of the audit's sample period — a six - month period that predates and is not contiguous with the beginning of the onsite audit — and ending on the last day of the onsite audit . for example , a hospital with an onsite audit in march of 2017 may have a sample period from july 1 , 2016 through december 31 , 2016 , which means that auditors should verify that the hospital's contract was in effect from at least july 1 , 2016 through the end of the march 2017 onsite audit . if hrsa identifies deficiencies in hospitals' contracts , the agency may issue ( 1 ) findings of noncompliance , which are made public on hrsa's website , or ( 2 ) areas for improvement , which are not made public . when an audit results in a finding of noncompliance , the hospital is required to submit a corrective action plan within 60 days of the audit report being finalized for hrsa's approval . hrsa closes the audit once the hospital attests that the corrective action plan has been fully implemented , and any necessary repayments have been made to affected manufacturers . for example , if a nongovernmental hospital were unable to demonstrate that it had a contract with a state or local government when audited , hrsa policy states that the hospital would be issued a finding of noncompliance and may be subject to termination from the 340b program for not meeting eligibility criteria . in addition , the hospital may be responsible for repayment to manufacturers for discounts it received during the period it lacked a contract . most of the contracts we reviewed between nongovernmental hospitals and state or local governments obligated the hospitals to provide health care services to low - income individuals , but they included few details about those obligations .