( app . i provides a more detailed description of our objectives , scope , and methodology. ) hiv / aids , tb , and malaria , three of the world's deadliest infectious diseases , cause tremendous human suffering , economic loss , and political instability . according to unaids , in 2002 aids caused 3 million deaths , and 5 million people became infected . more than 70 percent , or 28.5 million , of the 40 million people with hiv / aids worldwide live in sub - saharan africa . however , according to a report by the national intelligence council , hiv infections in just five populous countries — china , india , nigeria , russia , and ethiopia — will surpass total infections in central and southern africa by the end of the decade . in addition , thailand , a developing country that had successfully countered the growth of aids in the 1990s , is now facing a resurgent epidemic . according to who , after hiv / aids , tb is the world's leading infectious cause of adult mortality , resulting in as many as 2 million deaths per year . like hiv / aids , tuberculosis primarily affects the most economically active segment of the population , with 75 percent of the annual deaths occurring in those between the ages 15 and 54 . conversely , malaria , which causes more than 1 million deaths and at least 300 million cases of acute illness each year , is a leading cause of death in young children . the disease exerts its heaviest toll in africa , where about 90 percent of malaria deaths occur . the fund was formally launched in january 2002 . the fund is a grant - making organization with the purpose of attracting , managing , and disbursing funds that will increase existing resources and make a sustainable and significant contribution to the reduction of infections , illness , and death . the fund aims for an integrated and balanced approach , covering prevention , treatment , care , and support , and seeks to establish efficient and effective disbursement mechanisms . during its first full year of operation , the fund successfully completed two proposal rounds and began distributing grant money . over the course of these two proposal rounds , the fund approved grants to 153 proposals in 81 countries across the major regions of the world ( see fig . these grants total nearly $3.7 billion ( $1.5 billion over the first 2 years ) and cover all three diseases . in january 2003 , the u.s. secretary of health and human services was elected to serve as chairman , replacing the outgoing chairman from uganda . figure 4 illustrates the current structure of the fund's board . the board plans to meet three times per year and strives to make decisions by consensus . when consensus cannot be reached , any voting member can call for a vote . dissemination of information is also a problem , according to the international hiv / aids organization report and ccm members with whom we met .