eligibility criteria . the mdh designation differs from the other designations in terms of eligibility criteria . as noted earlier , mdhs must have at least 60 percent of their inpatient days or discharges attributed to medicare patients , must be small and , with few exceptions , rural . in contrast , both the sch and cah designations require hospitals to be remote rural hospitals ( i.e. , located a specified distance from the nearest hospital ) . similarly , lvas are generally required to be more than 15 miles from the nearest hospital . rural hospital designations also differ in terms of eligibility criteria related to bed size . cah - designated hospitals are required to have 25 inpatient beds or fewer , while mdhs must have 100 beds or fewer . rrcs must have at least 275 beds or meet other criteria , such as serving a high proportion of remote patients , among other things . financial benefit . the mdh designation has a relatively small financial benefit compared to most of the other rural hospital designations , and the benefit only applies to costs associated with inpatient services . mdhs generally can only receive 75 percent of the difference between payment based on their hsr and the payment they would have otherwise received based on the ipps rate as an additional payment added to their ipps rate payment . in contrast , the sch and cah designations have both inpatient and outpatient payment benefits . hospitals with an sch designation can receive an additional payment added to their ipps rate payment equal to 100 percent of the difference between payment based on the hsr and what the hospital would otherwise receive as payment based on the ipps rate , as well as a 7.1 percent addition to their outpatient payments . the cah designation results in the highest financial benefit by generally providing 101 percent of the hospital's reported costs in the current year for both inpatient and outpatient medicare services . lvas generally can receive up to 25 percent in additional payments , and while rrcs receive no direct financial benefit , they are exempt from certain requirements related to geographic reclassification ( as are schs ) . legislative permanence . unlike all but one other rural payment designation , the mdh program is a temporary program and must be extended periodically by congress in order to continue . historically , the extension by congress has sometimes occurred after the program has expired and as a result there were temporary lapses in payments to mdh designated hospitals . the bipartisan budget act of 2018 included a provision to extend the mdh program through fiscal year 2022 . the only other designation that must be extended is the lva designation . in 2010 , the patient protection and affordable care act temporarily expanded the lva designation eligibility criteria to include hospitals with a higher volume of discharges and located closer to other hospitals than in previous years . these expanded eligibility criteria have been amended and extended through fiscal year 2022 .