work training . in a postrelease employment project , bop evaluated the impact of prison work experience and vocational and apprenticeship training on offenders' behavior after release to the community . begun in 1983 , the evaluation collected data through 1987 on more than 7,000 offenders . on the basis of the evaluation , bop concluded that inmates who participated in work and job skills programs were less likely to be returned to federal prisons — even as many as 8 to 12 years after being released . in addition to the ongoing external assessment , aousc recently established an internal committee to update the agency's strategy and policy for reintegrating ( i.e. , supervising and assisting ) offenders newly released to communities . also , aousc has started a lecture - and - discussion series to help create a dialogue with experts in the field of criminal justice . one purpose of the series is to provide information to a supervision workgroup of probation officers , supervisors , and aousc officials . the workgroup , in turn , is to develop recommendations for updating pretrial services and postconviction supervision policies . further , aousc is considering options for improving the surveillance of sex crime and other offenders under home confinement . according to aousc , these reintegration measures are being taken to enhance public safety , provide correctional treatment , and help ensure that offenders comply with conditions of supervision . doj , dol , and hhs — in response to the large number of offenders being released from state prisons and returning to communities — are developing a federal grant program , the “young offender initiative: reentry grant program and the demonstration grant program.” under the reentry grant program component , applicants are to target a population of young offenders ( within the age range of 14 to 35 years old ) returning to the community from incarceration ( minimum of 12 consecutive months for adults , 6 consecutive months for juveniles ) who pose a risk to community safety . also , as suggested to us by a bjs official , we contacted the new york state department of correctional services to discuss its research or studies of recidivism regarding inmates released from that state's correctional facilities ( see p. 11 ) . regarding sentence length , criminal and drug use histories , and inmate participation in prison programs , we summarized selected information from the results of bjs' most recent ( 1997 ) survey of inmates in federal and state prisons . an overview of the scope of bjs' survey is as follows: the survey population consisted of 91 federally owned and operated facilities and 1,409 state prisons that held sentenced inmates as of june 30 , 1996 — 89,072 sentenced inmates in the custody of federal facilities and 1,059,607 inmates in state correctional facilities . from this population , the final survey sample selection consisted of 40 federal facilities and 275 state facilities . at the selected facilities , inmate interviews were conducted from june to october 1997 . a total of 4,041 federal inmates and 14,285 state inmates were interviewed regardless of the inmates' sentence length .