according to the u.s . global change research program's 2014 national climate assessment , projected climate changes suggest that western forests in the united states will be increasingly affected by large and intense fires that occur more frequently . figure 1 shows the forest service's assessment of wildfire hazard potential across the country as of 2014 . working collaboratively across federal - nonfederal boundaries to address the wildland fire issue can involve any mix of the nation's 2.3 billion acres of federal , state , local , private , or tribal lands . historical settlement and development of the nation resulted in the intermingling of lands among these different entities . as we reported in 2008 , about 60 percent of the nation's land is privately owned and managed , and about 30 percent is managed by five federal land management agencies , with the forest service and blm managing the majority of those lands . of the remainder , about 8 percent of the nation's land is owned and managed by state and local governments , and about 2 percent is owned and managed by the federal government for purposes such as military installations and water infrastructure . under the national forest management act and the federal land policy and management act of 1976 , respectively , the forest service and blm manage lands for various uses such as protection of fish and wildlife habitat , forage for livestock , recreation , timber harvesting , and mineral production . fws and nps manage federal lands under legislation that primarily calls for conservation ; activities such as harvesting timber for commercial use are generally precluded . also , this forest service official said the agency and the national fire protection association are discussing making changes to the firewise program to emphasize mitigation actions . another factor that several federal officials and stakeholders identified as helping reduce wildland fire risk to communities is providing both consistent and targeted messaging to prevent human - caused wildfires . as noted , bia is responsible for the administration and management of lands held in trust by the united states for indian tribes , individuals , and alaska natives . each of the five agencies has regional or state offices that oversee individual field units . state forestry agencies and other nonfederal entities — including tribal , county , city , and rural fire departments — have primary responsibility for managing wildland fires on nonfederal lands , and share responsibility for protecting homes and other private structures . state and local governments can also adopt laws requiring homeowners and homebuilders to take measures to help protect structures from wildland fires . these officials also noted that taking action does not guarantee that a home will be spared , given the conditions and severity of a fire . according to a nonfederal researcher we interviewed , it is also helpful when communities integrate actions or requirements to reduce risk into comprehensive county land - use plans . for example , the community planning assistance for wildfire program , established in 2015 by headwaters economics and wildfire planning international , is a grant program that works with communities to help reduce wildfire risk through improved land - use planning .