citizenship and immigration services . the disaster reserve workforce division told us that , as of march 2009 , a draft of the concept of operations plan was being reviewed within these three component agencies and a final product is expected to be delivered for dhs review by june 30 , 2009 . according to the disaster reserve workforce division , because internal fema resources were sufficient to respond effectively to hurricanes gustav and ike , fema did not require the assistance of other federal agency employees for those events . the disaster reserve workforce division , in partnership with fema's emergency management institute , has been developing standardized credentialing plans , which will incorporate existing position task books for the disaster assistance employee workforce ( a total of 230 positions organized in 23 cadres ) . fema officials told us in march 2009 that they had either initiated development of or completed credentialing plans for 102 positions . they said they expected to complete the remaining credentialing plans for all cadres and positions by spring 2010 . disaster reserve workforce division officials explained that development of the credentialing plans in conjunction with the position task books will highlight gaps in the training curriculum that will assist in prioritizing curriculum development . apart from the disaster reserve workforce division's credentialing initiative , the fema workforce is to be credentialed by the national preparedness directorate's nims credentialing program , the administrative process for validating the qualifications of personnel , assessing their background , and authorizing their access to incidents involving mutual aid between states . fema officials told us in march 2009 that the nims credentialing guideline was posted to the federal register and issued for public comment on december 22 , 2008 , and the comment period closed on january 21 , 2009 . they said comments have been collected and were to be adjudicated march 11 , 2009 . according to the officials , following adjudication , the guideline is to be revised and submitted to the executive secretariat for formal fema adoption and release . according to fema officials , experiences from the 2008 hurricane season confirmed the basic need for the credentialing program . the post - katrina act requires each fema regional office to staff and oversee one or more strike teams within the region to serve as the focal point of the federal government's initial response efforts and to build federal response capabilities within their regions . the act also requires the president , acting through the fema administrator to establish emergency response teams ( at least three at the national level and a sufficient number at the regional level ) . according to disaster operations directorate officials , “strike teams” and “emergency response teams,” the post - katrina act's terms for the support teams deployed to assist in major disasters and emergencies under the stafford act , are now called incident management assistance teams ( imat ) . imats are interagency national - or regional - based teams composed of subject matter experts and incident - management professionals , and are designed to manage and coordinate national response emergencies and major disasters . according to the officials , regional administrators oversee imats based within their regions .