( see fig . 5 for photographs of equipment inl provided to the isf. ) inl personnel said they had attached barcodes to the equipment and we observed them use a scanner to inventory the equipment . the 2012 inl inventory report for lebanon shows that inl personnel inspected about 78 percent of 1,243 items provided to the lebanese security forces . these gaps involve embassy officials not utilizing required checklists to verify lebanese facilities' safeguards for sensitive defense equipment and not documenting details of state's end - use checks . closing these gaps could help mitigate the impact of security - related travel restrictions on u.s. officials' access to some locations and could also help raise the level of confidence that lebanese security forces are complying with security requirements . because end - use monitoring in lebanon is intended to provide u.s. officials with visibility over the implementation of required safeguards , the above - mentioned gaps reduce the u.s. government's confidence that safeguards are being properly implemented to prevent equipment from falling into the wrong hands . furthermore , the absence of inl procedures for identifying defense articles erodes confidence that state officials are applying recommended end - use monitoring and security safeguards on defense equipment . on a more positive note , our analysis did confirm that 100 percent of the lebanese recipients of u.s. training were vetted for human rights violations and that this system appears to be working as intended in lebanon . to help ensure that u.s. agencies are in a better position to ensure adequate safeguards for and monitoring of sensitive equipment , we recommend that the secretary of defense take additional steps to ensure that office of defense cooperation officials in beirut use the checklists required during the physical security checks . we interviewed u.s. officials in washington , d.c. ; at the u.s. central command in tampa , florida ; and at the u.s. embassy in beirut , lebanon , as well as officials of the lebanese armed forces ( laf ) and internal security forces ( isf ) in beirut , lebanon . to assess the extent to which the u.s. government has disbursed or committed security - related assistance funding for lebanon's security forces since fiscal year 2009 , we requested data from state and dod . the funding data we report represent the balances as of september 30 , 2013 . state provided data on the status of allocations , obligations , unobligated balances , and disbursements for all of the funding accounts that support security - related assistance in lebanon: foreign military financing ; international narcotics control and law enforcement ; international military education and training ; and nonproliferation , antiterrorism , demining and related programs ; and section 1206 and 1207 authorities . state collected the data directly from each bureau for state - implemented accounts and from dod for foreign military financing and international military education and training . however , because foreign military financing funds are budgeted and tracked in a different way than other foreign assistance accounts , dod provided us with data on commitments .