programs. ) similarly , the european union has extended nonreciprocal trade preferences to many countries in the african , caribbean , and pacific ( acp ) regions since 1975 through its acp - ec convention of lomé . the european union will continue to offer nonreciprocal preferences until 2008 through the lomé convention's replacement agreement , known as the contonou agreement of 2000 . like the united states , the european union also expanded the number of products receiving tariff preferences under its gsp program for the 49 nations designated by the united nations as “least developed countries” ( ldc ) . recently , the european union further expanded these gsp preferences by adopting the “everything but arms” amendments , which offer duty - free access for all ldc products except arms by 2009 . presently , the european union offers nonreciprocal trade preferences to 171 countries and territories under its gsp program and its cotonou agreement . ( see app . ii for more details on the u.s . ( see app . ii for more details on the eu programs. ) eu and u.s. nonreciprocal trade preference programs share certain common features and requirements . they offer reduced or duty - free access to eligible products from beneficiary countries , with lesser preferences for products deemed more sensitive or competitive with u.s. or eu domestic producers . sensitive products are either excluded completely from coverage or provided access at a higher preferential duty than other covered products . for example , while the u.s. gsp offers duty - free treatment for all eligible products , it excludes completely from coverage sensitive products like textiles and apparel . the eu gsp scheme , on the other hand , offers incremental tariff reductions on the basis of a product's sensitivity . eu and u.s. programs also contain requirements regarding product origin , which all beneficiary countries must meet to receive preferential tariff rates on their products . “rules of origin” ensure that tariff advantages apply only to products actually produced in beneficiary countries . producers in beneficiary countries may use imported materials to produce goods for export , provided the inputs comply with specific criteria outlined in the rules of origin for the preference program . for example , rules of origin may specify a maximum percentage of imported materials that can be included in a product or may require that specific amounts and types of processing be carried out on imported inputs in order for the final product to qualify for preferential treatment . both the united states and the european union allow , to a varying extent , countries to comply with rules of origin by cumulating inputs or sharing production processes with designated beneficiary countries or groups of countries . in general , allowing broader cumulation provides producers in beneficiary countries with greater flexibility in complying with rules of origin requirements . finally , u.s. and eu trade preference programs contain eligibility requirements in the form of certain country practices . for example , receiving program tariff preferences may be dependent upon countries' having policies in place to ensure worker rights , protect intellectual property , or adequately control illegal drugs .