itc . the itc accounted for an estimated $3.4 billion in forgone revenue , and it provided an income tax credit up to 30 percent for the development of certain renewable projects . developers of certain qualifying facilities could choose to take the itc in lieu of the ptc if the project met certain criteria ; however , developers could not claim both tax credits for the same project . the itc was first established in 1978 at 10 percent of eligible investment costs and was temporarily increased in 2005 to 30 percent for solar and certain other technologies . subsequent legislation extended the itc at 30 percent for these technologies through december 31 , 2016 . after december 31 , 2016 , the itc is scheduled to return to 10 percent of eligible investment costs for solar projects . accelerated depreciation for renewable energy property . accelerated depreciation recovery periods for specific energy property: renewable energy ( accelerated depreciation for renewable energy property ) accounted for an estimated $1.7 billion in forgone revenue . this provision is similar to accelerated depreciation provisions available for a wide range of investments in other sectors . accelerated depreciation for renewable energy property allows developers of certain renewable energy properties to deduct larger amounts from their taxable income sooner than they would normally be able to do under the straight - line depreciation method . specifically it allows them to recover investments by deducting the cost of the investment from their taxable income over a 5-year period . unlike the itc and ptc , which have expiration dates and have been subject to congressional review as part of efforts to expand , extend , or reauthorize them , accelerated depreciation for energy property — like other accelerated depreciation provisions — does not have a specific expiration date and , as such , is not subject to periodic review by congress . credit for investment in clean coal facilities . this credit for traditional fuel sources is estimated to have accounted for $1.4 billion in forgone revenue to support the development of clean coal projects . the credit provides up to 30 percent of qualified investments in clean coal facilities greater than 400 mw in size . unlike the itc , ptc , and accelerated depreciation for renewable energy property — for which all eligible taxpayers may claim the tax expenditure — the credit for investment in clean coal facilities is subject to a specified amount authorized by congress . as such , developers must submit an application that includes a description of the project , the project's financing structure , and the proposed technology to apply for the credit . according to irs officials , doe's nrel reviewed the applications to determine whether the projects met the required technical criteria , and then made recommendations to irs about whether the projects should receive an allocation of the tax credit . according to irs officials , 12 awards have been made for projects included in our scope , and 4 of those projects had been placed in service as of september 2014 . additionally , according to the officials , further allocations of the credit are available .