attorneys . the model identifies the number of inmates currently in bop's system and the length of those inmates' sentences , as well as the number of inmates estimated to enter the bop system and the length of their sentences . further , the estimates' derivation should provide for varying any major assumptions and recalculating outcomes based on sensitivity analyses , and their associated risks / uncertainty should be disclosed . also , the estimates should be verified based on cross - checks using other estimating methods and by comparing the results with independent cost estimates . the cost estimates should include both government and contractor costs over the program's full life cycle , from the inception of the program through design , development , deployment , and operation and maintenance to retirement . they should also provide an appropriate level of detail to ensure that cost elements are neither omitted nor double counted and include documentation of all cost - influencing ground rules and assumptions . non - salary inmate medical care costs refer to the amount bop spent on pharmaceuticals , medical supplies , and outside medical care ( community hospital services and a portion of guard escort service and a portion of salaries ( overtime ) . documentation and found budget officials had documented the formulas they used to calculate cost elements for new initiatives , such as activation - related costs for a new prison facility planned to open in the budget year . in some cases , however , we required the guidance of bop budget analysts to identify backup support because the documentation was insufficient to allow someone unfamiliar with the budget to locate detailed corroborating data . for example , in reviewing bop's fiscal year 2008 cost estimate for a health service initiative related to expanding kidney dialysis , we required a budget official's assistance in locating supporting formulas used to calculate the estimate . best practices include providing enough detail so that the documentation serves as an audit trail to allow for clear tracking of cost estimates over time . documenting all steps for developing its cost estimate would better position bop to recreate its estimates in the event of attrition within its budget office among those who have developed initial cost estimates . bop performed cross - checks by benchmarking new estimates against historical data , such as by estimating medical care costs based on cost obligations in recent years and developed numerous risk analyses and impact scenarios of funding cuts . although not required to do so by omb or doj annual budget development guidelines , bop did not perform an uncertainty analysis consistent with best practices to quantify the risk associated with changes to various assumptions that drive its cost estimates.major assumptions include the inmate population projection ; inflation indices for medical care and utilities ; and annual salary increases . such an analysis would help provide doj , congress , and other stakeholders with information to determine the probability that costs for key operations , such as inmate medical care and utilities , may exceed funding levels requested in the president's budget . consistent with best practices , bop detailed pertinent costs related to its s&e and b&f accounts across sub - accounts .