petition for relief . a person who receives a notice of violation from customs has 60 days to file a petition for relief or pay the amount initially assessed . customs is not to establish a receivable until the petition period expires or until it reaches agreement on the amount of the cfp claim with a violator that has filed a petition . customs may also accept a petition after the petition period expires . petitioners may be granted mitigation for a number of reasons , including contributory customs error , extraordinary cooperation with the investigation , immediate remedial actions , inexperience in importing , and prior good record . mitigation of initial assessments may be substantial . for example , we reviewed a cfp claim involving delivery of restricted merchandise without customs approval for which the violator was assessed $500,000 . the violator filed a petition that explained that a clerical error had been made on the entry form . the sureties agreed to pay 30 percent of the value of the merchandise or the amount of the bond , whichever was less . based on the facts of the case and the additional information in the petition , customs granted mitigation and reduced the amount of the claim to $250 . in turn , customs recorded a receivable amount of $250 and subsequently collected that amount . offer in compromise . an alleged violator may make an offer in compromise to settle a cfp claim at any time after the violation . customs has specific authority under 19 u.s.c . 1617 and 19 cfr 161.5 to compromise claims , and customs bases its decisions on whether to compromise claims on many factors , including , but not limited to , the following: ( 1 ) risk that the government may not recover a significant portion of the assessed amount if the claim is litigated and ( 2 ) the alleged violator's financial inability to pay the initially assessed amount or the amount established through the petition for relief . the compromises generally result in significant reductions of the amounts initially assessed . an example of an offer in compromise that reduced an initial cfp assessment is a case in which customs claimed gross negligence . option 1 . when customs knows all the facts concerning an alleged violation at the time of the initial review and the harm to the government is readily quantifiable and understood , an option 1 resolution may be possible . option 1 can be described as a “parking ticket” approach . according to a customs official , such determinations occur because the receivables are recorded by the initiating officer who is responsible for sending notices to alleged violators before the cases are forwarded to the fp&f offices for review . after a notice is sent and a case is forwarded to an fp&f office , the deciding official determines whether the alleged violation occurred or can be sufficiently supported . in addition , the customs official stated that when case initiators are determining whether a violation occurred , they often do not have the benefit of additional documentation and information presented with petitions for relief . moreover , additional documentation is often only obtained through the course of discovery if a case goes to litigation .