the army concurred with our recommendations . the army has been unable to ensure that requirements for new warfighting capabilities are feasible . in june 2017 , we reported that the army had prioritized combat readiness and rebuilding force structure over resourcing its requirements development process to meet future readiness needs . we reported that even though the army made some improvements in this area , officials were unable to ensure requirements for major defense acquisition programs were well - informed and feasible because of workforce constraints . for example , we found that the army's requirements development workforce declined by 22 percent from 2008 to 2017 , with some requirements development centers reporting more significant reductions . dod concurred with both recommendations . the army is in the process of updating and developing new concepts and equipment to deal with a future environment that will be increasingly lethal , competitive , complex , and dynamic . the army anticipates that it will have to contend with a resurgent russia and a rising china , as well as regional challenges from north korea and iran . according to the army , these adversaries have improved their military capabilities , in particular their ability to prevent u.s. forces from massing close to the potential battlefield , thereby eroding advantages that the army has enjoyed for decades . once deployed , the army stated it expects that its forces will be constantly under surveillance and potentially under attack . to counter the adversaries' threats , the army is focusing on updating warfighting concepts and modernizing the force . in december 2018 , the army published a new army operating concept that is specifically designed to deter and defeat china and russia , and addresses large - scale ground combat . the concept emphasizes that the army must demonstrate its readiness to conduct multi - domain operations — such as ground , air , and cyber — as a key part of deterring adversaries from escalation . to support its readiness for future missions in this complex environment , the army has begun to update or upgrade multiple weapon systems . in april 2018 , the army published its army modernization strategy , which identified six priorities that are key to operationalizing multi - domain operations , including long - range precision fires and next generation combat vehicles , as shown in table 1 . all six of these priorities involve modernizing equipment and / or acquiring new equipment with improved capabilities . the army has identified the need to make changes to how it develops and acquires new weapons systems . to that end , the army established the army futures command to provide unity of command , accountability , and modernization at the speed and scale required to prevail in future conflicts . our prior work has found that the army has faced challenges with managing maintenance efforts and developing requirements for future weapon systems . some of the challenges include the following: the army lacks an implementation plan to guide its retrograde and reset activities , which could lead to inconsistent reset efforts .