omb agreed with our recommendation . cloud computing implementing cloud computing has security implications , which federal agencies began addressing . further , agencies made progress implementing omb's “cloud first” policy . we reported on these two issues and made recommendations . in may 2010 , we reported that cloud computing can both increase and decrease the security of information systems in federal agencies . risks included dependence on the security practices and assurances of a vendor , dependency on the vendor , and concerns related to sharing of computing resources . federal agencies had begun efforts to address information security issues for cloud computing , but key guidance was lacking and efforts remained incomplete . although individual agencies had identified security measures needed when using cloud computing , they had not always developed corresponding guidance . for example , only nine agencies reported having approved and documented policies and procedures for writing comprehensive agreements with vendors when using cloud computing . agencies had also identified challenges in implementing existing federal information security guidance and the need to streamline and automate the process of implementing this guidance . these concerns included having a process to assess vendor compliance with government information security requirements and the division of information security responsibilities between the customer and vendor . among other things , we recommended that omb establish milestones for completing a strategy for implementing the federal cloud computing initiative . federal agencies made progress in implementing omb's “cloud first” consistent with this policy , each policy , as we reported in july 2012.of the seven agencies in our review incorporated cloud computing requirements into their policies and processes . dod concurred with our recommendation . critical factors underlying successful major acquisitions to help the federal agencies address the well - documented acquisition challenges they face , we identified seven successful investment acquisitions and nine common factors critical to their success in 2011 . specifically , we reported that department officials identified seven successful investment acquisitions , in that they best achieved their respective cost , schedule , scope , and performance goals.common factors critical to the success of three or more of the seven investments were: ( 1 ) program officials were actively engaged with stakeholders ; ( 2 ) program staff had the necessary knowledge and skills ; ( 3 ) senior department and agency executives supported the programs ; ( 4 ) end users and stakeholders were involved in the development of requirements ; ( 5 ) end users participated in testing of system functionality prior to formal end user acceptance testing ; ( 6 ) government and contractor staff were stable and consistent ; ( 7 ) program staff prioritized requirements ; ( 8 ) program officials maintained regular communication with the prime contractor ; and ( 9 ) programs received sufficient funding . further , officials from all seven investments cited active engagement with program stakeholders as a critical factor to the success of those investments . these critical factors support omb's objective of improving the management of large - scale it acquisitions across the federal government , and wide dissemination of these factors could complement omb's efforts .