these rates are not updated until labor conducts a new survey . several of the union and contractor association representatives we interviewed said the age of the davis - bacon nonunion - prevailing rates means they often do not reflect actual prevailing wages , which can make it difficult for contractors to successfully bid on federal projects . beyond concerns with processes and timelines , we also found that critical problems with labor's wage survey methodology continue to hinder its survey quality . omb guidance states that agencies need to consider the potential impact of response rate and nonresponse on the quality of information obtained through a survey . a low response rate may mean the results are misleading or inaccurate if those who respond differ substantially and systematically from those who do not respond . however , labor cannot determine whether its davis - bacon survey results are representative of prevailing wages because it has not calculated survey response rates since 2002 , and , other than a second letter automatically sent to nonrespondents , does not currently have a program to systematically follow up with or analyze nonrespondents . while a senior labor official said the agency is taking steps to again calculate response rates , these changes have not been fully implemented and it is unclear if they will result in improved survey quality . the utility of issuing wage determinations at the county level is also questionable . labor's regulations state the county will normally be the civil subdivision for which a prevailing wage is determined ; however , labor is often unable to issue wage rates for job classifications at the county level because it does not collect enough data to meet its current sufficiency standard of wage information on at least three workers from two employers . in the results from the four surveys we reviewed , labor issued about 11 percent of wage rates for key job classifications using data from a single county ( see fig . 1 ) .24 , 25 moreover , in 1997 , labor's oig reported that issuing rates by county may cause wage decisions to be based on an inadequate number of responses . in the four surveys we reviewed , more than one - quarter of the wage rates were based on data reported for six or fewer workers ( see fig . we found almost 75 percent of those rates were 3 years old or less . however , 36 percent of the nonunion - prevailing wage rates were 3 years old or less and almost 46 percent were 10 or more years old . we analyzed wage rates for key job classifications because wage rates for nonkey job classifications can only be issued at the county or group level , but not at the supergroup or state level . regional office officials said they may combine rates from counties with the exact same wage and fringe benefit data in their final wage compilation report , the wd - 22 . however , the rates being combined may have been calculated at different geographic levels — for example , one county's rates may have been calculated at the group level while another county's rates my have been calculated at the supergroup level .