not at all applied . agency documentation did not demonstrate that coast guard officials applied key practices . to examine the extent to which the coast guard has assessed its workforce needs , we analyzed coast guard documentation , including guidance for assessing workforce needs and guidance that sets out the coast guard's 2016 human capital strategy . in particular , we analyzed documents on the coast guard's manpower requirements determination process , which is the process the coast guard is to use to determine the number of people and the mix of skills needed for each of its 158 unit types . to do this , we analyzed data from manpower requirements analyses and determinations that the coast guard prepared from calendar year 2003 , when the service began implementing its manpower requirements determination process , through calendar year 2019 , the last full year of data available at the time of our review . we assessed the reliability of these data , through electronic testing , reviewing documentation , and interviewing coast guard headquarters and field unit officials on how these data were collected and used . mra requesters are to submit an after action report within 6 months after the mra is completed . the after action report is to outline actions to be taken based on an mra . these actions could include adding resources , adjusting requirements , or assuming additional risk . manpower requirements determination . the process is to conclude with a manpower requirements determination . the determination identifies the number and type of positions a unit type requires to meet mission - based capability requirements . in developing the determination , stakeholders are to review mra results and develop the determination , while documenting any changes from the initial mra . these stakeholders typically include representatives from the program assessed in the mra and experts from around the coast guard in areas such as personnel assignments , workforce forecasting , training availability and capacity , and resource oversight , among others . the manpower requirements determination program then submits the determination to be signed by the assistant commandant for human resources . this signed memorandum , known as the determination , formalizes the final manpower requirement . figure 5 summarizes the coast guard's manpower requirements determination process , according to coast guard guidance . we found that the coast guard has not ensured that all three key steps of the manpower requirements determination process are completed since it began implementing it in 2003 . since 2003 , the coast guard conducted mras for 28 percent of its workforce . however , the coast guard completed manpower requirements determinations for only 6 percent of its workforce . moreover , we found that this trend continued with mras that the coast guard completed within the past 5 years . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for determining the number of positions within each type of coast guard unit . finally , we evaluated the coast guard's workforce assessment efforts against coast guard guidance for conducting manpower requirements analyses , and best practices identified in our prior work related to strategic human capital management . appendix i describes our objectives , scope , and methodology in more detail .