at the federal building and u.s . custom house in denver , colorado , judiciary tenants told us they were not included in scoping the project and identifying new building technologies , and as a result , they told us that the contractors installed energy efficient lights bulbs in historical fixtures that were above the allotted wattage and that the bulbs had to be replaced . gsa management developed mechanisms to actively engage judiciary tenants on recovery act projects throughout the construction process , but judiciary tenants at some of the selected buildings reported significant challenges . according to gsa officials , gsa developed a communication template for recovery act projects — outlining each project's scope , schedule , budget , and point of contact — that it shared with judiciary tenants . gsa and judiciary tenants at all of the 10 courthouses we reviewed also said that gsa held regular meetings with the tenants or provided them with project updates . however , judiciary tenants at 3 of the 10 courthouses told us that gsa did not solicit their input . for example , at the federico degetau federal building and clemente ruiz nazario u.s . courthouse in san juan , puerto rico , judiciary tenants said that gsa limited their involvement during construction , and as a result , their input was not obtained on the project's phased schedule approach that required the closure of all public restrooms in the operating courthouse for a year , except for one restroom on the seventh floor of the adjoining federal building . courthouse in san antonio . according to gsa's analysis shown below , project components that recover costs quickly , such as high - efficiency chillers and low - flow plumbing fixtures have been combined with components that take longer to recover costs , such as solar water heaters , for a simple payback period below 40 years . in addition to $4.5 billion in green funds , the recovery act provided gsa with $750 million for federal buildings and u.s. courthouses . while gsa generally selected projects that helped it build or acquire new courthouses , other eligible uses included repairs and alternations to existing buildings , building security enhancements , and building operations and maintenance . at the thurgood marshall u.s . courthouse in new york city , new york , gsa used $64 million to pay for construction cost increases of the full modernization project . according to gsa officials , costs increased due to unforeseen building conditions that required additional work , funding to remediate asbestos from the historic building , and the higher - than - expected cost of construction in manhattan at the time . at the birch bayh federal building and u.s . courthouse in indianapolis , indiana , gsa used a portion of its green funds to complete structural renovations in bathrooms to increase accessibility for people with disabilities . the project also included lead paint and asbestos removal , new carbon monoxide sensors , and fire alarm sprinkler systems . at the george c. young federal building and u.s .