senate report no . 113-176 , which accompanied a proposed senate bill for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 , included a provision for gao to review the military services' progress in opening closed positions and occupations to women , and in developing and validating gender - neutral occupational standards . we assessed ( 1 ) the status of the services' efforts to open previously closed positions and occupations to women , including any steps to identify and mitigate potential challenges ; ( 2 ) the extent to which the services' efforts to validate gender - neutral occupational standards are consistent with statutory requirements and joint staff guidance ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which dod is tracking , monitoring , and providing oversight over the military services' plans to complete the integration of women into direct combat positions by january 2016 . for purposes of this report , we use the terms military services or services when we are referring to the air force , the army , the marine corps , and the navy . determine the reliability of the data provided by dod , we obtained information on how the data were collected , managed , and used through interviews with and questionnaires to relevant officials and determined that the data presented in our findings were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we also obtained and analyzed documentation and discussed with officials any potential challenges they have identified and whether they took steps or designed possible approaches to mitigating those challenges . for our second objective , we analyzed documentation describing the services' planned scope and methodology for their ongoing efforts to validate gender - neutral occupational standards and compared it to the requirements in the governing statutes and the joint staff guidance for validating physically demanding occupational standards . we also discussed these efforts with relevant officials . for our third objective , we obtained and analyzed documentation and discussed with officials from the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness ( ousd ( p&r ) ) and the joint staff the nature and level of their tracking and monitoring , and their review of the military services' and socom's efforts to integrate women into combat positions . internal control we then compared these efforts to dod guidance,standards , and statutory requirements . appendix i provides a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from september 2014 to july 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the role of women in the military has evolved from the women's armed services integration act of 1948 — which afforded women the opportunity to serve in the military services — to january 2013 , when the secretary of defense and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff directed the services to open closed units and positions to women by january 1 , 2016 .