search and rescue . the coast guard reported that performance in this area , as measured by the percentage of mariners' lives saved from imminent danger , was 86.1 percent , just above the target of 86 percent for fiscal year 2005 . this result is similar to the fiscal year 2004 result of saving 86.8 percent of lives in imminent danger . the coast guard identified continuing improvements in response resources and improvements made in commercial vessel and recreational boating safety as the main reasons for continuing to meet the target . aids to navigation . according to coast guard reports , the aids to navigation program performance measure — that is , the 5-year average number of collisions , allisions , and groundings — improved in fiscal year 2005 by dropping to 1,825 incidents from 1,876 incidents in fiscal year 2004 . the fiscal year 2005 total was also below the target of 1,831 . the coast guard attributes this continued decrease to a multifaceted system of prevention activities , including radio aids to navigation , communications , vessel traffic services , dredging , charting , regulations , and licensing . ports , waterways , and coastal security . in fiscal year 2005 , the coast guard began using a new measure of program performance — the percent reduction of terrorism - related risk in the maritime environment . according to coast guard officials , this measure is based on an assessment of the total amount of maritime risk under the coast guard's authority . at the end of each fiscal year the coast guard calculates the amount of this total risk that has been reduced by the program's activities throughout the fiscal year . officials added that because of the dynamic and changing nature of risk , the total amount of maritime risk under the coast guard's authority — the baseline level of risk — is recalculated annually . because this was the first year the agency used the measure , there was no previous performance baseline to establish a numeric annual target . however , according to the coast guard , in the absence of a numeric target , the program used , and met a target of fully implementing all planned activities geared toward lowering the risk due to terrorism in the maritime domain . marine environmental protection . the marine environmental protection measure of performance is the 5-year average annual number of oil and chemical spills greater than 100 gallons per 100 million tons shipped . according to coast guard reports , since fiscal year 2002 , the reported average number of oil and chemical spills has dropped from 35.1 to 18.5 in fiscal year 2005 . the coast guard identified its prevention , preparedness , and response programs — including industry partnerships and incentive programs — as reasons for the drop . marine safety . the marine safety measure — a 5-year average of passenger and maritime deaths and injuries — achieved its fiscal year 2005 performance target of 1,317 .