federal workers are not the problem . they are trapped in and encumbered by outdated and ineffective policies and procedures that must be changed . in addition , they need more consistent and enlightened leadership to show the way forward . they also need help from congress . since we designated strategic human capital management as a governmentwide high - risk area in january 2001 , congress , the administration , and agencies have taken a number of steps to address the federal government's human capital shortfalls . in fact , and this is my major point today , i believe that we have made more progress in addressing the government's long - standing human capital challenges in the last 2 years than in the last 20 , and i am confident that we will make more progress in the next 2 years than we have made in the last 2 years . when we placed strategic human capital management on our high - risk list back in january 2001 , as a governmentwide high - risk challenge , we noted that after a decade of government downsizing and curtailed investments of human capital , it had become increasingly clear that federal human capital strategies were not appropriately constituted to adequately meet the current and emerging needs of the government and its citizens . we provided many examples of where human capital shortfalls were eroding the ability of agencies — and threatening the ability of other agencies — to effectively , efficiently , and economically perform their missions . in short , strategic human capital management was a pervasive challenge across the federal government . we noted that while legislation and other actions have been put in place since 1990 to address most major management areas , human capital was the critical missing link in reforming and modernizing the federal government's management practices . our high - risk report pointed to actions that federal leaders and their agencies , the office of personnel management ( opm ) , the office of management and budget ( omb ) , and congress needed to take to address high - risk human capital issues . since then , a real and growing momentum for change has become evident . in august 2001 , president bush placed the strategic management of human capital at the top of the administration's management agenda . in october 2001 , omb notified agencies that they would be assessed against standards for success for each part of the president's management agenda ( pma ) , including the strategic management of human capital . the first agency assessment was made public in february 2002 as part of the president's proposed fiscal year 2003 budget . subsequent assessments were later released in june and september 2002 and in january 2003 , reporting on both the status and progress of agency efforts . in december 2001 , opm released a human capital scorecard to assist agencies in responding to the human capital standards for success in the pma . in march 2002 , we released a model of strategic human capital management , designed to help agency leaders determine how well they integrate human capital considerations into daily decision making and planning for the program results they seek to achieve .