split purchases . using data mining techniques , we identified card purchases that appeared to have been split into two or more transactions by cardholders to circumvent their single purchase limit . we requested documentation for a statistically determined sample of 280 potential split transactions totaling $4 million . of these 280 transactions , we determined that 49 transactions were actual splits . based on these results , we estimate that $17.1 million of the total fiscal year 2002 purchase card transactions were split transactions . for example , a cardholder with a single purchase limit of $2,500 purchased accommodations at 110 hotel rooms totaling $4,950 . when performing follow - up , the cardholder stated that va provides lodging accommodations for veterans receiving medical services such as radiation therapy , chemotherapy , and day surgery who live at least 150 miles from the medical facility . the cardholder created two separate purchase orders and had the vendor create two separate charges , one for $2,500 and the other for $2,450 , so that the purchase could be made . on the documentation provided , the cardholder stated the “purchase was split per the direction of the previous purchase card program administrator.” the cardholder also stated that currently , her purchase card at that facility is no longer used to pay hotel lodging for veterans . hotel payments are now disbursed electronically via va's financial service center . the purpose of the single purchase limit is to require that purchases above established limits be subject to additional controls to ensure that they are properly reviewed and approved before the agency obligates funds . by allowing these limits to be circumvented , va had less control over the obligation and expenditure of its resources . noncompliance with simplified acquisition procedures . improper source . we identified 8 purchases totaling $7,510 in the non - statistical sample that were subject to procurement from a mandatory source of supply but were obtained from other sources . various federal laws and regulations such as the javits - wagner - o'day act ( jwod ) require government cardholders to acquire certain products from designated sources . the jwod program is a mandatory source of supply for all federal entities . it generates job and training for americans who are blind or have severe disabilities by requiring that federal agencies purchase supplies and services furnished by nonprofit agencies , such as the national industries for the blind and the national institute for the severely handicapped . data mining . a cardholder made a purchase of $100 on august 24 , 2002 . citibank electronically sent charge information to vha for this purchase on october 8 , 2002 . according to the vha policy , the cardholder should have reconciled this charge within 17 days , or by october 25 , 2002 , of receiving the citibank charge information to meet the 95 percent reconciliation timeliness standard . however , the cardholder did not reconcile this charge until september 8 , 2003 , or 335 days later after receiving the citibank charge information . the purpose of cardholder reconciliation is to detect invalid transactions , including billing errors and unauthorized purchases .