mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . this report provides information on financial assurances for 11 western states . this bond review report is generated from blm's automated information system — lr 2000 . cleanup costs for these abandoned mines vary by type and size of the operation . to curb further growth in the number of abandoned hardrock mines , blm issued regulations , effective in 1981 , that required all mining operators to reclaim blm land disturbed by hardrock mining . in 2001 , blm began requiring all mining operators to provide financial assurances before beginning exploration or mining operations on blm land . these financial assurances must cover all of the estimated reclamation costs for a given hardrock operation . having adequate financial assurances to pay reclamation costs for blm land disturbed by hardrock operations is critical to ensuring that the land is reclaimed if the mining operators fail to do so . in june 2005 , we reported that some current hardrock operations on blm land do not have financial assurances , and some have no or outdated reclamation plans and / or cost estimates on which the financial assurances should be based . my testimony today focuses on the ( 1 ) royalties states currently charge on hardrock mining operations , ( 2 ) the number of abandoned hardrock mine sites and number of associated hazards , and ( 3 ) value and coverage of the financial assurances operators use to guarantee reclamation costs on lands managed by blm . some of these disturbed abandoned mine lands pose serious environmental and physical safety hazards . these hazards include environmental hazards such as toxic or acidic water that contaminates soil and groundwater or physical safety hazards such as open or concealed shafts , unstable or decayed mine structures , or explosives . however , this estimate includes a substantial number of non - hardrock mines , such as coal mines , and sites that are not on forest service land . at our request , the forest service provided a revised estimate of the number of abandoned hardrock mine sites on its lands , excluding coal or other non - hardrock sites . according to this estimate , the forest service may have about 29,000 abandoned hardrock mine sites on its lands . that said , we still have concerns about the accuracy of the forest service's recent estimate because it identified a large number of sites with “undetermined” ownership , and therefore these sites may not all be on forest service lands . blm has also acknowledged that its estimate of abandoned hardrock mine sites on its lands may not be accurate because it includes sites on its lands that are of unknown or mixed ownership ( state , private , and federal ) and a few coal sites . in addition , blm officials said that the agency's field offices used a variety of methods to identify sites in the early 1980s , and the extent and quality of these efforts varied greatly . for example , they estimated that only about 20 percent of blm land has been surveyed in arizona .