, business class . consequently , dod did not know , and was unable to provide us with data related to , the extent of its premium class travel . as mentioned previously , we were able to obtain such data through extensive analysis and extractions of dod travel card transactions from databases provided by the bank of america . dod travelers must follow a complicated array of premium class travel guidance . ( see app . i for further details of gsa and dod premium class travel regulations. ) for example , although ftr and dod travel regulations allow premium class travel when the scheduled flight time is in excess of 14 hours , these regulations prohibit use of premium class accommodation if the traveler has scheduled rest stops . in addition to the ftr and dod regulations , we also applied the criteria set forth in our internal control standards and sensitive payments guidelinesin evaluating the proper authorization of premium class travel . for example , while dod travel regulations and policies do not address the issue of subordinates authorizing their supervisors' premium class travel , our internal control standards consider such a policy to be flawed from an independence viewpoint . therefore , a premium class transaction that was approved by a subordinate would fail the controls over authorization test . using these guidelines , we estimated , based on our statistical sample , that an estimated 72 percent of the dod centrally billed travel transactions containing premium class travel for fiscal years 2001 and 2002 were not properly authorized and that an estimated 73 percent were not properly justified . as shown in table 2 , an estimated 64 percent of premium class transactions did not contain travel orders that specifically authorized the traveler to fly premium class , and thus the commercial travel office — a travel agency — should not have issued the premium class ticket . another 6 percent of premium class transactions were related to instances where the travel order authorizing business class was not signed ( left blank ) or the travel order authorizing first class was not signed by the service secretary or his or her designee , as required by dod regulations . if the travel order is not signed , or not signed by the individual designated to do so , dod has no assurance that the substantially higher cost of the premium class tickets was properly reviewed and represented an efficient use of government resources . we also estimated that 2 percent of the premium class transactions involved situations where a subordinate approved a superior's travel . although these limited instances do not necessarily indicate the existence of a significant systemic problem , allowing subordinates to approve their supervisors' premium class travel is synonymous with self - approval and reduces scrutiny of premium class requests . another internal control weakness identified in the statistical sample was that the justification used for premium class travel was not always provided , not accurate , and / or not complete enough to warrant the additional cost to the government .