dod and u.s . fish and wildlife service officials believe that dod's integrated natural resources management plans provide a holistic approach for natural resources management and for installations where an approved natural resources management plan is in place , the plan should be used as a substitute for critical habitat designations . for several years , the u.s . fish and wildlife service has been using these management plans in lieu of designating critical habitat on military lands . in testimonies in march and april 2003 , interior department officials said that a recent lawsuit that successfully challenged u.s . fish and wildlife service's failure to designate critical habitat casts doubt on the service's ability to substitute critical habitat designations on military lands with approved natural resources management plans . in that lawsuit , which involved a forest service plan , the court ruled that the u.s . the memorandum encourages federal land managers to work together and regularly discuss military and other land - use issues with nearby land managers and to consider the effects of their actions on lands managed by other federal agencies . in addition , the memorandum stipulates that the committee develop overarching policies and procedures to ensure that federal land managers implement this approach . also , it is expected that federal land managers would develop agency - specific policies and procedures for engaging other federal land managers on a routine basis and report to the committee annually on their progress . to date , the committee has not acted on this memorandum . according to a cognizant dod official , once the memorandum is signed , it is still unclear how the actions outlined in the memorandum would be implemented or affect agency participation in cooperative management efforts . while there are some examples of cooperative management efforts between dod and other federal land managers , most of these efforts have been undertaken in response to a crisis . such crises can include a marked decline of a species' population or land - use restrictions that may impact the federal land managers' ability to carry out their missions . experience has shown that when there is not a crisis , there is little incentive to cooperate . because of a marked decline in the number of sonoran pronghorn at the barry m. goldwater range , federal and other land managers were being pressured by the public to manage cooperatively in support of the species . as a result , regional land managers formed the barry m. goldwater range executive council in 1997 to discuss issues of concern , ensure consistent land management in the region , and identify and coordinate species recovery efforts . the council identifies and prioritizes pronghorn recovery efforts and has agreed to a number of initiatives to help preserve the species , such as establishing forage enhancement plots . as a result , restrictions on the training range have been minimized through dod and other federal land managers' efforts to cooperate on protective measures on nonmilitary lands . recently , the departments of defense , the interior , and agriculture reacted to the potential listing of the black - tailed prairie dog .