no operational impacts . very uncommon or uncommon very common or common don't know very uncommon or uncommon very common or common don't know very uncommon or uncommon very common or common don't know minor operational impacts , such as causing minimal delays . how long have you been in this role ? estimated average number of months 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) 3 . how long have you worked with the utility system ? estimated average number of months 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) 4 . does your military service own the infrastructure of this utility system ? ( check one. ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) a ) does your military service pay for the majority of the operation and maintenance of this utility system through appropriated sustainment , restoration and modernization ( srm ) funding ? ( check one. ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) . this section asks about some of the characteristics of this utility system . please answer only for utility infrastructure that is dod - owned . does the utility system perform the following functions ? ( check one per row. ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) 6 . when was this utility system originally installed ? ( check one. ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 7 . when was the most recent recapitalization project completed on this utility system , which replaced a significant part or parts of the system ? ( check one. ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) 8 . which of the following best describes the types of employees that conduct maintenance on this utility system , as of september 30 , 2015 ? ( check one. ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) 9 . how many full - time equivalent ( fte ) government employees operate and maintain this utility system , as of september 30 , 2015 ? ( check one. ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) 10 . for fiscal year 2015 , what was the size of this utility system in terms of the amount of commodity delivered on a typical day ? ( enter number. ) how many people use this utility system during a typical weekday ? ( check one. ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) . in which fiscal year ( fy ) were the facility condition index ratings for the infrastructure associated with this utility system last updated ? ( check one. ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) 13 .