referral . if settlement negotiations are unsuccessful , epa will determine whether enough evidence exists to refer the case to doj for potential litigation . doj then reviews the accumulated evidence and determines whether there is merit to file suit against the company . before filing the case in court , doj generally discusses the matter with the owner in a further attempt to settle . according to epa and doj officials , epa's investigations for nsr compliance , and subsequent enforcement actions , take a long time to conclude and involve substantial epa resources . in instances where epa's investigations have uncovered suspected violations , it can take years to litigate a case or bring it to conclusion through a settlement . specifically , the 22 settlements resulting from epa's enforcement initiative took , on average , 7 years to conclude . according to several industry representatives we interviewed , these efforts have also placed a large burden on owners and operators of generating units , given the amount of information required on past activities at the unit . available data , while not complete , suggest that a substantial number of generating units have not complied with requirements to obtain nsr permits . complete data on nsr compliance do not exist for two primary reasons . first , epa has not yet investigated all electricity generating units for compliance with requirements to obtain nsr permits . second , nsr compliance is determined at a point in time , and epa's interpretation of compliance has , in some cases , differed from that of federal courts . nonetheless , epa has investigated a majority of coal - fired generating units , and data from these investigations suggest that a substantial number of generating units have not complied . from our review of relevant documentation and epa - provided data , we identified two primary reasons why complete data on nsr compliance are not available . first , epa has not yet investigated all generating units for nsr compliance , and second , available data do not provide a complete picture of compliance . epa has investigated most — but not all — coal - fired generating units for compliance with nsr at least once . according to our review of epa - provided documents and data , epa has investigated 831 generating units at least once since it began its coal - fired power plant enforcement initiative . these 831 units represent about 81 percent of all coal - fired units that generated electricity in 2010 and about 24 percent of all fossil fuel - fired units ( those using coal , natural gas , or oil ) that produced electricity in 2010.coal - fired units — have not been investigated by epa . according to epa officials we interviewed , the agency has focused most of its nsr compliance efforts on large , coal - fired units because they produce dramatically higher levels of harmful air emissions . most natural gas units — as well as some smaller data on units investigated by epa are not conclusive because compliance is determined at a point in time ; therefore , subsequent changes to the unit could affect its future compliance with nsr .