consolidating the stockpile . under the b61-12 lep , nnsa and the air force plan to consolidate and replace four of the five variants of the b61 that were in the active stockpile at the time the b61 lep began . improving accuracy . the b61-12 is to be equipped with a new tail kit guidance assembly that enables it to be delivered with greater accuracy than the b61 bombs it replaces , which are equipped with parachutes . more specifically , according to air force officials and documents , the assembly will provide the b61-12 with a guided freefall capability while retaining a ballistic ( unguided ) delivery capability . the greater accuracy of the b61-12 is to enable the b61-12 to meet all the military requirements for which past versions of the b61 were designed . addressing other age - related issues . the b61-12 lep is to extend the service life of the b61 by at least 20 years , make field maintenance of the weapon easier for air force technicians , and provide modern security features . nnsa manages its b61-12 lep activities through a federal program office on kirtland air force base in albuquerque , new mexico , under the direction of the federal program manager . it manages the work of six government - owned , contractor - operated nnsa laboratories and sites that serve as design and production agencies for the lep . sandia national laboratories , also located on kirtland air force base , serves as the systems - level integrator for the overall weapon design . figure 2 shows the six sites participating in the b61-12 lep and their respective roles . the air force's responsibilities , in addition to managing the acquisition of the tail kit guidance assembly , include integrating the b61-12 with its delivery aircraft and the operational flight program software of these aircraft . the air force nuclear weapons center , also at kirtland air force base and under the direction of the air force lead project officer , manages technical integration and other lep - related tasks required to qualify , certify , and field the weapon . the delivery aircraft that carry the b61-12 are being designed to deliver the weapon in two different modes with two different systems , the second of which provides the enhanced capabilities offered by the new tail kit guidance assembly . system 1 aircraft will have an analog interface with the b61-12 that is designed to deliver the weapon in a ballistic mode , with the tail kit in a fixed position . system 2 aircraft will have a digital interface with the b61-12 , enabling the guided delivery capability afforded by the tail kit assembly . figure 3 illustrates the delivery aircraft for the b61-12 . nnsa substantially incorporated most of the cost estimating best practices identified by our past work when it developed the $7.6 billion program cost estimate for the b61-12 lep . our cost estimating guide identifies best practices for developing a high - quality , reliable cost estimate and identifies four characteristics of such an estimate: it is comprehensive , well - documented , accurate , and credible . these four characteristics and some of the best practices that underlie them are illustrated in figure 4 .