cwmd . cwmd does not have a formal mechanism , such as standard processes and procedures , for collecting and analyzing customer feedback . however , cwmd officials stated that certain informal mechanisms are used to collect customer feedback . for example , cwmd officials reported that the cwmd office of policy , plans , analysis , and requirements directorate communicate with customers and gather customer needs and requirements . in addition , as part of these informal mechanisms , internal and external reviews feedback may be obtained from eventual end users of the r&d technology such as operators from cbp , the u.s. coast guard , and the tsa , according to cwmd officials . cybersecurity and infrastructure security agency . the directorate does not have a formal mechanism for collecting and analyzing customer feedback . however , periodic control gates are used to gather customer feedback , according to directorate officials . the input received during these reviews is used to make corrective actions and manage r&d efforts as necessary . for example , according to directorate officials , they conduct a comprehensive review of r&d coordination efforts annually to determine what was effective and what can be improved . tsa . tsa does not have a formal mechanism for collecting and analyzing customer feedback . however , according to tsa officials , informal feedback may be obtained through review of the weekly reports and meetings regarding recent developments and project milestones . in addition , feedback may be obtained during quarterly program management reviews , third party project development , and certification testing . secret service . the secret service does not have a formal mechanism for collecting and analyzing customer feedback . however , according to secret service officials , informal feedback may be obtained in conjunction with other related internal review activities , including program management reviews . to formalize and improve customer feedback processes for r&d efforts , the national academy of sciences has stated that feedback from both r&d failures and successes may be communicated to stakeholders and used to modify future investments . research on leading practices in the area of customer satisfaction suggests that multiple approaches are needed to effectively listen to customers about their perceptions of quality service and needs . the research also points to a need for centrally integrating all customer feedback so that managers can achieve a better understanding of customers' perceptions and needs . also , we have previously reported that leading organizations combine quantitative and qualitative listening tools to obtain customer feedback and then centrally integrate the data in one location . such approaches include the following: customer satisfaction surveys . we previously reported that most major organizations use tools such as surveys to periodically capture customers' overall perceptions about their organization and to measure satisfaction with specific transactions soon after they occur . these surveys can be administered through the mail , by telephone , in person , or electronically . benchmark surveys . benchmark surveys gather perceptions of performance from the entire market . these surveys usually gather customer perceptions of performance about top competitors in an industry . this allows the company to examine its customer - perceived strengths and weaknesses in the overall marketplace .