uranium . however , both of the buildings still contained nuclear material when we visited the site in october 2000 , and site officials told us that they do not plan to provide material for conversion under the initiative for the next 2 to 3 years . we also met with officials at the state research institute , scientific industrial association ( also known as luch ) — one of the two sites that is converting highly enriched uranium to low enriched uranium . these officials told us that they are encountering difficulties in obtaining highly enriched uranium for conversion because russian sites believe they will receive more money and support from doe by retaining their weapons - usable nuclear material . as of december 2000 , the initiative resulted in the conversion of about 1.6 metric tons of highly enriched uranium . doe officials have also successfully negotiated verification measures with both of the sites that are converting the material to provide assurances that the sites actually convert highly enriched uranium to low enriched uranium that cannot be used for weapons . however , doe's initiative has not yet resulted in the closure of any buildings or sites ; therefore , doe officials are not sure of the extent to which the initiative will result in an overall cost savings to the program . furthermore , while material conversion is reducing the proliferation risk for the material converted to low enriched uranium , it is not reducing the risk of theft at the buildings and sites that are contributing the highly enriched uranium because those buildings and sites still contain weapons - usable nuclear material and still require nuclear security systems . given the lack of progress in closing buildings and sites , doe officials said that they are reevaluating whether to continue with material conversion . doe officials said that the initiative's primary goal is to reduce the risk of nuclear material theft and that they favor continuing the material conversion even if it does not result in the closure of any buildings or sites because the risk of theft for the material that is converted would still be eliminated . doe is improving the security of 192 metric tons of weapons - usable nuclear material in russia by installing modern security systems that detect , delay , and respond to attempts to steal nuclear material . these systems , while not as stringent as those installed in the united states , are designed to reduce the risk of nuclear material theft at russian sites . while russia and the united states have worked cooperatively to reduce the risk of theft in russia , russian officials' concerns about divulging national security information continue to impede doe's efforts to install systems for several hundred metric tons of nuclear material at sensitive russian sites . continued progress in reducing the risk of nuclear material theft in russia hinges on doe's ability to gain access to russia's sensitive sites and reach agreement with minatom to reduce the number of sites and buildings where nuclear material is located . achieving these two goals would improve security for large amounts of nuclear material and reduce program costs .