nstissp no . 12 , which focuses on systems used for u.s. national security information , aims to ensure that information assurance is factored into “the planning , design , launch , sustained operation , and deactivation of federal and commercial space systems used to collect , generate , process , store , display , or transmit and receive such information.” the policy also includes a provision addressing commercial imagery satellites that may be used to satisfy national security requirements during periods of conflict or war . the policy states that approved u.s. cryptographies shall be used to provide confidentiality for ( 1 ) command and control uplinks , ( 2 ) data links that transmit national security information between the ground and the space platforms , ( 3 ) cross - links between space platforms , and ( 4 ) downlinks from space platforms to mission ground or processing centers . a range of security techniques is available for protecting satellite systems: for example , using encryption on tt&c and data links , using robust parts on the satellites , and applying physical and cyber security controls at the ground stations . the application of these techniques varies across federal agencies and the private sector . commercial satellite service providers typically use some of these security techniques to meet most of their customers' security requirements , and they base their decisions on business objectives . generally , the military applies more stringent security techniques to their satellites than do civilian agencies or the private sector . table 4 provides an overview of security techniques by satellite system component . techniques to protect satellite links include the use of encryption , high - power radio frequency ( rf ) uplinks , spread spectrum communications , and a digital interface unique to each satellite . commercial satellite service providers , federal satellite owners and operators , and customers stated that they typically use at least one of these techniques . usually , only the military uses spread spectrum techniques . both tt&c and data links can be protected by encryption: generally , for tt&c links , the tracking and control uplink is encrypted , while the telemetry downlink is not . encryption is the transformation of ordinary data ( commonly referred to as plaintext ) into a code form ( ciphertext ) and back into plaintext , using a mathematical process called an algorithm . encryption can be used on data to ( 1 ) hide information content , ( 2 ) prevent undetected modification , and ( 3 ) prevent unauthorized use . different levels of encryption provide different levels of protection , including encryption approved by the national security agency ( nsa ) that is used for national security information . nstissp no . 12 requires approved u.s. cryptographies on tt&c and data links for u.s. space systems transmitting national security information . for satellite systems transmitting non – national - security information , there is no policy that security is required for the links , but satellite service providers and federal satellite owners and operators included in our review stated that they protect tracking and control uplinks with encryption . however , nsa officials stated that not all commercial providers' tracking and control uplinks are encrypted .