we do not agree . part of irs's justification for closing the recommendation is that irs uses cost - benefit return on investment analysis to evaluate future scenarios and to support funding requests for new initiatives in its annual budget submissions . such prospective return on investment information is useful for budgetary decision making , but our recommendation is for irs to develop outcome data on the actual results of its programs and activities . we have also previously recommended that irs ( 1 ) extend the use of return on investment in future budget proposals to include major enforcement programs and ( 2 ) develop return on investment data for its enforcement programs using actual revenue and full cost data and compare actual results to the projected return on investment data included in its budget request . our recommendations regarding development of outcome - oriented performance metrics remain open because , as noted above , irs does not develop such data for either funded initiatives or for ongoing enforcement programs and activities and it has not deployed outcome - oriented performance measures . irs also reported that return on investment information is but one tool that can be utilized to improve resource - allocation decision making , and it is not prudent to rely exclusively on return on investment as the sole determinant of resource allocation . as we have reported previously , we acknowledge that irs must consider other factors besides maximizing revenue collection and least - cost operations . the fairness of irs's implementation of the tax code and treatment of all taxpayers are important , and we are cognizant of the many factors , such as coverage , that are important considerations when making resource - allocation decisions . these factors , and the decisions irs makes about how to respond to them , have a significant effect on taxpayers , as well as on tax collections . however , using full cost and collection outcome - oriented performance metrics are also important to make optimum use of its available resources and to be able to credibly demonstrate it is doing so to congress and the public . for several years , irs has been developing full cost data on its programs and activities in response to a recommendation we made in 1999 . however , as we have reported in the past , irs's efforts have been slowed because irs cannot produce full cost information down to the program and activity levels directly from its cost accounting system , the integrated financial system ( ifs ) . irs has partially overcome this difficulty by developing the ability to manually combine cost data from ifs with personnel time - charge data from irs's various workload management systems and revenue data for enforcement programs to develop full cost ( and revenue ) information for selected programs . irs's lack of outcome - oriented performance metrics is inconsistent with federal financial management concepts as embodied in fasab's statement of federal financial accounting concepts no . 1 , objectives of federal financial reporting .