( recommendation 1 ) . one waiver request from a foreign government that would have been eligible to use the equipment standardization justification but cited the loss of sale justification in its waiver request . to select the remaining 19 waivers , we set a threshold for waivers approved where the value of the nonrecurring cost was over $20 million to capture high - value waivers , as these waivers represented 80 percent of the total value of approved waivers within our time frame for our sample selection . next , we selected at least 2 waiver requests from each fiscal year for the 6-year period included in our review and ensured a mix of waivers requested by various foreign governments , including those that had the highest value of waivers approved . we also ensured that the waivers reflected a mix of fms cases to be managed by the air force , army , and navy , which also review and provide input to dsca on the waiver requests . the fms program has been criticized for being slow and burdensome . to create efficiencies in the overall fms program , dod could take additional steps to streamline the fms waivers review process . we are making the following recommendation to dsca: the dsca director should continue to identify opportunities to streamline the review process for nonrecurring cost waiver requests . we provided a draft of this report to dod for comment . in its comments , reproduced in appendix ii , dod concurred with our recommendation . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated , as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and the secretary of defense . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or makm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . in this report , we addressed the ( 1 ) nonrecurring cost waivers approved by the department of defense ( dod ) from fiscal years 2012 through 2017 , ( 2 ) factors dod considers when reviewing waivers , and ( 3 ) efficiency of the waiver review process . to address all objectives , we analyzed data from the defense security cooperation agency ( dsca ) on requests made by foreign governments to waive nonrecurring costs on purchases of major defense equipment under the foreign military sales ( fms ) program . we reviewed data for fiscal years 2012 through 2017 , as these years provided the most complete data available to facilitate our analysis and gain insights about the waivers requested based on the three allowable justifications within the scope of our review — equipment standardization , loss of sale avoidance , and cost savings to the u.s. government .