id . however , “in such a case the agency must , at a minimum , let the standard be generally known so as to assure that it is being applied consistently and so as to avoid both the reality and appearance of arbitrary denial of benefits to potential beneficiaries.” morton v. ruiz , 415 u.s. 199 , 231 ( 1974 ) . in cases where the authorizing statute provides discretion , agencies are deemed to act within their authority as long as there is a rational basis for their decisions and their acts are not “arbitrary and capricious , an abuse of discretion , or otherwise not in accordance with law.” 5 u.s.c . § 706 ( 2 ) ( a ) ; see citizens to preserve overton park , inc. v. volpe , 401 u.s. 402 ( 1971 ) . under this standard , courts look to whether the agency's decision was “based on a consideration of the relevant factors and whether there has been a clear error in judgment.” overton park , 410 u.s. at 416 . although the factual inquiry is to be “searching and careful” and there must be a “thorough , probing , in - depth review,” the ultimate standard of review “is a narrow one.” id . see , eg , city of grand rapids v. richardson , 429 f. supp . mich. 1977 ) ( denying request to halt grant awards based on allegations of vague and unpublicized eligibility criteria ; while court was “tremendously sympathetic” to the losing applicant , “the court cannot say that the agency committed error , abused its discretion or acted arbitrarily or capriciously within the meaning of . overton park,” nor did agency violate “elementary fairness” ) . one other introductory point is relevant before reviewing the department's use of congestion pricing in awarding grants under the 9 programs . as a general rule , section 301 of title 23 of the u.s. code prohibits the imposition of tolls on all roads , highways , bridges , tunnels , and other transportation facilities constructed with federal funds . thus in our view , the department could not use any form of tolling , such as congestion pricing , as a selection factor for a grant — whether made under title 23 ( fhwa and research and innovative technology administration grants ) or title 49 ( federal transit administration grants ) — if the tolling that was the basis of the grant's “priority” was prohibited by section 301 . congress has enacted a number of exceptions to the tolling ban , however , and the department has confirmed that all of the tolling , specifically congestion pricing , activity supporting the grants at issue qualified under one or more of these exceptions . october 2008 dot letter at 15-16 . using congestion pricing as a priority selection factor , the department awarded grants under the bus and bus - related facilities capital investment grants ( bus and bus facilities ) program to all five urban partners — new york city , san francisco , minneapolis , seattle , and miami — and to san diego , which was not designated as an urban partner .