prototype . should be very close to form , fit , and function . probably includes the integration of many new components and realistic supporting elements / subsystems if needed to demonstrate full functionality of the subsystem . high - fidelity lab demonstration or limited / restricted flight demonstration for a relevant environment . integration of technology is well defined . prototype near or at planned operational system . represents a major step up from trl 6 , requiring the demonstration of an actual system prototype in an operational environment , such as in an aircraft , on a vehicle or in space . examples include testing the prototype in a test bed aircraft . prototype . should be form , fit and function integrated with other key supporting elements / subsystems to demonstrate full functionality of subsystem . flight demonstration in representative operational environment such as flying test bed or demonstrator aircraft . technology is well substantiated with test data . technology has been proven to work in its final form and under expected conditions . in almost all cases , this trl represents the end of true system development . examples include developmental test and evaluation of the system in its intended weapon system to determine if it meets design specifications . actual application of the technology in its final form and under mission conditions , such as those encountered in operational test and evaluation . in almost all cases , this is the end of the last “bug fixing” aspects of true system development . examples include using the system under operational mission conditions . pulling together essential cost , schedule , and technical information in a meaningful , coherent fashion is always a challenge for any program . without this information , management of the program will be fragmented , presenting a distorted view of program status . for several decades , dod has compared the value of work performed to the work's actual cost . this measurement is referred to as earned value management ( evm ) . earned value goes beyond the two - dimensional approach of comparing budgeted costs to actuals . it attempts to compare the value of work accomplished during a given period with the work scheduled for that period . by using the value of completed work as a basis for estimating the cost and time needed to complete the program , the earned value concept should alert program managers to potential problems early in the program . in 1996 , in response to acquisition reform initiatives , dod reemphasized the importance of earned value in program management and adopted 32 criteria for evaluating the quality of management systems . these 32 criteria are organized into 5 basic categories: organization , planning and budgeting , accounting considerations , analysis and management reports , and revisions and data maintenance . the 32 criteria are listed in table 1 .