epa did not have any comments . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , dot , epa , and other interested parties . the report also is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at flemings@gao.gov or ( 202 ) 512-2834 . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . dot did comment on two of the recommendations in our draft report . first , in response to our recommendation that fmcsa modify its training system , fmcsa officials noted that fmcsa uses a dot - mandated training management system to track grants management training , and that they do not have control over the features or functionality of this system . as such , we modified the language in our report to recommend that fmcsa work with appropriate individuals at dot to modify the training system . second , our draft recommendation that fmcsa create grants management goals and objectives and report to congress on their progress in meeting them stated that fmcsa should report to congress annually . in response , fmcsa officials noted that the agency already updates congress on its programs regularly and that an annual report on its grants management goals would be administratively burdensome . we agreed that fmcsa could keep congress informed without submitting a separate annual report , and thus removed the reference to “annually” from our recommendation . we also provided a copy of our draft report to epa for review and comment . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . in order to address the extent to which , prior to fiscal year 2010 , the federal motor carrier safety administration's ( fmcsa ) grant programs had internal controls in place that reduce the risk of grant award irregularities , we reviewed gao's standards for internal control in the federal government to determine internal control standards relevant to the management of grant programs . in addition , we reviewed gao's prior work on fmcsa's commercial vehicle information systems and networks ( cvisn ) grant program to determine internal control weaknesses that contributed to financial irregularities with cvisn grant awards . we interviewed the grant program manager for each program other than cvisn prior to fiscal year 2010 to discuss how each grant program was managed at that time and the internal controls that were in place over the grant programs . we did not include cvisn in this review given the work we had already conducted on that grant program . we collected and analyzed relevant documentation , such as grant policy memos , related to internal controls over grants . we also interviewed fmcsa headquarters officials , including the chief financial officer ( cfo ) , regarding internal controls . we also interviewed fmcsa officials and fmcsa grant recipients from four states — alabama , alaska , arizona , and wisconsin .