a website survey . cms employs a website customer satisfaction survey that measures and collects performance data on users' experiences . for example , the survey asks users to rate the layout of plan finder and the extent to which the website's design allows them to find plan information easily . it also asks about the usefulness of the resources that are available on the website to help users understand how to use plan finder to compare part d plans . cms has tracked several measures that are rated through these surveys , including measures related to how content is organized and the extent to which the website streamlines the plan comparison process . website user data . cms tracks plan finder website user data , such as the number of visitors to the website and the amount of time that users spend on specific webpages , to gain insight into users' experiences and website navigation patterns . for example , if users are spending a long time on a specific plan finder webpage , it may indicate that they are having a hard time understanding the information that is being presented on the page , according to a cms official . in addition , cms officials said that they can also use this data to measure the number of users that work their way through plan finder to obtain information on part d plan options available to them . for those that do not fully work their way through plan finder to obtain information on available plans , cms tracks user data on when they exited the website . cms has implemented updates to the website on a quarterly basis and , according to cms officials , has used feedback on plan finder to address identified issues and improve the website's usability . for example , cms developed and added a “frequently asked questions” webpage to the website in 2013 to help beneficiaries with frequently encountered issues . several of the questions explain how and why cost - sharing can vary under different circumstances . to help beneficiaries better understand plans' pharmacy networks , cms added an indicator that identifies whether the pharmacies they entered into plan finder are in - network , in - network preferred , or out - of - network in the plans that are available to them . in addition , cms has added filters to help beneficiaries compare part d plans and select plans that meet their needs . for example , the filters allow beneficiaries to look only at plans that cover all of the drugs they take , or plans that have limited premiums or deductibles . although cms has obtained feedback on plan finder , incorporating such feedback and addressing usability issues can present challenges . one cms official we spoke with said that incorporating the feedback that cms receives can sometimes be difficult since they try to balance the need to explain complex elements of the part d benefit , while also keeping the website streamlined . for example , the official noted that providing too much information on the website can make it more difficult for beneficiaries to identify needed information .