we recommended that epa take further action to address these needs . in response to our recommendations , in 1999 , epa hired the u.s. army corps of engineers — an agency with considerable cost - estimating and contract management expertise — to conduct a comprehensive review of epa's cost - estimating processes . the corps made a number of recommendations to epa in its review , including providing better training and estimating tools , such as access to data on the actual costs of cleanup work already contracted . the corps also recommended that epa reinforce its commitment to controlling costs , consolidate its various cost guidance documents , and better document the basis for any significant variances in the original estimates , awarded prices , and actual costs incurred . in light of the corps' and our findings and recommendations , we initiated work to determine ( 1 ) what initiatives epa has taken in response to the two reviews and ( 2 ) what means epa will use to determine whether its initiatives have improved the quality and usefulness of its estimates . to respond to these objectives , we reviewed the corps' and our previous documented findings and recommendations to epa ; discussed current epa initiatives to improve cost estimates with superfund program managers and epa's office of acquisition management , which is responsible for the agency's contracting practices ; reviewed documentation on epa's initiatives ; and discussed the initiatives with the corps' officials who had reviewed epa's estimating processes and had interviewed contracting officials from three epa regions with large cleanup workloads . we did not review any individual estimates because these had been incorporated into the corps' comprehensive review . we conducted our review from august 2000 through february 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . because of their experience with the technical aspects of cleanups , epa regional work assignment managers prepare detailed cost estimates for all new work on superfund projects before the agency contracts for that work . these estimates should specify the scope of the work assignment ( such as conducting a cleanup feasibility study ) , the required hours , and the expected cost of each major activity for that assignment . regional contract officers then use these estimates to negotiate with contractors the best price that epa can award for each work assignment , documenting any significant differences between the estimate and the awarded price . the agency also uses this process to negotiate any changes in the scope of a work assignment as the cleanup proceeds that may lead to discrepancies between the original awarded price and the final price of the contracted work . the work assignment manager uses the estimate and any revisions to develop the work plan and to manage the contractor's work . when we last examined epa's cost estimates in april 1999 , we reported that 11 ( or about 31 percent ) of the 35 estimates we reviewed fell substantially below the awarded price — an indication that the estimates may be of poor quality , according to the agency's financial manager's financial integrity act report .