iv. ) in addition to the budget authority for the csrees wood utilization research centers , we obtained expenditure data for the wood utilization research and product development activities conducted under the authority of the mcintyre – stennis act , the hatch act , the national research initiative , the small business innovation research grants , and other small grants , which can fund wood utilization research and product development . we obtained specific expenditure amounts for these activities for fiscal year 2004 from the cris database system . fiscal year 2005 data were not available for these csrees activities . for the forest service , we obtained information on budget authority from an internal agency review of research stations and research work units . we used this information to provide an overview of the changes in budget authority for wood utilization research and product development for fiscal years 1995 through 2005 . see appendix iv for the budget authority for each research work unit over this period . in addition , we interviewed forest service budget officials in headquarters , the forest products laboratory , and the state and private forestry program on budget and other funding issues , such as the allocation of funds and setting of research funding priorities . we concluded that the data provided in the agency survey were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review . we also reviewed and summarized information from forest service documents on the number of scientists and research support staff at the forest service — the only agency that has full - time federal employees who directly conduct wood utilization research and product development activities . we reported the number of full - time equivalent ( fte ) staff at each of the 27 research work units that conducted research on wood utilization and product development for fiscal years 1995 through 2005 . ( see app . iv. ) to collect funding information from the remaining agencies , we asked budget and program officials for budget authority or expenditure information for fiscal years 2004 and 2005 for wood utilization research and product development . specifically , the national science foundation provided us with expenditure information from its project reports summary and search and awards databases because that is the only way it could identify the amounts devoted to wood utilization research and product development . we interviewed knowledgeable agency officials regarding the reliability of these data . we used the data for descriptive purposes only , and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for these purposes . the funding for defense's army , corps of engineers , and office of naval research ; and the department of homeland security's coast guard were congressional committee - directed funds or budget authority . however , for the office of naval research and the coast guard , we reported expenditures because those amounts were applicable to our time period — fiscal years 2004 and 2005 . to respond to objective three — how the federal government transfers technologies and products from its wood utilization research and product development activities to industry — we obtained and reviewed relevant legislation and policies and procedures on federal technology transfer activities .