an agency does not face any costs for offering early outs . for agencies to use these authorities , the office of personnel management ( opm ) must first review agency plans for using these tools and assure that the plans comply with certain legislative requirements . omb assures that the agency has funding for the buyout program and meets the legislative requirements . agencies must have opm approval before using buyout and early - out authorities and are required to provide opm with interim and final reports on their use . the date on which the agency expects to effect the workforce reshaping . the time period during which the agency plans to offer voluntary early retirement . according to an opm reviewing official , the opm human capital officer assigned to review a particular agency provides the first level of examination . the review process then includes additional management reviews and the final approval by the opm director . through this process , opm checks to see whether all legislative and regulatory requirements are met , and that these criteria are being consistently applied across all agencies' requests for buyout and early - out authority . in some cases , opm had agencies revise their plans until they met opm's standards , according to an opm review official . for example , opm officials reported they received an agency request that involved four different components or work units . the justifications submitted for each component were in various states of readiness and covered different time periods . after consultation with opm reviewing officials , the agency elected to withdraw the request and resubmit them as separate more - targeted requests . in its first resubmission , the agency provided a request dealing with reshaping , business process reengineering , and downsizing of one of the four components , thus improving the linkage to its business strategy . this request received omb concurrence and was approved by opm . over the 3-year period , opm granted a total of 491 requests from the 51 agencies for buyout , early - out , or both authorities . they believed that buyout and early - out programs should generally provide career guidance , counseling , and outplacement assistance to employees who may be displaced . treasury's office of the comptroller of the currency , when offering a buyout and early - out program , made a wide variety of other services available to employees . for example , in those offices to be closed treasury solicited the affected employees' relocation preferences and tried to accommodate them to the extent possible . employees who were interested in other positions and locations could visit the new locations at the agency's expense . in addition , the agency paid relocation bonuses to some affected employees and instituted a “safe landing” program that consisted of a support network matching affected employees with “buddies” who provided encouragement to those employees and served as sounding boards for them , training and discussion forums that focused on career and stress management , and technical training to prepare for other job opportunities .