v . this appendix provides information on the key aspects of our analysis of the competitive response of general hospitals to specialty hospitals . first , it describes the sample selection process . second , it discusses the survey used to collect data from a sample of general hospitals and the process of fielding the survey . third , it explains the differences between local and regional markets . fourth , it describes the methodology used to analyze survey data . finally , it addresses issues related to data reliability and limitations . we selected two groups of general hospitals for this analysis — the sample and a comparison sample . the sample consisted of general hospitals in hospital referral regions ( hrr ) — which we refer to in this report as regional health care markets — with a specialty hospital that opened since the start of 1998 . the comparison sample consisted of general hospitals in regional health care markets without any specialty hospitals . in constructing the comparison sample , we also excluded regional health care markets with specialty hospitals that did not have physician owners or investors . regional markets capable of meeting the criteria for the sample were identified by compiling a current list of specialty hospitals that opened from 1998 through 2005 . we excluded markets in states where certificate of need ( con ) laws existed , because specialty hospitals are located primarily in non - con states . we identified 32 unique regional markets containing 53 specialty hospitals that met these criteria . ( see table 10. ) we selected markets for the comparison sample on the basis of their similarity to the markets used for the sample , except for the presence of a specialty hospital . we excluded markets from the comparison sample if they contained a specialty hospital , regardless of ownership or date of opening . we used data from dap pertaining to market characteristics to ensure that markets included in the comparison sample were similar to markets in the sample . we excluded markets from the comparison sample if any one of their values for seven market characteristics — overall population , medicare population , average number of inpatient beds , population to beds ratio , physician specialists to total physicians ratio , average number of surgical discharges , and the herfindahl - hirschman index — fell outside the range of values for markets in the sample . the application of these criteria resulted in a sample that consisted of 78 unique regional markets . the centers for medicare & medicaid services' ( cms ) 2005 provider of services ( pos ) file was used to identify general hospitals located in the markets selected for the sample and the comparison sample , and these hospitals were subject to several exclusions . general hospitals that were major teaching hospitals or had fewer than five cardiac , orthopedic , or surgical discharges in 2004 , were excluded from both samples because the presence of a specialty hospital may not affect these hospitals in the same manner it would affect other types of general hospitals .