( see fig . about a third of nls users continued to receive cassettes through the mail , although this format is being phased out . downloading from the internet was less popular than receiving materials through the mail , with only about 10 percent of nls users downloading audio materials through nls's online braille and audio reading download ( bard ) system . bard enables eligible users to search for and select audio files for immediate download rather than wait to receive materials through the mail . these files may be transferred to a digital cartridge and played on nls's specialized device , or downloaded directly to and played on a variety of commercially available devices , such as smartphones . a much smaller proportion of nls users chose to receive braille materials , whether in hard copy or downloaded from bard and read on a refreshable braille device that converts an electronic text file into braille characters . over the last 5 years , the majority of materials circulated to nls users each year have been either digital cartridges or cassettes , although the number of items downloaded through bard has been gradually increasing ( see fig . the number of digital cartridges has increased substantially since they were introduced in 2009 , while the number of cassettes has declined as they are phased out . meanwhile , the number of audio files downloaded annually from bard more than doubled between fiscal years 2010 and 2014 . among braille materials , there has been a shift away from hard copy to electronic braille . most users' preference for receiving materials through the mail and playing them on an nls - provided specialized audio device appears to be linked to their level of comfort with technology and their access to the internet , according to interviews and survey data . nls designed the digital cartridges and players that provide users with audio books and magazines to be easy to see and handle for those with visual and other disabilities . the program's mainly older users feel comfortable with nls's specialized audio player because it is user friendly , according to staff at all 8 network libraries we contacted . for example , librarians in one state said many users like nls's player because it is durable and easy to use , and many — especially those who lost their vision later in life — do not feel as comfortable using commercially available audio devices . at the same time , younger nls users — a minority of the customer base — may prefer to use other devices , such as smartphones , to access nls audio materials , according to staff we spoke with at 6 of the 8 network libraries . staff in one library said younger users tend to be more sophisticated in their use of technology , and prefer to use smaller , mainstream devices rather than the nls player . ( see fig . 6 for an image of nls's standard and advanced players and the commercial audio device which as of august 2015 had more registered nls users than any other commercially available device. ) furthermore , some users lack internet access or do not feel comfortable downloading files from the internet .