findings . we found that , in general , mortgages with higher ltv ratios ( smaller down payments ) and lower credit scores were riskier than mortgages with lower ltv ratios and higher credit scores . according to a private mortgage insurer testifying before a congressional committee , this approach has the benefit of minimizing impacts on lenders and the potential to be implemented more quickly than a coinsurance arrangement . the representative noted that fha should have the flexibility to selectively test such arrangements . risk sharing could affect taxpayers' risk , according to industry observers . it could protect the taxpayer , not only because private partners would assume some of the risk but also because the quality of the underwriting might improve because private partners would want to minimize the likelihood of loss . however , to the extent that fha would offer both full mortgage insurance and engage in risk sharing , it could be subject to adverse selection . that is , private partners could seek relatively low - risk borrowers for the shared - risk product , leaving fha with the riskiest borrowers . one report notes that under risk - sharing agreements , private partners may act in other ways that are contrary to fha's interest . for example , according to this report , if fha takes only a catastrophic loss position , the partner may have little incentive to minimize fha's losses once the partner's maximum exposure level has been reached . sharing risk on a pro rata basis , starting with the first dollar of loss and ending with the last dollar of loss , creates stronger incentives for fha's risk - sharing partners to use sound underwriting terms and service their loans diligently . we have found that this is particularly true when there is a more equal division of risk . if fha agrees to assume the first portion of loss on default , the partner may not feel the need to protect against a high incidence of claims as long as the loss severity is not expected to reach its maximum level of exposure . the partner would also need to be sufficiently capitalized or otherwise protected to withstand its portion of the loss . also , one observer warned that fha would be at risk because it lacked the capacity to analyze risk - sharing proposals , which could place it in a weak position with partners . consistent with this , fha officials told us that fha would need to increase its staff and analytic capacity to safely implement risk - sharing agreements . risk sharing would also affect the role that ginnie mae plays in guaranteeing timely payment of principal and interest on mortgage - backed securities . that is , like reducing fha's loan guarantee coverage below 100 percent , risk sharing changes the nature of ginnie mae's exposure to counterparty risk , according to observers . ginnie mae would need to undertake assessment of a new class of counterparties — the private partner providing the insurance coverage — while continuing to assess the counterparty risk of its issuers , one observer noted .