federal insurance for property and crops . the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) and the federal crop insurance corporation are sources of federal fiscal exposure due , in part , to the vulnerability of insured property and crops to climate change . these programs provide coverage where private markets for insurance do not exist , typically because the risk associated with the property or crops is too great to privately insure at a cost that buyers are willing to accept . from 2013 to 2017 , losses paid under nfip and the federal crop insurance program totaled $51.3 billion . federal flood and crop insurance programs were not designed to generate sufficient funds to fully cover all losses and expenses , which means the programs need budget authority from congress to operate . nfip , for example , was about $21 billion in debt to the department of the treasury as of april 2019 . further , the congressional budget office estimated in may 2019 that federal crop insurance would cost the federal government an average of about $8 billion annually from 2019 through 2029 . operation and management of federal property and lands . the federal government owns and operates hundreds of thousands of facilities and manages millions of acres of land that could be affected by a changing climate and represent a significant federal fiscal exposure . for example , the department of defense ( dod ) owns and operates domestic and overseas infrastructure with an estimated replacement value of about $1 trillion . in addition , the national climate assessment provides high - level information on what is known about observed and projected climate risks in the united states . however , no federal entity looks holistically at the federal government's investments to strategically prioritize projects to ensure that they address the nation's most significant climate risks and provide the highest net benefits relative to other potential projects . further , we reported in september 2017 that the federal government had not undertaken strategic government - wide planning to manage significant climate risks before they become fiscal exposures . as an initial step in managing climate risks , most of the experts we interviewed for the september 2017 report told us that federal decision makers should prioritize risk management efforts on significant climate risks that create the greatest fiscal exposure . moreover , several stakeholders told us that the federal government's emphasis has been on funding postdisaster efforts instead of funding resilience projects before a disaster occurs . this is consistent with findings from our july 2015 report that most federal funding for hazard mitigation is only available after a disaster . in addition , according to fema officials , some of the agency's hazard mitigation programs are designed to empower state and local governments to determine their mitigation funding priorities , and these state and local priorities may or may not align with the federal interest . finally , although we did not identify a government - wide strategic approach specifically for investing in climate resilience projects , the national mitigation investment strategy — a national effort under way to plan for predisaster resilience investments — represents a potential cross - agency vehicle for climate resilience planning .