navy . the navy user representative stated that there is no “one - size - fits - all” answer , that information regarding the effects would be classified , and that the navy would continue to operate even if it could not use gps , although missions might take longer to accomplish and require additional assets . civil agency officials stated that if the constellation performance fell below the committed level of service , their operations would be affected ; however , the effects vary by agency . for instance , federal aviation administration ( faa ) officials stated that a constellation smaller than the committed 24 satellites could result in flight delays and increased reliance on legacy ground - based navigation and surveillance systems . likewise , u.s. coast guard officials stated that they could revert back to older methods of navigation if gps service were diminished , but there would be a loss of efficiency . on the other hand , the national institute of standards and technology , within the department of commerce , relies on gps for timing data rather than navigation data and may be less sensitive to decreases in the number of gps satellites . furthermore , some civil agencies rely on both gps and augmentation systems . for example , faa augmentation systems increase the integrity of gps for aviation purposes . however , officials from a few civil agencies explained that the augmentation systems cannot compensate for a drop in the size of the gps constellation below the committed level . gps modernization efforts across the space , ground control , and user equipment segments introduce new capabilities , such as improved resistance to jamming and greater accuracy . for most of these new capabilities , all three segments need to be in place in order for users to benefit from the new capability . however , the development of gps ground control systems has experienced years of delay and in some cases will delay the delivery of new capabilities to users . in addition , although the air force has taken steps to enable quicker procurement of military gps user equipment , there are significant challenges to these systems' implementation . we previously reported that the air force had not been fully successful in synchronizing the acquisition and development of the next generation of gps satellites with the ground control system , thereby delaying the ability of military and civil users to utilize new gps satellite capabilities . the delay was due to funding shifts that were made to resolve gps iif satellite development problems . since our last report , we found that the air force has faced technical problems and continued to experience delays in upgrading the capabilities of the current ground control system and that the delivery date of the follow - on ground system has further slipped . table 2 highlights specific new capabilities for which there have been significant delays in the ground segments and additional delays that have occurred since last year's review . since our 2009 report , the contract for the newest ground system development effort — known as ocx — was awarded in february 2010 , about 10 months later than the original contract award date was to occur .