ii , figs . ( see app . consequently , va has not yet reported its performance against this goal . va has set a national goal to rehabilitate 9,000 veterans to in addition , the vocational rehabilitation program has established a working group to develop new national performance measures . according to va officials , the new measures will focus on the middle of the rehabilitation process , because a veteran can be in the program from 1 to 6 years , with an average of 4 years . the measures that already exist focus on the front - end ( eg , timeliness of services ) and back - end ( eg , outcomes ) . from program years 2007 to 2009 , the wia adult and es programs saw declines in measures for the percentage of participants who entered employment and the percentage who retained their employment for 6 months . these measures have generally rebounded slightly in 2010 , although they have generally not regained levels attained prior to the recent recession . since 2006 , veterans have had slightly lower entered employment outcomes than those for all participants using the es program . in the wia adult program , veterans' employment and retention outcomes have been slightly lower than outcomes for all participants since 2009 . further , between 2006 and 2010 , employment and retention outcomes were similar but slightly lower for veterans who worked with disabled veterans' outreach and employment representative program staff , in comparison with outcomes for veterans in the wia adult program . according to labor officials , some of these differences in outcomes may be explained by differences in characteristics of the populations served . they noted that veteran participants in the wia adult program are more likely to be over the age of 55 than nonveteran participants , and historically , older workers have achieved lower outcomes in both the wia adult and es programs . in addition , labor officials stated that because the disabled veterans' outreach and employment representative programs serve veterans who face barriers to employment , their outcomes are likely to be lower than outcomes for veterans who are job - ready and nonveterans served by the wia adult or es programs . while labor reports some data on veterans' program outcomes , it does not report the extent to which each of these programs is achieving its established performance goals . labor provides congress an annual veterans' program report that provides certain performance information , such as the number of disabled and recently separated veterans who received intensive services . for this annual report , however , labor is not required to report program outcomes in relation to performance goals . the handbook has not been updated since 2008 . labor and va have provided staff with training on the handbook and formed a group to monitor coordination . labor and va conducted a national training webinar based on the interagency handbook for both agencies' staff after it was published , have made virtual trainings available since 2009 , and provided technical assistance to staff . to monitor the coordination activities outlined in the interagency handbook , labor and va created a joint work group .