pub . the acv program is still relatively early in the acquisition process . as a result , we were unable to review all of the elements in the mandate since the acv program has not yet progressed to those stages in the acquisition process . acquisition best practices based on our extensive body of work in that area and department of defense ( dod ) guidance , and used this information to analyze the proposed acv acquisition approach and acquisition activities to date . we also reviewed our previous work on the acv and efv programs . in addition , we interviewed program and agency officials from the usmc's advanced amphibious assault program office and combat development command , the office of the deputy assistant secretary of the navy for expeditionary programs and logistics management , and the office of the secretary of defense , cost assessment and program evaluation . we conducted this performance audit from august 2014 to april 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . according to usmc officials , the aav has become increasingly difficult to operate , maintain , and sustain . as weapons technology and threat capabilities have evolved over the past four decades , the aav is viewed as having capability limitations in the areas of water speed and land mobility , lethality , protection , and network capability . the aav is a self - deployed tracked ( non - wheeled ) vehicle with three variants , each describing its intended function — personnel , command , and recovery . the aav has a water speed of approximately six knots , and needs to be deployed from within 7.4 nautical miles of the shore . this factor may represent a significant survivability issue not only for the vehicle's occupants , but also for naval amphibious forces that must move closer to potential threats on shore to support the vehicle . over time , emerging threats — such as next generation improvised explosive devices — have changed the performance requirements for a vehicle that moves from ship to shore . according to dod , the need to modernize usmc's capability of transitioning from ship to shore is essential . in response to the need for new and better capabilities , the usmc began development of the efv in 2000 . we reported on the efv program in 2006 and 2010 . the efv was to travel at higher water speeds — around 20 knots — which would have allowed transporting ships to launch the efv further from shore than the aavs it was to replace . however , following the expenditure of $3.7 billion between fiscal years 1995 and 2011 and a 2007 breach of a statutory cost thresholdcanceled by dod due to affordability concerns . dod authorized the usmc to seek a new solution , emphasizing the need for cost - effectiveness and requiring the establishment of cost targets .