woody biomass also can be used for fuel . various entities , including power plants , schools , pulp and paper mills , and others , burn woody biomass in boilers to turn water into steam , which can be used to make electricity , heat buildings , or provide heat for industrial processes . federal , state , and local governments , as well as private organizations , are working to expand the use of woody biomass . recent federal legislation contains provisions for woody biomass research and financial assistance . for example , the consolidated appropriations act for fiscal year 2005 made up to $5 million in appropriations available for grants to create incentives for increased use of woody biomass from national forest lands . in response , the forest service awarded $4.4 million in such grants in fiscal year 2005 . state and local governments also are encouraging the material's use through grants , research , and technical assistance , while private corporations are researching new ways to use woody biomass , often in partnership with government and universities . the users in our review cited several factors contributing to their use of woody biomass . woody biomass can be put to various uses . widespread thinning efforts will be costly to the federal government . to help defray these costs , and to enhance rural employment and economic development , the government is promoting a market for woody biomass . however , as we have reported in the past , increasing the use of the material faces several obstacles . officials in federal agencies promoting woody biomass use — including the departments of agriculture , energy , and the interior — told us that its use is hampered by the high costs of harvesting and transporting it and the difficulty in obtaining a reliable supply in some areas . nevertheless , some businesses and government entities are using woody biomass for various purposes , including heating buildings , making lumber , and generating electricity . my testimony today summarizes the findings of our report being released today that discusses factors facilitating woody biomass use among selected users , the challenges these users faced in using the material , and the insights these users' experiences may have for the federal government as it seeks to promote greater use of woody biomass . two users — the montana school district and the coal - fired power plant in colorado — started using woody biomass in part because of concerns about forest health and the need to reduce hazardous fuels in forest land . they hoped that by providing a market for woody biomass , they could help stimulate thinning efforts . another user , a vermont power plant , began using woody biomass because of air - quality concerns . according to plant officials , the utilities that funded it were concerned about air quality and as a result chose to build a plant fired by wood instead of coal because wood emits lower amounts of pollutants .