gsa directs and manages the mas program . macs and gwacs are also interagency contracts . government buyers usually pay a fee for using other agencies' gwacs , macs , and schedule contracts . these fees are usually a percentage of the value of the procurement , which are paid to the sponsoring agency and are expected to cover the costs of administering the contract . along with using interagency contracts to leverage their buying power , a number of large departments — dod and dhs in particular — are turning to enterprisewide contracts as well to acquire goods and services . enterprisewide contracts are similar to interagency contracts in that they can leverage the purchasing power of the federal agency but generally do not allow purchases from the contract outside of the original acquiring activity . enterprisewide contracting programs can be used to reduce contracting administrative overhead , provide information on agency spending , support strategic sourcing initiatives , and avoid the fees charged for using interagency contracts . all of these contracts are indefinite delivery / indefinite quantity ( id / iq ) contracts . id / iq contracts are established to buy goods and services when the exact times and exact quantities of future deliveries are not known at the time of award . in fiscal year 2008 , federal agencies spent at least $60 billion through gwacs , macs , the mas program , and enterprisewide contracts to buy goods and services to support their operations: about $46.8 billion was spent on the mas program ; about $5.3 billion was spent on gwacs ; at least $2.5 billion was spent on macs although the actual amount could be much higher ; and at least $4.8 billion was spent on the three enterprisewide contracts we reviewed , although , like macs , the actual amount spent on all enterprisewide contracts could be higher . sales under the mas program have been relatively flat in recent years , and obligations under gwacs have declined slightly in recent years . to provide a more coordinated approach in awarding macs and enterprisewide contracts , we recommended that ofpp take steps to establish a policy and procedural framework in conjunction with agencies for establishing , approving , and reporting on new macs and enterprisewide contracts on an ongoing basis . the framework should stress the need for a consistent approach to leveraging governmentwide buying power while allowing agencies to continue to use their statutory authorities for buying goods and services . recent legislation and ofpp initiatives are expected to strengthen oversight and management of macs , but these initiatives do not address enterprisewide contracts . the 2009 national defense authorization act required , 1 year after its enactment , that the far be amended to require that any mac entered into by an executive agency after the amendment's effective date be supported by a business case analysis . the business case is to include an analysis of all direct and indirect costs to the federal government of awarding and administering a contract and the impact it would have on the ability of the federal government to leverage its buying power .