all 24 agencies responded to our survey . we did not verify the accuracy of the agencies' responses ; however , we reviewed supporting documentation that the agencies provided to validate their responses . we contacted agency officials when necessary for follow - up . although this was not a sample survey and , therefore , there were no sampling errors , conducting any survey may introduce errors — commonly referred to as nonsampling errors . this allows administrators to determine where each device is connected . however , with a wireless network , pinpointing a wireless - enabled device's location can be difficult because the device is mobile . as a result , it can be harder for information security officials to locate unauthorized devices and eliminate the risks they pose . unauthorized wireless networks create two main challenges for agencies' information security . the first challenge comes from legitimate agency organizations , employees , or contractors seeking to benefit from the flexibility of wireless networks . because of the affordability and availability of wireless network equipment , well - meaning individuals might install unauthorized wireless - enabled devices or wireless access points into an agency's traditional wired network environment without the approval of the agency's chief information officer . as a result , agency information security officials might be unaware that wireless networks are being used and would therefore be unable to take the appropriate mitigating actions — such as protecting against potential wireless attacks or preventing signal leakage . the second challenge stems from the increasing availability and integration of wireless technology into products such as laptops . for example , agencies that are not seeking to install a wireless network may find that as they purchase new equipment they are buying wireless - enabled devices . in some instances , these devices are not available without wireless technology . as a result , an agency may inadvertently procure wireless network components that could pose risks to its enterprise . it is critical that agencies understand whether or not the equipment they are procuring is wireless - enabled and determine how they will mitigate the risks it can pose to their information and systems . controls such as policies , practices , and tools can help to mitigate wireless network security challenges that federal agencies face . these controls include developing comprehensive policies that govern the implementation and use of wireless networks , defining configuration requirements that provide guidance on the deployment of available security tools , establishing comprehensive monitoring programs that help to ensure that wireless networks are operating securely , and training employees and contractors effectively in an agency's wireless policies . developing comprehensive information security policies that address the security of wireless networks can help agencies mitigate risks . fisma recognizes that development of policies and procedures is essential to cost - effectively reducing the risks associated with information technology to an acceptable level . nist specifies 13 elements that should be addressed in a policy for securing wireless networks . these elements can be broadly organized into the following three categories: ( 1 ) authorized use , ( 2 ) identification of requirements , and ( 3 ) security controls .