under this statute , which is codified at 8 u.s.c . § 1324 , about 2,400 criminal defendants were convicted in federal district courts in fiscal year 2004 . according to federal officials we interviewed , most alien - smuggling prosecutions stem from reactive or interdiction - type cases at the border , wherein in - depth investigations to follow a money trail are not warranted . however , during our field visits in september 2004 to phoenix and houston , we asked u.s. attorney's office officials for their observations regarding whether there has been an increasing emphasis on the financial aspects of alien - smuggling investigations since the creation of dhs and ice . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have . for information about this testimony , please contact richard stana , director , homeland security and justice issues , at ( 202 ) 512-8777 , or stanar@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . other individuals making key contributions to this testimony include danny burton , grace coleman , frances cook , odilon cuero , and kathleen ebert . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . this activity generally produces short - term profits for the smugglers . that is , after the aliens reach their final destinations , they have no continuing relationship with the smugglers . in legal and diplomatic references , alien smuggling is distinct from human trafficking , although both smuggling and trafficking may have similarities or common elements . in human trafficking , the criminality and human rights abuses — such as coercion for prostitution , labor sweat shops , or other exploitative purposes and servitude arrangements — may continue after the migrants reach the united states in order to produce both short - term and long - term profits . whereas a trafficked person is a victim , an alien who consents to be smuggled is subject to criminal processing and deportation . given the underground nature of alien smuggling , exact figures quantifying the size or scope of this transnational crime are not available . nonetheless , estimates by the united nations and the federal law enforcement and intelligence communities indicate that people smuggling is a huge and highly profitable business worldwide , involving billions of dollars annually , and the united states is a major destination country . people smuggling is a continuously growing phenomenon , according to the international criminal police organization ( interpol ) . the victoria 19 case has been cited by ice as representing a new model for fighting alien smuggling — a model that ice ( 1 ) subsequently used to launch a multi - agency task force ( operation ice storm ) in the phoenix ( arizona ) metropolitan area and ( 2 ) reportedly was using to develop ice's national “antismuggling / human - trafficking strategy. although its development was announced as early as june 2003 , a national strategy for combating alien smuggling had not been finalized and implemented by ice as of july 5 , 2005 .