it suggests the use of telework during such an event . according to the guidance , agencies should consider which essential functions and services can be conducted from a remote location ( eg , home ) using telework . however , the guidance does not address the steps agencies should take when preparing to use telework during an emergency . for example , although the guidance states that agencies should consider testing , training , and exercising of social distancing techniques , including telework , it does not address other necessary preparations , such as informing designated staff of the expectation to telework or providing them with adequate technical resources and support . earlier this month , after we briefed your staff , the white house released an implementation plan in support of the national strategy for pandemic influenza . this plan calls on opm to work with dhs and other agencies to revise existing telework guidance and issue new guidance on human capital planning and coop . the plan establishes an expectation that these actions will be completed within 3 months . if the forthcoming guidance from dhs and other responsible agencies does not require agencies to make the necessary preparations for telework , agencies are unlikely to take all the steps necessary to ensure that employees will be able to effectively use telework to perform essential functions during any coop event . in addition , inadequate preparations could limit the ability of nonessential employees to contribute to agency missions during extended emergencies , including a pandemic influenza scenario . in summary , mr. chairman , although more agencies reported plans for essential team members to telework during a coop event than in our previous survey , few documented that they had made the necessary preparations to effectively use telework during an emergency . in addition , he stated that both fema and opm have provided guidance on the use of telework . however , as stated in our report , present guidance does not address the preparations agencies should make for using telework during emergencies . with the release of the white house's implementation plan regarding pandemic influenza , a time line has now been established for the issuance of revised guidance on telework ; however , unless the forthcoming guidance addresses the necessary preparations , agencies may not be able to use telework effectively to ensure the continuity of their essential functions . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the committee may have at this time . for information about this testimony , please contact linda d. koontz at ( 202 ) 512-6240 or at koontzl@gao.gov . key contributions to this testimony were made by james r. sweetman , jr. , assistant director ; barbara collier ; sairah ijaz ; nick marinos ; and kim zelonis . this work was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .