each pretest was conducted on the phone . we selected pretest respondents to represent small urban and rural areas in different parts of the country . we conducted these pretests to determine if the questions were burdensome , understandable , and measured what we intended , and to ensure we could identify an appropriate individual who was knowledgeable about its use to respond to the survey . on the basis of feedback from the pretests and expert review we modified the questions as appropriate . to produce the estimates from this survey , answers from each responding case were weighted in the analysis to account statistically for all the members of the population , including those who were not selected or did not respond to the survey . estimates produced from this sample are generalizable to the population of transit providers that served small urban areas and transit providers with more than 10 vehicles that served rural areas as reported to the fta's national transit database in reporting year 2013 . because our results are based on a sample and different samples could provide different estimates , we express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample's results as a 95 percent confidence interval ( for example , plus or minus 10 percentage points ) . dot concurred with both of our recommendations . to what extent are selected transit providers in large urban areas using its ? dot also provided technical comments on the draft , which we incorporated as appropriate . to what extent are transit providers in small urban and rural areas using its ? what benefits and challenges are transit providers in large urban , small urban , and rural areas experiencing in deploying its ? how does dot promote and support the use of its technologies , and to what extent do transit providers utilize these resources ? to determine the extent of its use among transit providers in large urban areas , we reviewed 2013 data on national its deployment from the department of transportation ( dot ) . to identify the benefits and challenges that transit providers in large urban , small urban , and rural areas are experiencing from deploying its , we interviewed jpo and fta officials , industry associations , officials from public transit stakeholders in our site visits , and 31 transit providers in large urban areas , surveyed transit providers in small urban and rural areas , and reviewed published research on its . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . on the basis of interviews with dot officials and analysis of the 2013 its deployment data , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we conducted site visits to pittsburgh , pennsylvania ; portland and eugene , oregon ; and tampa and orlando , florida to observe transit its deployments . we selected these site visits based on criteria including geographic dispersion and recommendations by the its joint program office ( jpo ) and federal transit administration ( fta ) officials and industry stakeholders . during these site visits , we obtained documentation and interviewed officials from public transit stakeholders including municipalities , academic researchers , state departments of transportation , and metropolitan planning organizations .