the clerk is then reviewed monthly . the reviews involve testing five claims for proper follow - up . we found that medical centers have few standardized management reports to facilitate oversight . our analysis of medical center reasons not billable reports found that these reports consist of a list of over 100 reason codes for unbillable amounts that are not summarized by major categories , such as the five categories we identified , to facilitate management review and decision making . our review of va and vha policies and procedures and our interviews with cbo officials determined that va lacked formal policies and procedures for oversight of the billing and collections processes related to third - party insurers . in addition , we found that va and vha have few standardized management reports to facilitate oversight . for example , our review of cbo reports found that these reports generally consist of data on va - wide days to bill , accounts receivable , and collections . vha cbo does not generate detailed performance reports by medical center , and it does not review unbilled amounts . limitations in management reporting relate to vha systems design . for example , vista operates as a stand - alone system at each medical center . as a result , vha's cbo does not have direct access to medical center data , and it would need to use data calls to obtain medical center data for monitoring and oversight . consequently , vha developed the performance and operations web - enabled reports ( power ) system as a data warehouse for vista data and information to provide some additional management information capability . however , as a data warehouse power does not provide a full range of standard management reports needed for oversight , and obtaining management information from power for oversight and monitoring purposes would necessitate numerous individual management queries and data compilations . rise is part of the vista modernization action program . the primary objective of rise is to provide comprehensive tools for seamless sharing of required administrative and clinical information to support billing and related revenue activities across the enterprise . the four goals of the rise plan are ( 1 ) defining a clear vision for revenue cycle activities across vha , ( 2 ) replacing or enhancing aspects of current integrated billing and accounts receivable systems , ( 3 ) improving all related business processes by implementing structured it support systems while delivering automated tools to improve revenue cycle efficiency , and ( 4 ) identifying process improvements for vha that drive improvement in revenue cycle activities while leveraging enhanced it support systems . according to va officials , the rise team is currently developing detailed short - and long - term business process and technology strategies in all areas of the revenue program . the rise team is also developing accompanying documentation that defines end - to - end processes and that will form the requirements for the framework of the overall system improvement initiative .