( see fig . while about two - thirds of the states used the categorical eligibility option , some states pointed out difficulties that the option created . for example , many individuals made categorically eligible for food stamps through receipt of a pamphlet or referral to a service may in fact not actually qualify for a food stamp benefit , possibly increasing the administrative burden on food stamp workers . in addition , several officials said they would like the food stamp rules pertaining to categorical eligibility simplified . they noted that categorical eligibility is determined in part by the source of the funding for the program under which the household receives noncash benefits or services . because many programs have multiple funding sources , it can be difficult to determine whether a particular program meets the tanf funding requirements . another official said that categorical eligibility is difficult to explain to staff . other officials noted problems tied to the variation from state to state that the option creates . one official commented that allowing states to determine which of their welfare - funded services to use in granting categorical eligibility for food stamps could create a great deal of national variation in who can access this federal entitlement program . using tanf - funded services as a basis for categorical eligibility , a state official explained , is a complicated way of excluding vehicles when determining food stamp eligibility . thirty - three states used available options to exempt some or all vehicles from counting as assets in determining food stamp eligibility in order to increase access , support clients' work efforts , or simplify eligibility determination for food stamp workers . ( see fig . twenty - nine of these states chose to replace their food stamp vehicle rules with their tanf program rules.while most of these states replaced their food stamp vehicle asset rules with their tanf cash assistance rules , a few states used rules from their tanf noncash assistance childcare programs . seven states told us that they used the option to confer categorical eligibility to recipients of tanf - funded services as a way to exclude all vehicles and other assets from eligibility determination . specifically , six of the seven states told us that they used categorical eligibility to increase access to food stamps and three said that they used it to support client work efforts . ( see fig . while most states used available options to liberalize the way vehicles are considered in the food stamp eligibility determination process , 17 states used existing food stamp program rules regarding vehicles . seven of these states said that they could not replace their food stamp vehicle rules with tanf vehicle rules because their tanf rules were more restrictive than their food stamp rules . in at least one of these states , changes to tanf rules required approval by the state's legislative body . state officials in almost half of the states told us that the food stamp program's vehicle asset rules should be changed to exempt at least one vehicle per household . other state officials wanted the exemption value of a vehicle increased to reflect the current cost of vehicles .