prevalence of corruption in afghanistan . corruption in afghanistan continues to undermine security and afghan citizens' belief in their government and has raised concerns about the effective and efficient use of u.s. funds . we noted in 2009 that according to the afghan national development strategy pervasive corruption exacerbated the afghan government's capacity problems and that the sudden influx of donor money into a system already suffering from poor procurement practices had increased the risk of corruption and waste of resources . according to transparency international's 2013 corruption perception index , afghanistan is ranked at the bottom of countries worldwide . in february 2014 , the afghan president dissolved the afghan public protection force which was responsible for providing security intended to protect people , infrastructure , facilities , and construction projects . dod had reported major corruption concerns within the afghan public protection force . limited afghan capacity . while we have reported that the afghan government has increased its generation of revenue , it remains heavily reliant on the united states and other international donors to fund its public expenditures and continued reconstruction efforts . in 2011 , we reported that afghanistan's domestic revenues funded only about 10 percent of its estimated total public expenditures . this direct assistance was intended to help develop the capacity of afghan government ministries to manage programs and funds . in the first year of the pledge , through bilateral agreements and multilateral trust funds , the united states more than tripled its direct assistance awards to afghanistan , growing from over $470 million in fiscal year 2009 to over $1.4 billion in fiscal year 2010 . for fiscal year 2013 usaid provided about $900 million of its afghanistan mission funds in direct assistance . in 2011 and 2013 , we reported that while usaid had established and generally complied with various financial and other controls in its direct assistance agreements , it had not always assessed the risks in providing direct assistance before awarding funds . although usaid has taken some steps in response to our recommendations to help ensure the accountability of direct assistance funds provided to the afghan government , we have subsequently learned from a special inspector general for afghanistan reconstruction ( sigar ) report that usaid may have approved direct assistance to some afghan ministries without mitigating all identified risks . since 2002 , u.s. agencies have allocated over $23 billion dollars towards governance and development projects in afghanistan through usaid , dod , and state . the agencies have undertaken thousands of development activities in afghanistan through multiple programs and funding accounts . we have previously reported on systemic weaknesses in the monitoring and evaluation of u.s. development projects as well as the need for a comprehensive shared database that would account for all u.s. development efforts in afghanistan ( see table 1 ) . with respect to monitoring and evaluation , although usaid collected progress reports from implementing partners for agriculture and water projects , our past work found that it did not always analyze and interpret project performance data to inform future decisions . usaid has undertaken some efforts in response to our recommendations to improve its monitoring and evaluation of the billions of dollars invested toward development projects in afghanistan .