we referred this firm to sba oig for further investigation . case 2: our investigation determined that this firm , a general contractor specializing in roofing and sheet metal , continued to represent itself as hubzone - eligible even though it did not meet hubzone requirements . while he self - certified to the firm's hubzone status in orca in september 2007 , the vice president admitted during our interview in april 2008 that the firm did not meet hubzone requirements . nonetheless , after our interview , the firm continued actively to represent that it was a hubzone firm — including a message in large letters on its web site and business cards declaring that the firm was “hubzone certified.” the firm's vice - president self - certified during the sba's hubzone certification process in march 2007 that , as shown in figure 4 , the firm's principal office was one - half of a residential duplex in landover , maryland . we provide specific details regarding each application below . fictitious application one: our investigators submitted this fictitious application and received hubzone certification 3 weeks later . to support the application , we leased , at a cost of $250 a month , virtual office services from an office suite located in a hubzone and gave this address as our principal office location . specifically , the terms of the lease allowed us to schedule use of an office space up to 16 hours per month and to have mail delivered to the suite . our hubzone application also indicated that our bogus firm employed two individuals with one of the employees residing in a hubzone . two business days after submitting the application , an sba official emailed us requesting a copy of the lease for our principal office location and proof of residency for our employee . we created the documentation using publicly available hardware and software and faxed copies to sba to comply with the request . sba then requested additional supporting documentation related to utilities and cancelled checks . after we fabricated this documentation and provided it to sba , no further documentation was requested before sba certified our bogus firm . fictitious application two: four weeks after our investigators submitted this fictitious application , sba certified the bogus firm to participate in the hubzone program . for this bogus firm , our “principal office” was a mailbox located in a hubzone that our investigators leased from a retail postal service provider for less than $24 a month . additional details on our scope and methodology are included in appendix i . our proactive testing found ineffective hubzone program eligibility controls , exposing the federal government to fraud and abuse . in a related report and testimony released concurrently with this testimony , we reported that sba generally did not verify the data entered by firms in its online application system . we found that sba was therefore vulnerable to certifying firms based on fraudulent application information . our use of bogus firms , fictitious employees , and fabricated explanations and documents to obtain hubzone certification demonstrated the ease with which hubzone certification could be obtained by providing fraudulent information to sba's online application system .