iii ) . cms agreed that more could be done to work with states to help ensure children's access to services and compliance with federal requirements and stated that the agency's regional offices are already starting to work with some states where problems exist . cms partially agreed with our recommendation that it work with states to develop criteria and time frames for assessing and improving epsdt reporting and the provision of services , including developing state - specific improvement plans for achieving epsdt goals . while acknowledging the importance of working with states to improve the provision of services , cms indicated that it was not certain that improvement plans for all states were necessary as part of this effort . because of the unreliability of epsdt reports , we believe that a more consistent assessment across all states is necessary to provide greater insight into states' progress in achieving epsdt goals . depending on the assessment outcomes , improvement plans may not be needed for every state . we have clarified our recommendation accordingly . cms agreed with our recommendation that the agency do more to foster information sharing and cooperation among states to improve epsdt . the agency indicated that , as a first step , it is planning several activities with states , foundations , and others to promote the value of epsdt services . the agency also provided technical comments that we incorporated where appropriate . california and connecticut reviewed our findings concerning their state programs and said they had no comments . florida , new york , and wisconsin provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . new york also commented that the draft did not acknowledge that compliance rates with screening requirements are uniformly low , even for children not in medicaid , and stated that epsdt expectations may not be realistic . while some available reports , such as our past work on lead and dental screening , do show low screening rates in the aggregate , these reports also show wide variations among states . because available data are insufficient to gauge states' progress in providing epsdt services , assessing whether the agency's 80 percent screening goal is realistic is difficult . we anticipate that once state epsdt data are more reliable , cms will be in a better position to reevaluate whether the annual screening goals that it set more than a decade ago are realistic and achievable . new york also commented that the shortfalls in the provision of recommended levels of preventive health services identified in the report apply to all children , not just those served by medicaid . rather than perform a comparative analysis of the provision of services for children in medicaid versus others , this report focused on the provision of epsdt services to children in medicaid , which our past work , as well as the work of others , has shown to be an at - risk population . new york's comments are included in appendix iv . as arranged with your offices , unless you release its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issuance date .