improper subleasing of va space . va guidance does not allow sharing partners to sublease the space obtained through sharing agreements . the city has posted signs about local ordinances at the site , which purport to show the space is under the city's jurisdiction . va is forgoing potential revenue for use of this facility by not having a written agreement in place . in the absence of a written agreement , it is also unclear what party should respond to any emergency situation that may occur at the park and fields . the lack of an agreement in this instance could potentially increase va's risk of liability . va officials stated there could be a number of reasons that these spaces lacked agreements such as agreements could have been disposed of or misplaced . va officials acknowledged that agreements are not centrally managed or stored and that cai does not include all terms of the agreements that are needed for monitoring activity . however , va's guidance calls for written sharing agreements with all non - va partners . further , federal internal control standards state that all transactions and other significant events need to be clearly documented , and the documentation should be readily available for examination and the documentation should be properly managed and maintained . we found that va had not established mechanisms to monitor the various agreements at the west los angeles and new york medical centers . va officials acknowledged that they had not performed systematic reviews of these agreements and had not established mechanisms to enable them to do so . federal internal control standards also state that management should put in place control mechanisms and activities to enable it to enforce its directives and achieve results . federal internal control standards require that departments and agencies assess program quality and performance over time and work to address any identified deficiencies . further , management must continually assess and evaluate these controls to assure that the activities being used are effective . without a mechanism for accessing land - use agreements to perform needed monitoring activities , va lacks reasonable assurance that the partners are meeting the agreed - upon terms , agreements are renewed as appropriate , and agreements are documented in writing , as required . this is particularly important if sharing partners are using va land for purposes that may increase risk to va's liability . finally , with lapsed agreements , va not only forgoes revenue , but it also misses opportunities to provide additional services to veterans in need of assistance and to enhance its operations . for the past decade , we have reported that the management of federal property is at risk for fraud , waste , and abuse . as one of the u.s. government's largest property holders , many of the issues we identified across the federal government can be found in va's management of its underutilized and vacant property . va's system for managing its numerous land - use agreements , including its system for recording associated revenues and benefits , is in need of corrective action .