divesting . some investors we interviewed said they typically would not divest based on a company's esg disclosures , and three said that esg information could lead them to divest . a mid - size asset manager noted that the firm works with companies to improve their disclosures rather than divest . conversely , representatives from one mid - size pension fund said they found that buying or selling shares is a more efficient method for changing corporate behavior than the lengthier strategy of engaging companies in dialogue . additionally , a large asset manager said that its portfolio managers sell shares if a company's esg performance or response to engagement is poor . although some studies report that the quantity and quality of esg disclosures generally improved in the last few years , 11 of 14 investors with whom we spoke said they seek additional esg disclosures from companies to address gaps and inconsistencies , among other issues . investors described challenges with understanding and interpreting both quantitative and narrative disclosures . quantitative disclosures . investors cited examples of inconsistencies in companies' quantitative disclosures that limit comparability , including comparability among companies that disclose on the same esg topics . specifically , investors described challenges such as the variety of different metrics that companies used to report on the same topics , unclear calculations , or changing methods for calculating a metric . for example , five of 14 investors said that companies' disclosures on environmental or social issues use a variety of metrics to describe the same topic . a few studies have reported that the lack of consistent and comparable metric standards have hindered companies' ability to effectively report on esg topics , because they are unsure what information investors want . in addition , some investors said that companies may change which metrics they use to disclose on an esg topic from one year to the next , making disclosures hard to compare within the same company over time . narrative disclosures . most investors noted gaps in narrative disclosures that limited their ability to understand companies' strategies for considering esg risks and opportunities . for example , some investors noted that some narrative disclosures contained generic language , were not specific to how the company addressed esg issues , or were not focused on material information . for example , two private asset managers said that companies may provide boilerplate narratives or insufficient context for their quantitative disclosures , and representatives from one pension fund said that the fund would like additional disclosures on cybersecurity but has found that most disclosures on this topic are generic and not very helpful . additionally , most institutional investors said that there is fragmentation in the format or location of companies' esg disclosures , which can make this information hard to compile and review . however , these investors generally said that it is more important for companies to focus on providing disclosures than on how or where the disclosures are presented . these investors said that they are able to purchase access to compiled data from third - party data providers to use in their analysis of companies' esg disclosures .