but this does not have to be the case . while there is no one right way to manage a successful merger , acquisition , or transformation , the experiences of both successful and unsuccessful efforts suggest that practices that are key to their success include the following . ensure top leadership drives the transformation . leadership must set the direction , pace , and tone and provide a clear , consistent rationale that brings everyone together behind a single mission . establish a clear mission and integrated strategic goals to guide the transformation . together , these define the culture and serve as a vehicle for employees to unite and rally around . focus on a key set of principles and priorities at the outset of the transformation . a clear set of principles and priorities serves as a framework to help the organization create a new culture and drive employee behaviors . set implementation goals and a timeline to build momentum and show progress from day one . goals and a timeline are essential because the transformation could take years to complete . dedicate an implementation team to manage the transformation process . a strong and stable team is important to ensure that the transformation receives the needed attention to be sustained and successful . use the performance management system to define responsibility and assure accountability for change . a “line of sight” shows how team , unit , and individual performance can contribute to overall organizational results . establish a communication strategy to create shared expectations and report related progress . the strategy must reach out to employees , customers , and stakeholders and engage them in a two - way exchange . involve employees to obtain their ideas and gain their ownership for the transformation . employee involvement strengthens the process and allows them to share their experiences and shape policies . build a world - class organization . building on a vision of improved performance , the organization adopts the most efficient , effective , and economical personnel , system , and process changes and continually seeks to implement best practices . the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) ongoing efforts to build a single , unified department illustrate the complexity and challenges of reorganizing government agencies . dhs now has more than 200,000 employees and almost $60 billion in budget authority , and completing its transformation into a cohesive department is critical to achieving its homeland security missions . dhs has updated and strengthened its plans to resolve the department's management challenges , and has demonstrated strong leadership commitment to make improvements in these areas . however , much work remains for dhs to implement these plans and show sustained progress . we designated the implementation and transformation of dhs as high risk because , among other things , dhs had to combine 22 agencies , while ensuring no serious consequences for u.s. national and economic security . this high - risk area includes challenges in dhs's management functions — financial management , human capital , it , and acquisitions ; the effect of those challenges on implementing dhs's missions ; and integrating the functions .