furthermore , there should be documentation of independence . according to ocie staff , ocie did not hold in - person ethics training in 2013 . ocie is currently revamping its ethics training and plans to roll out an enhanced program . in 2013 , sec's office of the ethics counsel required in - person ethics training for financial disclosure filers . of the staff members assigned to the section 964 inspections , one was not employed by sec in 2013 and two staff members were not financial disclosure filers . all other staff assigned to the section 964 inspections completed the office of the ethics counsel provided training . government auditing standards state that audit staff collectively should possess adequate professional competence and technical knowledge , skills , and experience . according to ocie policies and procedures , sro inspections are generally conducted in teams . the size of the inspection team is determined by the size and complexity of the sro regulatory program being reviewed . an exam manager is generally assigned as the immediate supervisor on the inspection and a member of the staff is generally designated as the lead for each inspection . the lead staff member and other members of the inspection team perform inspections under the supervision of the exam manager , assistant director , and associate director . performance measures can include measures of outputs or outcomes . for example , under its strategic goal for the safe and sound housing government - sponsored enterprises , fhfa has created the performance goal of improving the condition of the regulated entities and developed four performance measures for measuring its progress in reaching this goal . these performance measures include both output measures — a measure of the timeliness of its response to a regulated entity's remedial action plan — and outcome measures — a measure of a specific financial ratio that provides an indication of the condition of each regulated entity . as we reported in 2012 , market oversight has a stated goal of enhancing its oversight of finra . this goal is in line with sec's strategic goal to foster and enforce compliance with federal securities laws and ocie's goal to further implement its risk - focused examination strategy and enhance its risk - assessment efforts for its nationwide examination program . market oversight has also established three output - based performance measures that track the number and timeliness of inspections conducted , and the review of tips , complaints and referrals related to finra . however , market oversight has not established performance goals or measures , both output and outcome , that would translate its goal of enhancing finra oversight into tangible , measurable activities and timelines . furthermore , it has not yet determined targets for any of the performance measures it has established . according to our risk - management framework , management decisions should be made in the context of the organization's strategic plan , with clearly articulated goals and objectives that flow from the plan . performance measures must be clear , concise , and measurable and can be used to measure progress toward these goals . furthermore , leading practices in federal performance management that we previously identified state that performance measures should have appropriate targets .