iv . officials we interviewed in nws regional headquarters , the national centers , and operational units reported taking steps to address the impact of vacancies and help ensure forecasts and warnings were issued but said they were at times unable to complete key tasks and were experiencing stress and fatigue from their efforts to cover for vacancies . for example , operational unit managers reported that they have needed to perform additional tasks , such as working forecasting shifts , and have modified leave schedules to cover forecasting shifts in their units . however , taking these steps , according to managers and staff , at times led to their inability to complete other key tasks , such as providing severe weather information support to state and local emergency managers . most nws officials we interviewed indicated that vacancies in operational units remained unfilled for extended periods , stretching from several months to a few years . for example , one operational unit manager said that over the course of 6 years ( 2011 to 2016 ) , her unit had 16 vacancies . the vacancies remained unfilled for an average of 11 months , and 2 of the vacancies took over 2 years to fill , according to documentation provided by the manager . another operational unit manager said that since 2014 , 3 of the unit's positions were vacant between 8 and 20 months . operational unit managers and staff across the units we interviewed reported having taken several steps to address the impact of vacancies and to help ensure forecasts and warnings were issued . managers and staff in operational units with vacancies often performed additional tasks to help ensure forecasts and warnings were issued , according to officials we interviewed in five nws regional headquarters , the national centers , and six of eight operational units . for example , managers we interviewed in five of the eight operational units with vacancies that we visited said that they worked forecasting shifts to cover for vacancies . typically , in a fully staffed operational unit , managers are expected to spend from 10 to 25 percent of their time working forecasting shifts . in one weather forecast office we visited , however , three managers said they worked forecasting shifts above the expected percentage in 2016 . for example , the warning coordination meteorologist estimated working around 70 percent of his time on forecasting shifts for about 6 months to cover for vacancies . similarly , another operational unit we visited had a vacant administrative assistant position for over a year since february 2016 . in this instance , the warning coordination meteorologist and the science and operations officer told us that , in addition to their managerial duties , they shared the administrative assistant's responsibilities , while also working forecasting shifts to cover for other vacancies in the unit . operational unit managers and staff were sometimes temporarily promoted to positions of greater responsibility when those positions were vacant , according to officials we interviewed in five nws regional headquarters and managers in five operational units . for example , they said that a general meteorologist may be temporarily promoted to a lead meteorologist position , allowing that meteorologist to act as a supervisor to other meteorologists .