postal service . for the 2010 census , the bureau expects to hire almost 75,000 temporary field workers — at a cost of over $350 million — during address canvassing in 2009 and almost 525,000 temporary field workers — at a cost of over $2 billion — for nonresponse follow - up in 2010 . ( see fig . high - performance organizations are inclusive , drawing on the strengths of employees at all levels and of all backgrounds . for the decennial census , having a diverse workforce is particularly important . for example , in its strategic plan , the bureau notes that as the nation becomes more diverse , the bureau's staff must reflect the increasing diversity of the american population if they are to do their job well . in a related point , bureau officials emphasize the need to recruit temporary field workers locally , because such staff are best able to relate to local residents and overcome any reluctance to participate in the census . in fact , the census , in many respects , is a local endeavor because the key ingredients of a successful population count , such as a complete and accurate address list and timely and accurate field data collection , are carried out by the locally recruited temporary field staff — working in and around their respective neighborhoods — collecting data through various operations . a high - performance organization relies on a dynamic workforce with the requisite talents , multidisciplinary knowledge , and up - to - date skills to ensure it can accomplish its goals and missions . as we have previously reported , such an organization fosters a work environment in which people are enabled and motivated to contribute to continuous learning and improvement as well as to accomplishing missions and goals . such organizations promote accountability and fairness . importantly , they take advantage of a workforce that is inclusive and utilizes the strengths and talents of employees at all levels and backgrounds . this work environment is consistent with the principles of “diversity management” — a process intended to create and maintain a positive work environment where individual similarities and differences are valued , so that all can reach their potential and maximize their contributions to the organization . as shown in table 1 , in our previous work on diversity management , we identified 9 diversity management practices . perhaps the most important practice for diversity management is top leadership commitment , because leaders and managers must commit the time and necessary resources for the success of an organization's diversity initiatives . although all of these practices are important , today we discuss two of them as they relate to the bureau: ( 1 ) succession planning — an ongoing , strategic process for identifying and developing a diverse pool of talent for an organizations' potential future leaders — and ( 2 ) recruitment for the bureau's temporary field work — the process of attracting qualified , diverse applicants for employment which is important for maintaining high performance . as we have testified earlier , the federal government is facing new and more complex challenges in the 21st century because of long - term fiscal constraints , changing demographics , and other factors .