ii. ) the agency reported that it is exploring the adoption of one of the report's recommendations and is in the process of implementing the other . in addition to comments on each of our recommendations , cms provided detailed , technical comments that we incorporated where appropriate . is the requested drug medically necessary ? part d sponsors must approve coverage when the requested drug at the requested dosage is medically necessary . in order to show medical necessity , the prescribing physician must provide a statement that the requested drug is medically necessary because ( 1 ) all of the covered part d drugs on the sponsor's formulary for treatment of the same condition would not be as effective for the beneficiary , would have adverse effects for the beneficiary , or both ; ( 2 ) the prescription drug alternatives on the formulary have been ineffective in the past , are likely to be ineffective , or are likely to cause an adverse reaction for the beneficiary ; or ( 3 ) the number of doses available under a quantity limit for a requested drug has been ineffective or is likely to be ineffective . in addition , sponsors are required to approve a tiering exception if they agree with the prescribing physician's statement that treatment of the beneficiary's condition using the preferred alternative drug would not be as effective for the beneficiary as the requested drug , would have adverse effects for the beneficiary , or both . is the requested drug being prescribed for a medically accepted indication ? under medicare part d , a drug is considered to be prescribed for a medically accepted indication if the drug is fda - approved for that use . any off - label use — one not approved by fda — is considered medically accepted only if it is supported by a citation in one of the three designated drug reference guides . beneficiary advocates have argued that the coverage restrictions on those off - label drug uses not listed in the designated drug reference guides cause beneficiaries to be denied coverage for needed drugs , some of which beneficiaries had been previously taking successfully . for instance , a beneficiary without cancer may have a condition which causes severe pain . after trying several medications , the beneficiary may have less pain with the use of actiq , a medication approved only for breakthrough pain in cancer patients . under part d , the beneficiary would be denied coverage for the drug , even if the beneficiary's physician stated that the medication was medically necessary , because the drug was not prescribed for a medically accepted indication , and this use is not listed in one of the three drug reference guides . beyond ensuring compliance with mma and cms coverage rules , sponsors have discretion to develop their own drug - specific coverage criteria . sponsors in our study also considered the following factors . has the beneficiary tried and failed on a generic or preferred alternative drug ? to reduce costs , sponsors may require beneficiaries to try and fail on generic or preferred alternative drugs before approving coverage for higher - cost drugs .