treatment requirements . these revisions would require water systems to notify the state of treatment changes 60 days prior to the change rather than within 60 days following the change . customer awareness requirements . these revisions would ( 1 ) require water systems to disclose test results to homeowners and occupants who participate in tap monitoring programs and ( 2 ) permit states to allow water systems to modify flushing instructions — the amount of time that homeowners are advised to run water before using it — to address local circumstances . lead service line replacement requirements . ( app . i contains a detailed description of our scope and methodology. ) we performed our work between june 2004 and november 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . under the safe drinking water act , epa is responsible for regulating contaminants that may pose a public health risk and that are likely to be present in public water supplies . for the most part , state officials were in favor of the proposed changes involving the monitoring protocols . although they wanted more details on how the requirements would be revised , they believed the changes to be relatively minor . in particular , most state officials agreed that large water systems that exceed the action level should not be allowed to reduce the frequency of lead monitoring based solely on their ability to meet water quality parameters . regarding earlier notification of treatment changes , officials from all 10 states we contacted supported such a revision , particularly for major treatment changes . the officials indicated that the notification requirement would not have a significant impact on their own practices because each of the states already had some type of process in place to permit or review treatment changes . five of the states questioned whether 60 days advance notice would be sufficient to allow an adequate review . several states suggested that epa should require expedited monitoring of lead levels following major treatment changes — or issue guidance on when it would be appropriate for states to require such monitoring — and that epa should issue guidance on what constitutes a major treatment change . in addition , officials from two states commented that epa should require state approval of the treatment changes in addition to advance notification . on the proposed revisions involving customer awareness , all 10 states agreed that homeowners that participate in the tap sampling program should be informed of the test results — particularly if the results for individual homeowners exceed the lead action level — whether or not the 90th percentile result for the entire system exceeds the action level . one state was concerned about the additional resources that would be required to track the water systems' actions . nearly all of the states also endorsed the proposal to give states and water systems more flexibility in determining what flushing instructions are appropriate in particular situations . some states suggested that epa guidance on making such determinations would be useful . regarding the proposed reevaluation of lead service lines that tested out of a replacement program , the states' views were mixed .