( app . ii provides a complete list of the forest service's categorical exclusions. ) the forest service requires agency officials responsible for making vegetation management project decisions to prepare and retain a file and decision memo for each vegetation management project approved using a categorical exclusion . decision memos are to include , among other information , the title of each proposed action , an outline of the decision being made , a description of the public's involvement in the decision - making process , and the date for implementing the project . controversy has surrounded the forest service's use of vegetation management categorical exclusions because , on the one hand , critics assert that the use of categorical exclusions is an attempt to circumvent nepa by precluding the need to perform an ea or eis . supporters , on the other hand , have responded that current analysis and documentation requirements for an ea or eis under nepa are too burdensome and that the new categorical exclusions allow the forest service to more efficiently undertake routine vegetation management activities . adding to this controversy , the forest service initially did not subject projects being approved using the five vegetation management categorical exclusions to a formal notice , comment , and appeal process as it did to projects being approved using an ea or eis . we found that ( 1 ) six of the projects were not for vegetation management and thus correctly should not have been included on the questionnaires or in our data , ( 2 ) three of the projects were initially excluded but were subsequently added to revised questionnaires and our data as a result of our previous follow - up to clarify other issues , and ( 3 ) three of the projects were erroneously omitted from the questionnaires and should have been included in our data but were not . forest service officials said the three projects were erroneously omitted because paperwork was misfiled due to an administrative oversight or district office consolidation or because of confusion over whether the project had been approved . based on this analysis , we found that the data are sufficiently reliable for our reporting purposes . table 6 lists the 12 national forest units and 23 ranger districts we selected for interviews , using a nonprobability sample , to better determine why categorical exclusions may or may not have been used in approving vegetation management projects . the table also lists the forest service regions in which the forests and ranger districts are located , and their geographic location . we conducted our work from september 2005 through august 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as shown in table 7 , the forest service has two types of categorical exclusions: those that require the agency to prepare a decision memo for each project approved using a categorical exclusion , and those that do not require such documentation . the forest service handbook provides information on these categorical exclusions , as well as guidelines for preparing decision memos . acre ( in thousand ) acre ( in thousand ) .