are determined . in accordance with omb circular no . a - 25 guidance and u.s. department of agriculture policy , include in aqi fees the indirect and imputed costs currently not considered when setting aqi fee rates and either transfer the appropriate portions of those collections to the general fund of the treasury as required , or seek congressional approval to spend these monies on related aqi program costs . further , we recommend that the secretaries of agriculture and homeland security conduct joint reviews of the customs , immigration , and agricultural quarantine inspection fees and consolidate reporting , to include the activities and proportion of fees for which cbp , ice , and aphis are each responsible , to provide a comprehensive picture of the user fees supporting the sea passenger and vessel inspections processes . further , we recommend that the secretaries of homeland security and the army direct cbp and the corps to improve oversight of the hmf collections by working together to develop a method for the corps to provide information on domestic vessel movements to cbp ; a method for the corps to provide referrals of audit candidates to the cbp office of regulatory audit to be considered in the context of cbp's risk - based system for selecting audit candidates ; information on cbp's costs to collect and administer the hmf , for inclusion in the corps' annual report to congress on the harbor maintenance trust fund ; and an annual budget request for cbp - related salaries and expenses equal to , rather than in excess of , cbp's actual costs associated with collecting the hmf . we provided a draft of this report to the secretaries of homeland security and defense , and to the acting secretary of agriculture for review . we received written comments from the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , which are reprinted in appendix iii , and oral comments from the departments of agriculture ( usda ) and defense ( dod ) . in addition , each agency provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . circular no . a - 25 also states that each agency should review its programs to determine whether it could charge fees for any of its services , noting that if imposing such fees is prohibited or restricted by law , agencies will recommend legislative changes as appropriate . omb encourages agencies to examine potential effects of design alternatives when reviewing and proposing changes to regulations , even when the regulations are mandated by statute . the user fees considered in this report , and summarized in table 1 , are assessed under specific statutory authority and levied on air and sea passengers , vessel operators , or shippers ( see app . ii for a summary of the fees by payer ) . the fees vary in the way they are set , collected , used , and reviewed , which may affect their efficiency , equity , revenue adequacy , and administrative costs . although all of the fees we examined vary in how they are set and adjusted , these differences are a particular issue with the inspection fees .