tornadoes can also be costly . for example , noaa estimates that approximately once per decade , a devastating tornado in the united states has caused $1 billion or more in damages . landslides are the movement of a mass of rock , debris , or earth down a slope and can range from a rapidly moving rock avalanche to a more slowly moving earth slide and ground failure . the greatest landslide damage occurs in the appalachian and rocky mountains , as well as the pacific coast regions , but usgs data show that all 50 states can experience landslides and other ground - failure problems ( fig . we found that from 1980 through 2005 , approximately 66 percent of the u.s. population lived in an area where the landslide risk was moderate to high . landslides can have a significant adverse effect on infrastructure and threaten transportation corridors , fuel and energy conduits , and communications linkages . usgs estimates that landslides cause , on average , $3.5 billion in damage repair and between 25 and 50 deaths a year . other hazards also present risk to portions of the united states . areas with a value of less than 5 were considered low risk , 5 to 15 as medium risk , and over 15 as high risk . wildland fires – we used the federal wildland fire occurrence data maintained by the desert research institute to represent wildland fire risk . some of these hazards , including thunderstorms , extreme heat , and winter storms can occur in most areas of the country . tsunamis — a series of long waves generated by any large - scale disturbance of the sea — can occur in all u.s. coastal regions , but according to noaa , the west coast , alaska , and hawaii are the most vulnerable . tornadoes – we obtained historical tornado data from the noaa's national weather service that are available for download from www.nationalatlas.gov . we limited our analysis to tornado events with an f3 ( severe ) or higher level as measured on the fujita scale , because f3 or higher tornadoes cause significant property damage . not all records in the database included latitude and longitude information ; therefore , our map only includes those tornadoes for which latitude and longitude data were available . additionally , data were only available through 2004 . landslides – we obtained data representing the susceptibility and incidence of landslides from usgs . we used usgs' classification of areas of high and moderate risk and overlaid it with county data . counties that contained areas of both high and moderate risk were reclassified as “combination of high and moderate risk.” we also reviewed the annual losses associated with some of these natural hazards , when data were available , and factors that may be increasing natural hazard risk . as there is no comprehensive source of loss information for natural hazards , we used estimates developed by the federal agencies responsible for overseeing each natural hazard . we adjusted the loss estimates from some historical hazard events to 2006 dollars using the consumer price index for all urban consumers .