antismuggling efforts . in response to the increase in uac migration , we found that dhs and state had supported several law enforcement and legislative outreach efforts with an increased focus on investigating and dismantling smuggling operations in all three countries . for example , according to dhs officials , in response to the rapid increase in uac migration in 2014 , dhs shifted the investigative priorities of its transnational criminal investigative units ( tciu ) — which include host government police , customs officers , and prosecutors , among others — to target child - smuggling operations in all three countries . a dhs official in guatemala told us the unit there was able to dismantle two of the seven criminal organizations it was investigating that were actively smuggling children . in addition , state in honduras is working with a department of justice resident legal advisor to assist the honduran attorney general's office in prosecuting trafficking and alien - smuggling cases , while state support in guatemala included assistance to reform police training , with a new emphasis on uac - related issues in the community policing techniques , criminal investigations , and human rights curricula . state also participated in legislative and political outreach efforts to combat smuggling . for example , in guatemala , state has advocated modifying certain laws that would better enable guatemalan law enforcement to investigate and prosecute these cases . public information campaigns to deter migration . we also found that dhs and state had carried out several public information campaigns between 2013 and 2015 intended to dissuade citizens of el salvador , guatemala , and honduras from migrating to the united states . dhs's campaigns in 2013 and 2014 focused on warning potential migrants of the dangers of the journey . dhs had launched two campaigns in 2015 , including one to increase awareness of requirements under the executive action on immigration , which was launched in january 2015 but was stopped february 16 , 2015 , because of a federal court ruling that granted a preliminary injunction to prevent expansion of deferred action for childhood arrivals , among other things . dhs also has an ongoing campaign , “know the facts,” which was launched in mexico , el salvador , guatemala , and honduras in late july . according to dhs , the campaign , which was developed with the department of state and was approved by the white house , is intended to deter individuals from mexico , el salvador , guatemala , and honduras from entering the united states illegally by increasing awareness of u.s. immigration policies and enhanced border security efforts , as well as the dangers posed by smugglers . the campaign was extended to run through the end of november due to the increase in the number of uacs arriving to the united states , according to dhs . state public affairs officials we spoke to at the u.s embassies in all three countries told us they used the dhs campaign materials and developed their own materials to launch related public information campaigns in - country while also supporting similar host government campaigns . in - country refugee parole program .