federal . unlike state systems , the federal justice system does not have a separate court with jurisdiction over juvenile cases . youth that are proceeded against in federal court are generally adjudicated in a closed hearing before a u.s. district or magistrate judge and their cases are either declined or they can be adjudicated delinquent . delinquent adjudications can result in outcomes such as probation , commitment to a correctional facility , or the requirement to pay restitution . youth under the age of 18 who are confined in federal facilities , including native american youth , are housed in juvenile facilities overseen by the federal bureau of prisons ( bop ) , which contracts with other entities to manage those facilities . tribal . tribal government or native american organizations eligible to apply ( yes / no ) ? tribal justice systems vary . a number of tribes have tribal judicial systems , some with separate juvenile courts , and others rely on state courts or the federal system . as of april 2018 , there were approximately 89 adult and juvenile jail facilities and detention centers in indian country , according to bia officials . in addition , doi's bia directly manages some facilities , called juvenile detention centers , on tribal lands . outside indian country . a state generally has jurisdiction to proceed against a youth who has committed a crime or act of juvenile delinquency outside of indian country . this jurisdiction is generally exercised in each state by local courts ( eg , at the county and city levels ) . federal law limits federal jurisdiction over youth if a state has jurisdiction over the youth and has a system of programs and services adequate for their needs . since the passage of the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention act in 1974 , federal law has reflected an intent to support state and local community - level programs for the prevention and treatment of juvenile delinquency , and to avoid referral of juvenile cases out of the state and local systems while balancing against the need to protect the public from violent offenders . consistent with this , the federal juvenile delinquency code provides that a youth alleged to have committed an act of juvenile delinquency , with certain exceptions , will not fall under federal jurisdiction unless ( 1 ) the juvenile court or other appropriate court of a state does not have jurisdiction over the youth , ( 2 ) the state does not have available programs and services adequate for the needs of the youth , or ( 3 ) the offense charged is a violent felony or an enumerated offense involving controlled substances and there is a substantial federal interest in the case or the offense to warrant the exercise of federal jurisdiction . inside indian country . for both youth and adults , the exercise of criminal jurisdiction in indian country depends on several factors . these factors include the nature of the crime , the status of the alleged offender and victim — that is , whether they are indian or not — and whether jurisdiction has been conferred on a particular entity by statute .