see table 5 . the 17 cases were selected to represent procurement actions of $5 million or more at three dhs components . because our findings included similar problems across these activities , we believe they represent common problems in dhs' procurement process . to assess the reliability of this data , we compared the data obtained from dhs to the data maintained in the federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) . based upon the comparison , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to assess the extent to which dhs manages the risks of interagency contracting , we reviewed guidance and oversight at the departmental level and at the three components in our sample — opo , cbp and coast guard , and we interviewed officials in the office of the chief procurement officer ( ocpo ) and senior officials of the components under review . to determine how other large agencies address the management risks of interagency contracting , we reviewed relevant guidance and training at the departments of defense and energy . we also reviewed relevant gao and inspector general reports . to assess dhs planning for the use of interagency contracts , we conducted fieldwork at cbp's national acquisition center in indianapolis , indiana ; national data center in springfield , virginia ; and at the coast guard's procurement office in norfolk , virginia , and reviewed contract files and completed a data collection instrument for each of the 17 cases we selected . we also interviewed the contracting officer , program manager and contracting officer's technical representative to discuss each case . in conducting our review , we identified the reasons for using interagency contracts and the reasons for choosing a particular interagency contract . we performed our review between february and august 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . this is a 53 percent increase over the prior year . we have previously reported that use of interagency contracts demands a higher degree of business acumen and flexibility on the part of users and administrators than in the past , and acquisition officials need sufficient training and expertise to ensure the proper use of these types of contracts in an increasingly complex procurement environment . during our review , we identified several examples that showed that dhs may not have obtained a good value for millions of dollars in spending and indicated a need for improved training and expertise ( see table 2 ) . several contracting officials stated that additional training is needed in the use of interagency contracts but that there was not much training available . in addition , other contracting officials told us that they were not aware of the range of available alternatives for interagency contracting . to ensure the proper use of all types of interagency contracts , other large procuring agencies , including dod and the department of energy , have issued guidance to supplement the far and have emphasized specialized training . dod is the largest user of other agencies' contracts and the department of energy reported that it spent about $1.7 billion on other agencies' contracts in fiscal year 2005 — a substantial amount , but less than dhs .