it management . in our 2015 report , we found that dhs has fully addressed 2 of the 6 it management outcomes , mostly addressed another 3 , and partially addressed the remaining 1 . for example , dhs has finalized a directive to establish its tiered governance and portfolio management structure for overseeing and managing its it investments , and annually reviews each of its portfolios and the associated investments to determine the most efficient allocation of resources within each of the portfolios . dhs has also implemented its it strategic human capital plan at the enterprise level . this includes developing an it specialist leadership competency gap workforce analysis and a dhs it career path pilot . however , as dhs has not yet determined the extent to which the component chief information officers have implemented the enterprise human capital plan's objectives and goals , dhs's capacity to achieve this outcome is unclear . additionally , we found that dhs continues to take steps to enhance its information security program . however , while the department obtained a clean opinion on its financial statements , in november 2014 , the department's financial statement auditor reported that continued flaws in security controls such as those for access controls , configuration management , and segregation of duties thus , were a material weakness for fiscal year 2014 financial reporting.the department needs to remediate the material weakness in information security controls reported by its financial statement auditor . financial management . in our 2015 report , we found that dhs has fully addressed 2 financial management outcomes , partially addressed 3 , and initiated 3.financial statements for 2 consecutive years , fiscal years 2013 and 2014 , fully addressing 2 outcomes . as of november 2014 , dhs was working most notably , dhs received a clean audit opinion on its toward addressing a third outcome — establishing effective internal control over financial reporting . we reported in september 2013 that dhs needs to eliminate all material weaknesses at the department level , including weaknesses related to financial management systems , before its financial auditor can affirm that controls are effective . however , as we reported in our 2015 report , dhs has yet to identify and commit the resources needed for remediating the remaining material weaknesses . as we reported in september 2013 , according to dhs's auditors , the existence of these material weaknesses limits dhs's ability to process , store , and report financial data in a manner that ensures accuracy , confidentiality , integrity , and availability of data without substantial manual intervention . this , in turn , increases the risk that human error may cause material misstatements in the financial statements . we also found in our 2015 report that dhs needs to modernize key components' financial management systems and comply with financial management system requirements . the components' financial management system modernization efforts are at various stages due , in part , to a bid protest and the need to resolve critical stability issues with a legacy financial system before moving forward with system modernization efforts .