, where the device is now ) . although consumers can benefit from location - based services designed to make their lives easier , consumers also expose themselves to privacy risks when they allow companies to access their location data . in some cases , consumers of location - based services may be unaware that companies share their location data for purposes other than providing those services . as we stated in our september 2012 and december 2013 reports , these privacy risks include , but are not limited to the following: disclosure to unknown third parties for unspecified uses: according to privacy advocates , when a consumer agrees to use a service that accesses location data , the consumer is unlikely to know how his or her location data may be used in ways beyond enabling the service itself . we refer to these companies as mobile industry companies . in - car location - based services are delivered by in - car communications systems known as “telematics” systems , portable navigation devices , and map and navigation applications for mobile devices . companies can obtain location data in various ways . mobile devices and in - car navigation devices determine location information through methods such as cell tower signal - based technologies , wi - fi internet access point technology , crowd - sourced positioning , and gps technology . assisted - gps ( a - gps ) , a hybrid technology that uses more than one data collection methodology , is also widely used . for example , companies such as google and apple use customer data to compile large databases of cell tower and wi - fi access points . non - carriers use these crowd - sourced location maps to determine location by analyzing which cell tower and wi - fi signals are received by a device . consumers' location data are transmitted over the cellular network or wi - fi access points to companies providing the services . these location data may then be shared with third parties for various uses . for example , companies may choose to partner with third parties to provide a specific location - based service , such as real - time traffic information . several agencies have responsibility to address consumers' privacy and create related guidance . the federal trade commission ( ftc ) has authority to enforce action against unfair or deceptive acts or practices of companies ; the federal communications commission ( fcc ) has regulatory and enforcement authority over mobile carriers ; and the department of commerce's ( commerce ) national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) advises the president on telecommunications and information policy issues . additionally , the department of justice disseminates guidance on how law enforcement might request electronic evidence , such as a person's current or historical location data . representatives from mobile industry companies we spoke to for the september 2012 report and in - car navigation service companies we spoke to for the december 2013 report told us they primarily collect and share location data to provide location services and to improve those services .