table 1 highlights these practices . several of these practices could also benefit the space industrial base . for instance , applying an evolutionary approach to development would likely provide a steadier pipeline of government orders and thus enable suppliers to maintain their expertise and production lines . more realistic cost estimating and full funding would reduce funding instability , which could reduce fits and starts that create planning difficulties for suppliers . longer tenure and more authority for program managers would provide more continuity in relationships between the government and its suppliers . dod is attempting to implement some of these practices for its major weapon programs . for example , as part of its strategy for enhancing the roles of program managers in major weapon system acquisitions , the department has established a policy that requires formal agreements among program managers , their acquisition executives , and the user community that set forth common program goals . these agreements are intended to be binding and to detail the progress a program is expected to make during the year and the resources the program will be provided to reach these goals . dod is also requiring program managers to sign tenure agreements so that their tenure will correspond to the next major milestone review closest to 4 years . over the past few years , dod has also been testing portfolio management approaches in selected capability areas — command and control , net - centric operations , battlespace awareness , and logistics — to facilitate more strategic choices for resource allocation across programs . within the space community , cost estimators from industry and agencies involved in space have been working together to improve the accuracy and quality of their estimates . in addition , on specific programs , actions have been taken to prevent mistakes made in the past . for example , on the gps iiia program , the air force is using an incremental development approach , where it will gradually meet the needs of its users ; using military standards for satellite quality ; conducting multiple design reviews ; exercising more government oversight and interaction with the contractor and spending more time at the contractor's site ; and using an improved risk management process . on the sbirs program , the air force acted to strengthen relationships between the government and the sbirs contractor team , and to implement more effective software development practices as it sought to address problems related to the systems flight software system . correspondingly , dod's office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics is asking space programs passing through milestone reviews to take specific measures to better hold contractors accountable through award and incentive fees , to require independent technology readiness assessments at particular points in the acquisition process , and to hold requirements stable . furthermore , the air force , u.s. strategic command , and other key organizations have made progress in implementing the operationally responsive space ( ors ) initiative .