stephens . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . irs agreed that this would be useful . in testimony before congress , the commissioner of internal revenue has said that in cases involving offshore bank and investment accounts in bank secrecy jurisdictions , it would be helpful for congress to extend the time for assessing a tax liability with respect to offshore issues from 3 to 6 years . legislation was introduced in 2007 , but not enacted , to increase the statute of limitations from 3 to 6 years for examinations of returns that involve offshore activity in financial secrecy jurisdictions . at a more fundamental level , jurisdictional limitations also make it difficult for irs to identify potential noncompliance associated with offshore activity . money is mobile and once it has moved offshore , the u.s. government generally does not have the authority to require foreign governments or foreign financial institutions to help irs collect tax on income generated from that money . in prior work we have reported that a deputy commissioner of irs's large and midsized business division said that a primary challenge related to u.s. persons' uses of offshore jurisdictions is simply that when a foreign corporation is encountered or involved , irs has difficulty pursuing beneficial ownership any further because of a lack of jurisdiction . irs officials told us that irs does not have jurisdiction over foreign entities whose incomes are not effectively connected with a trade or business in the united states . thus , if a noncompliant u.s. person established a foreign entity to carry out non - u.s. business , it would be difficult for irs to identify that person as the beneficial owner . in addition , while the u.s. government has useful information - sharing agreements in place to facilitate the exchange of information on possible noncompliance by u.s. persons with offshore jurisdictions , agreements involving the exchange of information on request generally require irs to know a substantial amount about the noncompliance before other nations will provide information . however , it should be noted that we can not say that having this reporting requirement in place would have forestalled ubs's efforts to defraud the united states or detected them earlier . irs has proposed some amendments to the qi program that would somewhat enhance qi auditors' responsibilities in this area . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on the audit objectives for those reports . it is perfectly legal for u.s. persons to hold money offshore . taxpayers may hold foreign accounts and credit cards for a number of legitimate reasons . as shown in figure 1 , although holding money offshore is legal , taxpayers must generally report their control over accounts valued at more than $10,000 .