reviews . to examine cms's ability to collect overpayments , we reviewed department of health and human services office of inspector general ( hhs oig ) reports on medicare “currently not collectible” overpayments — overpayments for which a provider has not made a repayment for at least 6 months after the due date . we also obtained data from cms on the number of prepayment and postpayment claim reviews conducted by the ras . we obtained data from each of the 16 macs on the number of prepayment and postpayment claim reviews they completed.9 we obtained study reports generated by the smrc from cms , which provided data on the number of claims reviewed by the contractor . we obtained data on the number of mac and ra claim reviews conducted in calendar years 2013 and 2014 , and smrc claim reviews for completed studies initiated in fiscal years 2013 and 2014 . at the time of our review , data for 2013 and 2014 were the most recent complete years of data available . during the period of our review , cms executed three mac contracts that incorporated work associated with different , outgoing mac contractors . our data from these three macs do not include claim reviews conducted under the outgoing contracts and , accordingly , our mac data do not include all mac claim reviews conducted during this time period . our analysis included cms claim review contractors that are responsible for reviewing claims at high risk for improper payment . we excluded several other cms contractors that may review claims that have different responsibilities , such as zone program integrity contractors and quality improvement organizations . zone program integrity contractors , who investigate potential medicare fraud , may review provider claims as part of their investigations . for additional information on the mac roles and responsibilities , see gao , medicare administrative contractors: cms should consider whether alternative approaches could enhance contractor performance , gao - 15-372 ( washington , d.c.: apr . congress established per beneficiary medicare limits for therapy services , which took effect in 1999 . however , congress imposed temporary moratoria on the limits several times until 2006 , when it required cms to implement an exceptions process in which exceptions to the limits are allowed for reasonable and necessary therapy services . starting in 2012 , the exceptions process has applied a claim review requirement on claims after a beneficiary's annual incurred expenses reach certain thresholds . for additional information on the therapy service limits , see gao , medicare outpatient therapy: implementation of the 2012 manual medical review process , gao - 13-613 ( washington , d.c.: july , 2013 ) . as required by law , the ras are paid on a contingent basis from recovered overpayments . the contingency fees generally range from 9.0 percent to 17.5 percent , and vary by ra region , the type of service reviewed , and the way in which the provider remits the overpayment . because the ras are paid from recovered funds rather than appropriated funds , the use of ras expands cms's capacity for claim reviews without placing additional demands on the agency's budget .