please provide me with a copy of your responses . my e - mail address is solisw@gao.gov . we are sending copies of this report to senator tom harkin ; the senate and house committees on armed services ; the secretaries of the army , the navy , and the air force ; the director , office of management and budget ; and other interested congressional committees . the report is also available on gao's home page at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-8365 . key contributors to this report were thomas gosling , louis modliszewski , and r. k. wild . key contributors to our prior reports are listed in those reports . the following are gao's comments on the department of defense's letter dated october 8 , 2004 . in our report , we modified the text to clarify that the parts were not authorized for release under blanket orders . the title of this report is consistent with the titles of our prior reports on this subject , as listed on page 1 , and we did not modify it as dod suggests . in response to dod's comments , we modified the text to state that dod does not have a plan specifying the remedial actions to be taken to implement our recommendations . the government accountability office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . internal control standards requiring testing will be applicable to the new system . our reviews showed that the navy's and the air force's systems allowed country managers , who are responsible for managing the sale of items to foreign countries , to override system decisions not to release to foreign countries classified or controlled parts that are requisitioned under blanket orders . we identified instances where navy and air force country managers overrode the systems' decisions without documenting their reasons for doing so . for example , of the 123 air force requisitions we reviewed , the air force's system identified 36 requisitions for country manager review . for 19 of the requisitions , the managers overrode the system's decisions and shipped classified and controlled spare parts without documenting their reasons for overriding the system . the managers we queried could not provide an explanation for overriding the system . in 1999 , the army modified its system to reject requisitions that are made under blanket orders for classified or controlled parts . as a result , army country managers were precluded from manually overriding the army system's decisions . compared with the navy's and the air force's systems , the army's system provides more stringent protection against releasing classified or controlled parts that are not authorized for release under blanket orders to foreign countries .