( see app . ii for characteristics of title iii and title v institutions and their students. ) title iii and title v legislation outlines broad program goals for strengthening participating institutions , but provides grantees with flexibility in deciding what approaches will best meet their needs . an institution can use the grants to focus on one or more activities that will help it achieve the goals articulated in its comprehensive development plan — a plan that an applicant must submit with its grant application outlining its strategy for achieving growth and self - sufficiency . ( see app . iii for a description of how the grantees we visited used the grants. ) table 1 briefly describes the characteristics and eligibility criteria of title iii and title v grant programs . since its inception , one of the primary missions of title iii has been to support historically black colleges and universities , which play a significant role in providing postsecondary opportunities for african american , low - income , and educationally disadvantaged students . these institutions receive funding through title iii , part b , in part , to remedy discriminatory action of the states and the federal government against black colleges and universities . until the higher education act was amended in 1998 , other institutions that serve financially needy students — both minority serving and nonminority serving — competed for funding under title iii , part a . in 1998 , the higher education act was amended to create new grant programs designated for tribal colleges , alaska native and native hawaiian institutions , and hispanic serving institutions . these programs have provided additional opportunities for minority serving institutions to compete for title iii and title v funding . specifically , in 1999 , 55 hispanic serving , tribal , alaska native , and native hawaiian institutions were awarded new grants through the expanded programs . table 2 shows the increase in support since the new programs were first funded in 1999 . the grant programs are designed to increase the self - sufficiency and strengthen the capacity of eligible institutions . congress has identified many areas in which institutions may use funds for improving their academic programs . authorized uses include construction , maintenance , or renovation of educational facilities ; purchase or rental of telecommunications equipment or services ; support of faculty development ; and purchase of library books , periodicals , and other educational materials . in their grant performance reports , grantees most commonly reported using title iii and title v grant funds to strengthen academic quality and reported a wide range of benefits . specifically , we estimate that 87 percent of the grantees reported using their grant funds to improve academic quality , and an estimated 77 percent reported using their funds to improve student services ( eg , tutoring ) and student outcomes ( eg , course pass rates ) . we estimate that over half of the grantees reported using their funds for initiatives that focused on improving institutional management and fiscal stability .