housing . rather than allow the program to expire with $10 billion of the original $50 billion allocated to mha remaining uncommitted , treasury extended the program so that those funds could be used to address continued weaknesses in housing markets and roll out several additional programs that treasury had not yet had the opportunity to design and implement . treasury officials noted that various metrics they were monitoring indicated that the recovery had not successfully reached particular areas of the economy ( see table 3 ) . specifically , housing market indicators , such as foreclosures and mortgage delinquencies , remained elevated around the time the decision to extend tarp was made , despite initiatives — like mha — that were designed to preserve homeownership by directly modifying mortgages for qualified homeowners . the percentage of loans in foreclosure ( foreclosure inventory ) reached 4.58 percent at the end of the fourth quarter of 2009 and continued to increase to an unprecedented high of 4.63 percent in the first quarter of 2010 ( see fig . over the same period the serious delinquency rate — defined as the percentage of mortgages 90 days or more past due plus those in foreclosure — fell only slightly from 9.67 to 9.54 percent . although not shown , the serious delinquency rate for subprime loans exceeded 30 percent in the most recent two quarters , indicating the large proportion of subprime loans in trouble . foreclosure starts , which reflect new foreclosures filings , peaked at 1.42 percent in the third quarter of 2009 before declining over the next two periods to roughly 1.2 percent . by any measure however , foreclosure and delinquency statistics for housing remain well above their historical averages . moreover , although not explicitly mentioned by treasury , a comparison of trends in delinquent mortgages and new foreclosure starts indicate that more foreclosures are looming . while the foreclosure start rate grew 36 percent from the last quarter of 2007 to the last quarter of 2009 , the rate for delinquencies of 90 days or more grew by 222 percent over the same period ( see fig . this suggests mortgages are not rolling from delinquency to foreclosure as expected and that lenders are not initiating foreclosures on many loans normally subject to such actions . to the extent that foreclosure mitigation programs are ineffective , or a large number of the trial modifications represent unavoidable foreclosures , the resulting foreclosures will continue to weigh on the housing market . treasury also noted that extending tarp provides the flexibility to modify mha to respond to the changing dynamics of the foreclosure crisis . treasury noted early in the crisis that many foreclosures were the result of subprime , predatory , and fraudulent lending activity ; however , as the financial crisis progressed , treasury has modified and expanded its efforts because unemployment and negative equity have become the primary drivers of foreclosures , calling for a different approach to homeownership preservation . treasury has modified mha to deal with these issues by allowing more borrowers to qualify for modification — including borrowers with federal housing administration ( fha ) loans , who are currently in bankruptcy proceedings or who owe more than the current value of their home .