state . according to the survey response , the osdbu director has prior experience in program management for a federal acquisition program and also was a small business technical adviser and small business liaison officer . education . the survey response from the department of education indicated the director had prior experience as a federal contracting officer , contracts administrator , and federal small business contracts manager . ssa . the organizational chart and performance appraisal show that the osdbu director reports to the chief of staff . agency officials explained that , since 2013 , the commissioner has delegated this duty to the deputy commissioner . as of may 10 , 2017 , the agency did not have a deputy commissioner because the deputy commissioner was serving as the acting commissioner . in the absence of a deputy commissioner , the responsibilities were transferred to the chief of staff . the performance appraisal indicates that the osdbu director reports to the senior policy adviser . an osdbu official explained that , currently , the agency does not have a deputy secretary and that this duty had been delegated to the senior policy adviser . the official also stated that , in the past , the director typically met with the deputy secretary on a monthly basis and provided an update to the deputy secretary on small business activities . interior . survey responses from the department of the interior indicated the director had prior experience as a contracts administrator and small business liaison officer . the osdbu director at the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) did not demonstrate compliance . while the osdbu director had experience in related jobs , the director had not had any of the jobs specifically identified in section 15 ( k ) . the survey response cited the director's prior experience as the deputy assistant secretary for operations and management and deputy chief human capital officer . the director also served in several positions in which contracting was a responsibility . an osdbu official stated that the director has had a long work history in a variety of jobs and felt that the director was prepared for the role of the osdbu director . supervisory duties . section 15 ( k ) ( 7 ) requires that the osdbu director have supervisory authority over agency personnel to the extent that the functions and duties of such personnel are related to the functions or duties implemented and executed by the osdbu . based on the survey responses , follow - up with agency officials , and review of position descriptions , 23 of 24 agencies demonstrated compliance with the requirement relating to supervisory duties of the osdbu director . for instance , at the departments of the army and homeland security , the position descriptions and survey responses we reviewed indicated that the directors have such supervisory authority over agency personnel ( to the extent that the functions and duties of the personnel relate to sections 8 and 15 of the small business act ) .