gao reports . irs has requested funding in its fiscal year 2014 and 2015 budget proposals for an updated information system that would allow it to automate the linking process and collect more robust data but funding has not been approved . large partnerships may pay tax on audit adjustments rather than pass them through to the partners but such payments are not widely used current law allows large partnerships to pay a tax owed as determined by audit adjustments at the entity level rather than passing the adjustments through to partners , which would avoid all the costs of campus audits . this is allowed under both the electing large partnership ( elp ) audit procedures and under irs procedures for closing audits with what is called a closing agreement . this audit rate does not depend on whether large partnerships are defined to include direct and indirect partners or only direct partners . our interim report , which focused on only direct partners in defining large partnerships , also showed a 0.8 percent audit rate in 2012 . it is possible that some large partnership audits in table 4 are audits of different partnerships within the same large partnership structure . for example , if irs audits one large partnership and then discovers that it needs to audit another large partnership in the same complex structure , those would count as two separate audits . available irs data did not allow us to determine how often this occurred . table 5 shows that most large partnership field audits closed from fiscal years 2007 through 2013 did not find tax noncompliance . in 2013 , for example , 64.2 percent of the large partnership audits resulted in no change to the reported income or losses . in comparison , irs audits of c corporations with $100 million or more in assets had much lower no change rates , as also shown in table 5 . in addition , irs audits of all partnerships , not just large partnerships , also had a lower no change rate of 47 percent in fiscal year 2013 . according to irs focus group participants , large partnership returns have the potential for a high tax noncompliance risk . however , it is not clear whether the high no change rate for large partnership audits is due to irs selecting large partnerships that were tax compliant or is due to an inability of irs audits to identify noncompliance , as discussed below . when field audits of large partnerships resulted in changes , the aggregate amount was minimal , as shown in table 6 . this could be because positive changes on some audits were cancelled out by negative changes on other audits . in 3 of the 7 years shown in table 6 , the total adjustments from the field audits were negative ; that is , they favored the large partnerships being audited . this did not occur for audits of large corporations . irs data show that its large partnership audits used fewer resources than large corporate audits , but still required significant audit staff time , as shown in table 7 .