( see fig . continued economic growth is critical to addressing this challenge and will help to ease the burden , but the projected fiscal gap is so great that it is unrealistic to expect that the united states will grow its way out of the problem . early action to change existing programs and policies would yield the highest fiscal dividends and provide a longer period for prospective beneficiaries to make adjustments in their own planning . one of the potential policy changes that could address both the demographic shift and the need for robust economic growth is assisting older workers who want to stay in the workforce past retirement age . these demographic problems are not unique to the united states . other countries are also confronting the economic and labor force consequences of aging populations . in fact , the challenges arising from these demographic shifts alone will be less pronounced in the united states than in several other high - income nations . in prior work that we conducted for this committee , we found that sweden , japan , and the united kingdom had enacted retirement policy reforms that included incentives for older workers to extend their working lives . at the same time , these countries were also seeking policies that would reduce barriers to employment for older workers . in the 21st century , older americans are expected to represent a growing share of the population , have a longer life expectancy than previous generations and spend more years in retirement . we expect to publish a report in the fall . in summary , the aging of the baby boom generation ( those born between 1946 and 1964 ) , increased life expectancy , and falling fertility rates pose serious challenges for our nation . these trends will affect the size and productivity of the u.s. labor force and its output and will have real and important impacts on employers and the economy . with the impending retirement of the baby boom generation , employers face the loss of many experienced workers and possibly skill gaps in certain occupations . this could have adverse effects on productivity and economic growth . furthermore , the expected increasing ratio of the elderly to those of working ages will place added pressure on social security and medicare , both of which face long - term financial problems . increasing the labor force by encouraging americans to work longer may be one part of solutions to these problems . encouraging americans to work longer , if they are able to , requires first understanding the factors influencing that decision . these include retirement income , the availability of health insurance , an individual's health status , and the employment status of a spouse . the availability of suitable employment , including part - time work or flexible work arrangements , also may affect older workers' choices regarding retirement and employment . given these options , federal policymakers may want to consider creating incentives for older americans who are able to work to remain in the workforce and ensuring that federal policies do not discourage the choice to work longer .