irs disagreed with both of these recommendations . while irs agreed that having this information would be desirable to facilitate consideration of taxpayers' requests for collection alternatives , irs believes that most taxpayers would be unable to provide this information within the 30-day period taxpayers are provided to request a cdp appeal hearing . further , irs stated that it does not currently have statutory authority to deny cdp hearings to taxpayers who fail to submit financial information forms or the oic application form . irs believes that congressional action would be required to enable it to impose these requirements on taxpayers . we incorporated this information into the body of our report . given irs's concerns , we revised our report to say that taxpayers should be given a reasonable amount of time after filing a cdp request to provide supporting financial information and oic applications . if taxpayers do not provide the materials within that time , irs would proceed to make a final determination on the basis of available information . further , because at the time we completed our review irs had not decided if this could be done without a statutory change , we made this a matter for congressional consideration . finally , we also added a recommendation that irs should determine what a reasonable amount of additional time would be for taxpayers to assemble and submit this information since irs would be in a position to make this determination . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of the treasury , the commissioner of internal revenue , and other interested parties . copies will be made available to others upon request . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 9110 . i can also be reached by e - mail at brostekm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . our objectives were to provide information on ( 1 ) the extent to which the internal revenue service's ( irs ) office of appeals ( appeals ) found the irs collection function ( collection ) had made errors in processing liens and levies and how often collection due process ( cdp ) case results changed after a taxpayer requested a cdp appeal hearing ; ( 2 ) the nature of the arguments presented by taxpayers seeking relief from a lien filing or levy and the amount of communication between irs and taxpayers ; ( 3 ) the characteristics of the taxpayers that availed themselves of the cdp appeal process , such as the amount of their total liability ; and ( 4 ) whether opportunities exist to improve the operations of the cdp program while protecting taxpayer rights .