i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have . more details on our scope and methodology are provided in that report . the bureau is relying on contractor support in many key areas , including the technical integration of all of the key systems and infrastructure , and the development of many of the data collection systems . for example , in august 2016 , the bureau awarded a contract for the technical integration of the 2020 census systems and infrastructure , to include an evaluation of the systems and infrastructure , development of the infrastructure ( eg , cloud or data center ) to meet the bureau's scalability and performance needs , integration of all of the systems , and support for testing activities . however , key dates for this work have yet not been finalized . in addition , the bureau is relying on other contractors to develop a number of key systems , such as ( 1 ) development of the it platform that will be used to collect data from a majority of respondents — through the use of the internet , telephone , and non - response follow - up activities ; ( 2 ) procurement of the mobile devices and cellular service to be used for non - response follow - up ; and ( 3 ) development of the it infrastructure in the field offices . the 2020 census will be the first time that the bureau uses a technical integrator in this manner ; collects data nationwide via the internet ; and relies on mobile devices for non - response follow - up . a greater reliance on contractors for these key components of the 2020 census requires the bureau to focus on sound management and oversight of the key contracts , projects , and systems . does the bureau have back - up plans in case key systems are not ready in time for the 2018 test ? the 2017 census test ( with a census day of april 1 , 2017 ) will be the first time that the bureau has an opportunity to test various it systems and infrastructure in operation , including the internet response system and the system to be used for phone responses . however , because the bureau is revising its plans for the 2017 test , it has not yet determined whether or how it will test other systems and features prior to the end - to - end test , such as the mobile devices that the enumerator's will use to record and upload household information and whether these systems can handle a nationwide scope . uncertainty about what will be included in the 2017 test has the potential to add risk to the 2018 end - to - end test , and it will be important for the bureau to make plans in case key systems are not ready in time for the 2018 test . can the bureau adequately secure the systems and data , and respond to breaches should they occur ? as described previously , the bureau faces significant challenges in securing systems and data , and tight time frames can exacerbate those challenges .