award . in the award phase , dha officials are responsible for evaluating the proposals and awarding the contract to the offeror presenting the best value to the government based on a combination of technical , cost , and performance - based factors . after the contract is awarded , the contracting officer's representative is responsible for the day - to - day monitoring of contractor activities to ensure that the services are delivered in accordance with the contract's performance standards . each dental service contract includes quality assurance standards for provider access , claims processing , and customer service ( telephone coverage and correspondence timeliness ) against which the contractor's performance is assessed . contractors are required to meet these standards . although dha officials use a variety of methods to monitor contractors' performance , the primary method of monitoring performance is through monthly reports submitted by each contractor to dha . to develop requirements for each of its current dental services contracts , dha officials analyzed market research , data from contractors' past performance , legislation , independent cost estimates , and other information . dha officials used this information to align the contracts' requirements with contract goals to deliver high quality dental services in a cost effective manner , and to facilitate access to care . market research . as part of its development of contract requirements , dha officials gathered information through market research and analyzed it to determine the capabilities within the dental services market to satisfy the agency's needs . dha's market research included soliciting information from current and potential dental services contractors . to do this , dha officials issued rfis and draft rfps for comment . rfp . in the rfp phase , dha officials issue the rfp and receive proposals . these documents included questions related to potential benefit changes — such as how the offeror would implement a specific benefit — and potential data requirements — such as how the offeror would submit required data to dha . in addition to rfis and draft rfps , dha's market research activities included one - on - one meetings with dental services contractors . dha officials used information from these market research activities to revise contract requirements . for example , according to dha officials , feedback from contractors indicated that dod's contract requirements related to information security were costing dental contractors ( and dod ) a substantial amount of money . partly as a result of contractors' feedback , dha determined that it would be more economical for contractors to comply with the information security standards used in the commercial sector , according to these officials . in all three new contracts , dha officials therefore required contractors to comply with commercial information security requirements instead of those developed by dod . dha officials also used market research to determine the technical feasibility of potential contract requirements . for example , after encountering delays in treatment preauthorization decisions due to poor quality radiographs ( commonly known as x - rays ) , the rfi that dha issued for the addp contract included questions to determine the feasibility of the electronic submission of radiographs .