gao - 10-386 . washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2010 . interagency collaboration: key issues for congressional oversight of national security strategies , organizations , workforce , and information sharing . gao - 09-904sp . washington , d.c.: september 25 , 2009 . dod recognizes the need to have situational awareness of its liaisons . for example , at a january 2009 interagency coordination conference that the office of the under secretary of defense for policy hosted with dod and non - dod agencies , dod officials found that the department should increase the level of awareness of the liaisons it has detailed to non - dod agencies , as well as non - dod liaisons that have been detailed to dod entities , to minimize duplication and widen the overall interagency collaborative effort . similarly , a dod instruction requires the department's washington headquarters services to track and record approved liaisons . we found that dod's washington headquarters services and asd / hd , the principal dod representative with interagency partners for homeland defense and civil support matters , did not have a complete list of all the liaisons dod has detailed to its partners , or vice versa . according to washington headquarters services' records , there were only 2 dod personnel at dhs headquarters for fiscal year 2009 — yet an informal survey of dod personnel conducted by the asd / hd representative to dhs headquarters during the summer of 2009 found more than 110 dod personnel , from a variety of dod entities , working at dhs as liaisons , subject - matter experts , or in other capacities . officials at dod's washington headquarters services told us that they did not have complete awareness of dod liaisons sent to dod's federal partners because this information had not been provided to washington headquarters services by the dod entities exchanging liaisons . similarly , asd / hd and dod's washington headquarters services lacked knowledge of the liaisons whom their federal partners had assigned to different dod entities , because dod lacks policy or guidance that requires such action . as a result , dod entities , such as defense coordinating officers and joint task force - north , may not be fully aware of the liaisons whom they could leverage for their specific missions . for example , a defense coordinating officer told us that a point of contact and relationship with a representative from the department of energy would enhance his ability to meet some of his responsibilities . the defense coordinating officer told us he was not aware of the department of energy liaison assigned at northcom headquarters and available for his needs . further , while washington headquarters services and asd / hd are not precluded from sharing information with each other , they have not done so . asd / hd officials told us they were not utilizing the information possessed by washington headquarters services regarding dod liaisons detailed to other federal agencies because they were not aware of the instruction directing washington headquarters services to track and record approved liaisons .