obtaining and assessing feedback from industry partners . taking a systematic approach to gathering feedback from industry owners and operators and measuring the results of these efforts could help focus greater attention on targeting potential problems and areas needing improvement . in april 2013 , we examined dhs's chemical facility anti - terrorism standards ( cfats ) program and assessed , among other things , the extent to which dhs has communicated and worked with owners and operators to improve security . timely sharing of assessment results at the asset level . dhs security surveys and vulnerability assessments can provide valuable insights into the strengths and weaknesses of assets and can help asset owners and operators that participate in these programs make decisions about investments to enhance security and resilience . in our may 2012 report , we found that , among other things , dhs shares the results of security surveys and vulnerability assessments with asset owners or operators.security survey and vulnerability assessment results could be enhanced by the timely delivery of these products to the owners and operators and that the inability to deliver these products in a timely manner could undermine the relationship dhs was attempting to develop with these industry partners . specifically , we reported that , based on dhs data from fiscal year 2011 , dhs was late meeting its ( 1 ) 30-day time frame — as required by dhs guidance — for delivering the results of its security surveys 60 percent of the time and ( 2 ) 60- day time frame — expected by dhs managers for delivering the results of its vulnerability assessments — in 84 percent of the instances . dhs officials acknowledged the late delivery of survey and assessment results and said they were working to improve processes and however , we also found that the usefulness of protocols . however , dhs had not established a plan with time frames and milestones for managing this effort consistent with standards for project management . we recommended , and dhs concurred , that it develop time frames and specific milestones for managing its efforts to ensure the timely delivery of the results of security surveys and vulnerability assessments to asset owners and operators . dhs stated that , among other things , it deployed a web - based information - sharing system for facility - level information in february 2013 , which , according to dhs , has since resulted in a significant drop in overdue deliveries . sharing information with critical infrastructure partners at the sector level . critical infrastructures rely on networked computers and systems , thus making them susceptible to cyber - based risks . managing such risk involves the use of cybersecurity guidance that promotes or requires actions to enhance the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of computer systems . in december 2011 , we reported on cybersecurity guidance and its implementation and we found , among other things , that dhs and the other sector - specific agencies have disseminated and promoted cybersecurity guidance among and within sectors . however , we also found that dhs and the other sector - specific agencies had not identified the key cybersecurity guidance applicable to or widely used in each of their critical infrastructure sectors .