sec . airlines submit financial data monthly , quarterly , semiannually , and annually to dot with financial and operating statistics . to facilitate analysis of these data , we contracted with back , an aviation - consulting firm . back obtains the dot data and makes any necessary adjustments to these data to improve their accuracy . to determine the reliability of dot's form 41 data and back , we ( 1 ) reviewed existing documentation from dot and back about the data and the systems that produced them , ( 2 ) interviewed knowledgeable agency and company officials , and ( 3 ) performed electronic tests of the data . how might the elimination of nationality clause restrictions in any new u.s. - eu agreement affect airlines and consumers ? to examine the prevalence and effect of open skies agreements on airlines and consumers , we reviewed prior research from a variety of organizations , including the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) , and we analyzed dot data on passenger traffic from 1990 through 2002 . to determine the key issues related to the european court of justice's decision , we interviewed officials from five major u.s. and eight major eu airlines ; dot ; the u.s. department of state ( state ) ; the european commission directorates general for competition , employment , and transport ; u.s. and eu labor unions and associations ; and eu airports , as well as officials of eu aviation trade associations . to determine how the absence of the nationality clause restrictions might affect airlines and consumers , we interviewed industry experts about the likely outcome of removing the nationality clause restrictions , and used prior research to highlight any potential benefits or barriers that airlines and consumers would face . we also analyzed available data on capacity constraints at eu airports and the effect of opening transatlantic markets on labor . what are the key ways that commercial aviation between the united states and the eu could be changed by the court of justice decision ? we assessed the reliability of the various data sets analyzed throughout the report and determined that they were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we recognize that other important factors must be carefully examined when analyzing international aviation . for example , issues relating to safety and security regulatory oversight are obviously critical to any comprehensive analysis of air transportation . because of the magnitude of these issues , however , we agreed with your staff at the outset that they were beyond the scope of this report . in addition , while the eu mandate called for the creation of a more open aviation market ( including issues such as foreign ownership restrictions and access to domestic markets ) , both u.s. and eu officials acknowledged that addressing the court of justice ruling and resolving the nationality clause issue were both priorities , and we therefore focused our report on the issues linked to the ruling only . we also agreed to exclude from this report several other related issues – such as requirements that u.s. government employees and others using u.s. government financed foreign air travel to use u.s. airlines .