knowing who to include in the measures . it is difficult to know whether or not a job seeker should be counted in the measure for a program , even if he or she is served by the program . for example , a participant in the adult program who is already employed must be included in the retention and wage gain measures but cannot be counted in the entered employment measure . yet , for the dislocated worker program , the entered employment measure can include those who may be employed when they enter the program . knowing when to measure performance for participants . the data for different performance measures can be collected in different quarters of the program year . for example , for customer satisfaction , data can be collected at two points in time , depending on how the participant exited the program ( see fig . data on entered employment for participants in the adult program are collected in the third quarter after exit ; retention data are collected in the fifth quarter after exit . data on earnings change and replacement are collected at two points in time: pre - program earnings data can be collected at registration , and post - program earnings data are collected in the fifth quarter after exit . if a program participant does not appear in the ui wage records , local staff can collect supplemental data to establish employment for the participant , but this must be recorded within 30 days after the wia participant is found missing from the wage records . for entered employment , staff can collect supplemental data in the fourth quarter after a participant leaves ( or exits ) the program , but for retention , staff can collect it in the sixth quarter after exit . supplemental data cannot be used to measure earnings change and replacement . because the timing of data collection is complex and can be confusing , one local area in oregon developed a tool it calls the “bean counter” to help local staff determine when to follow - up with participants so their performance counts in the calculations ( see fig . knowing how to calculate the measures . in order to calculate the measures , states must account for a variety of factors . the type and combination of these factors determine the calculations that will be used . for example , in calculating some of the measures for the adult program , states must consider ( 1 ) whether the job seeker is employed at registration , ( 2 ) whether he or she is employed at both the first and third quarters after exit , and ( 3 ) whether the data source used to confirm employment was ui records or supplemental data . this information in various combinations results in 14 different ways that adult participants can be grouped in order to calculate the measures . in addition to noting the complexity of the measures , state and local officials said that the new measures taxed their resources . states had to develop procedures to collect data for the new customer satisfaction measure in compliance with detailed guidance from labor .