nla . moreover , los angeles international airport's estimate to upgrade its runways accounts for $398 million of the total reported by 14 airports . upgrading bridges , tunnels , and culverts accounts for 28 percent of the total cost ( $593 million ) . the vast majority of the bridge and tunnel costs are attributable to a $508-million project at los angeles where the freeway runs under the airfield . upgrading the cost for taxiways accounts for 24 percent ( $509 million ) of the total cost , and upgrading terminals , concourses , and aprons accounts for 15 percent of the total cost ( $317 million ) . at some airports , airlines are responsible for these areas , so upgrading them does not show up as a cost to airports . additionally , since two airports , indianapolis international and memphis international , are primarily going to receive the cargo version of the a380 , terminal upgrades would not be needed . key contributors to this assignment were carolyn boyce , jean brady , stephen brown , james fields , david hooper , michael horton , mitchell karpman , kieran mccarthy , richard scott , and kate wulff . see app . iv for the cost estimates from these 14 airports to upgrade their four major types of infrastructure. ) regarding the unresolved issues , most airport officials told us that they plan to apply to faa for modifications to the standards or to serve nla by restricting its operations . faa has three studies underway to evaluate certain design group vi standards to determine which ones should be revised . one study uses actual data from taxiing b - 747 aircraft to determine how much pilots deviate from a taxiway's centerline . the amount of deviation is important to help determine a taxiway's required width to operate nla safely . according to faa , it has continuously kept airport and industry officials informed of preliminary results of its on - going studies . however , faa will not know until 2003 , when the final results are expected , whether to revise the current design group vi standards and / or grant modifications or what the nature of any changes might be . there are certain design group vi standards for which modifications cannot be granted . for example , runway and taxiway bridges designed to safely support a b - 747 with a maximum taxiing weight of 875,000 pounds cannot support an a380 with a maximum taxiing weight of 1.4 million pounds . which airlines actually buy nla , how they use these aircraft in their route structure , and the total number of nla that are put into service will influence which airports eventually receive nla and the cost for infrastructure changes . for example , honolulu international airport is a likely destination for nla if japan airlines or all nippon airways , two of the key airlines that serve this airport , buy them . if not , honolulu international airport would not likely receive nla on a regular basis and could possibly accommodate them through modifications to standards , thereby avoiding more costly infrastructure changes .