resources . the community spouse may retain an amount equal to one - half of the couple's combined countable resources , up to a state - specified maximum resource level . if one - half of the couple's combined countable resources is less than a state - specified minimum resource level , then the community spouse may retain resources up to the minimum level . the amount that the community spouse is allowed to retain is generally referred to as the community spouse resource allowance . income . the community spouse is allowed to retain all of his or her own income . states establish a minimum amount of income — a minimum needs allowance — that a community spouse is entitled to retain . prior to the dra , if the community spouse's income was less than the minimum needs allowance , then states could allow the difference to be made up in one of two ways: by requiring the transfer of income from the institutionalized spouse ( called the income - first approach ) or by allowing the community spouse to keep resources above the community spouse resource allowance , so that the additional resources could be used to generate more income ( the resource - first approach ) . the penalty period is calculated by dividing the dollar amount of the assets transferred by the average monthly private - pay rate for nursing home care in the state ( or the community , at the option of the state ) . for example , if an individual transferred $10,000 in assets , and private facility costs averaged $5,000 per month in the state , the penalty period would be 2 months . federal law exempts certain transfers for less than fmv from the penalty provisions even if they are made within the look - back period . exemptions include transfers of assets to the individual's spouse , another individual for the spouse's sole benefit , or a child who is considered to be disabled under federal law . additional exemptions from the penalty provisions include the transfer of a home to an individual's spouse , or minor or disabled child who meets certain criteria ; an adult child residing in the home who has been caring for the individual for a specified time period ; or a sibling residing in the home who meets certain conditions . transfers do not result in a penalty if the individual can demonstrate to the state that the transfer was made exclusively for purposes other than qualifying for medicaid . additionally , our review of 2004 hrs data indicated that no elderly nursing home residents owned a home valued at more than $500,000 . life estates . the dra requires states to treat the purchase of certain life estates as a transfer of assets for less than fmv unless the purchaser ( the applicant ) lived in the house for at least 1 year after the date of purchase . the effect of this provision may be limited because we found that few approved medicaid nursing home applicants whose files we reviewed had life estates . specifically , the proportion of approved applicants who owned life estates ranged from zero in pennsylvania to 2 percent in south carolina . income first .