specific competencies support each role . in addition , gsa uses its competency model as a recruiting tool for human resources professionals . the model lists desirable attributes for job candidates as well as a few suggested interview questions for determining whether applicants possess these attributes . table 3 lists gsa's hr roles and the primary competencies gsa states are essential for success in each of the roles . usgs's hr competency model also identifies and describes a set of human capital competencies that are essential to effective performance in the roles and responsibilities of the agency's human capital office as outlined in its business model . usgs's competency model identifies core or universal competencies that usgs human capital staff members need and specific competencies that human capital managers , strategic consultants , operating specialists and generalists , and assistants need . for each competency , the model describes how that competency is applied . according to usgs , the competency model is currently being used as a tool for self - directed human capital development , and portions of the model have been incorporated in the new automated skills assessment system . in the future , usgs plans to use the model as a basis for recruiting and interviewing candidates , making decisions about developmental assignments , and developing the competencies of every human capital staff member to think and relate strategically to the science mission of usgs . table 4 lists usgs's competency categories . as the role of the human capital organization evolves to include serving the individual employee and helping to achieve the organization's strategic objectives , the accountability for human capital management is increasingly being shared by top management , line managers , and human capital professionals . mark braza , matthew tropiano , and laura turman also made key contributions . successful organizations , according to our model of strategic human capital management , include human capital professionals acting together with agency leaders and line managers in developing strategic and program plans to accomplish agency goals . through this joint action , agency and human capital leaders and their staffs share accountability for successfully integrating strategic human capital approaches into the planning and decision making of the agency . agency and human capital leaders , human capital professionals , and line managers share responsibility for achieving agency programmatic and human capital goals , and they ultimately share accountability for effective , legally compliant human capital management . according to opm , agencies have delegated more key human capital authorities to line managers . in a recent report , we highlighted the importance of delegating authority and holding line managers accountable for the effective use of human capital flexibilities , important tools that assist agencies in managing their workforces . agencies are also following a more collaborative approach between managers and human capital professionals for those human capital authorities retained by the human capital staff members . additionally , more agency and human capital leaders are linking human capital policies and practices to organizational outcomes and expecting more collaboration between line managers and human capital professionals . irs , for example , has dispersed human capital professionals throughout the agency's divisions to help apply strategic thinking to each operating division's unique interest .