please describe . 6. who at your agency approves the decision to offer the avo program as a recruitment or retention incentive ? please provide a position , not the name of an individual , and the person's office . for example , chief of relocation incentives , human resources . has your agency examined whether the avo program improved recruiting or retaining staff at any time during the fiscal years of 2012- 2016 ? yes  if “yes” , please email us any documentation that your agency has on whether the avo program improved recruiting or retaining staff , if possible no if “no” , please skip to question 9 8 . did your agency find that the avo program improved recruiting or retaining staff ? for what uses has the avo program been most beneficial ( for example , in certain locations or occupations ) ? has your agency identified any lessons learned that could be applied to your agency's avo program ? we did not include va when distributing the questionnaire . we selected this set of agencies for distribution of the questionnaire to remain consistent with our reporting of federal agencies' spending on avo through gsa's contract . we emailed the questionnaire to recipients as a word attachment on january 9 , 2017 . we sent reminder emails to and called non - respondents . we also emailed secondary points of contact where available at non - responsive agencies . we closed the questionnaire on march 10 , 2017 . twenty - four of 28 agencies completed the questionnaire , 20 of which had an operational avo , which we interpreted to mean that avo was being offered at the agency . thus , we report on the 20 agencies' responses to the questionnaire . we characterize the responses to the questionnaire as “most” when 12 to 19 agencies responded the same way . all questionnaire data were double key - entered into an electronic file in batches and were 100 percent verified . all data in the electronic file were verified again for completeness and accuracy . to assess the extent to which va has implemented additional internal controls since 2015 and has evaluated whether the use of avo has improved the recruitment and retention of employees , we analyzed documents from va and interviewed va officials . we assessed va's controls and evaluations using federal internal control standards . we reviewed va human resources and financial policy documents about the administration of avo with a focus on what changes had been made since fiscal year 2015 . we interviewed va officials who administer avo about these changes and additional changes that are planned . we also reviewed the 2015 va inspector general report on relocation programs and a 2016 review of va's permanent change of station program . we interviewed an official at the va inspector general's office and other va officials about the status of the recommendations . we conducted this performance audit from august 2016 to september 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .