( see app . ii for a more detailed description of our scenarios. ) as shown in table 1 , the spr is large enough and has enough drawdown capacity to completely replace the oil lost during our gulf coast hurricane and venezuelan strike scenarios , which reduce world oil supply by 155 million barrels over 6 months and 307 million barrels of oil over 24 months , respectively . the spr could eliminate these hypothetical disruptions by releasing 24 million and 87 million barrels of oil , respectively , and world spare capacity and fuel switching would make up the remaining 131 million and 220 million barrels . ( 3 ) under what circumstances would an spr larger than its current size be warranted ? in addressing these questions , we developed six hypothetical oil supply disruption scenarios . these scenarios are set in today's oil market , with global crude oil demand of approximately 83 million barrels per day and u.s. demand of approximately 21 million barrels per day . the scenarios are as follows: a hurricane in the u.s. gulf coast disrupts oil supplies by up to 1.5 million barrels per day for 6 months , similar to the disruptions caused by hurricanes katrina and rita in 2005 . a strike among oil workers in venezuela disrupts oil production by up to 2.2 million barrels per day over 5 months , similar to a strike that occurred in 2002 to 2003 . production then remains 0.2 million barrels per day below its prestrike level for an additional 19 months . iran stops exporting oil for 18 months , removing 2.7 million barrels per day from the market . a terrorism event at an oil facility in saudi arabia disrupts up to 6 million barrels per day over 8 months . closure of the strait of hormuz , which is a vital oil shipping lane located at the entrance to the persian gulf , disrupts 17 million barrels per day for 1 month . supply then recovers over the next 2 months . saudi arabia stops oil production , removing 10 million barrels per day from the market for 18 months . production then recovers over the following 6 months . we selected these hypothetical scenarios to illustrate the potential benefits of strategic reserves in a wide range of different situations , not because we consider these scenarios likely . to collect expert opinions on the impacts of past spr fill and use and recommendations for the future , we convened a group of experts in conjunction with the national academy of sciences and interviewed experts from industry and academia . we convened the group to allow the experts to exchange and challenge ideas , but the group was not designed to reach consensus on the issues discussed . we also reviewed records and reports from doe and the international energy agency and interviewed officials from these agencies and other oil industry experts .