postmasters in 1999 . about one - half of 1 percent of craft employees earned more in gross pay than their local postmasters . with regard to postmasters , about 12 percent supervised at least 1 craft employee who earned more than they did in gross pay or earned within 5 percent of what they earned . overtime was apparently the reason why these employees earned more or within 5 percent of what their postmasters earned . most postmasters who supervised at least 1 craft employee who earned more than they did were not eligible to receive the sda . these postmasters could not receive the sda because they were either eligible for overtime at time - and - one - half or were in grades below eas - 15 . instances of craft employees earning more than their supervisors . the five organizations indicated that craft employees will occasionally earn more than their supervisors , but this is the exception and not the norm . four of the five organizations indicated that they used market - based pay systems that generally resulted in their organization setting pay for supervisors high enough to prevent almost all craft employees from earning more than their supervisors . according to watson wyatt , private sector companies use market - based pay for nonbargaining unit positions , and about 30 percent of the companies had various policies in place to help ensure that supervisors earned more than their employees . basic pay consisted of salaries and wages paid directly for duties performed during the regular workweek and accounted for , on average , 95 percent of a postmaster's pay . variable pay , economic value added ( eva ) , was pay - for - performance cash rewards for achieving specific organizational goals and targets and accounted for , on average , 4 percent of a postmaster's pay . merit awards were lump - sum payments to recognize achievements beyond what was normally expected . premium pay was supplemental pay for overtime , nights , and holidays worked . merit awards and premium pay accounted for , on average , 1 percent of a postmaster's pay . the service said it used the results of a 1995 hay management report that compared eas and private sector compensation as a guide in making substantive changes to the eas pay system in 1996 . among other changes , the service lowered the basic pay minimums of the 26 eas grades . that change resulted in the basic pay minimums of eas - 15 and eas - 16 exempt supervisors being less than the basic pay maximum of a grade 5 clerk - - the most populated grade and pay level of the largest bargaining unit . rural carriers were excluded from our basic pay analysis because their basic pay included overtime , which could not be identified and excluded . craft employees earned more than their local postmasters . overtime was the primary reason why clerks and city carriers earned more than their local postmasters . overtime could not be isolated for rural carriers ; but according to service officials , overtime was the most probable reason why rural carriers earned more than their local postmasters .