this appendix describes some of these factors . there are several operational factors that can affect the capacity utilized , including ( 1 ) aircraft availability , ( 2 ) aircraft characteristics , ( 3 ) cargo characteristics and loading configuration , and ( 4 ) route and fuel needs , among other factors . according to amc officials , these factors , among others , contribute to capacity limitations . because airlift aircraft are normally in high demand and usually highly tasked , they are reserved for movement of forces and cargo critical to the successful execution of campaign plans . however , competing demands can limit the availability of aircraft to meet specific mission needs , forcing amc planners to potentially use larger aircraft , such as the c - 5 , to transport payloads that cannot maximize the available space . operational tempo and the number of aircraft undergoing maintenance and assigned for training needs and crew certification drive the total number of aircraft available to amc officials at any given time . user requirements and threat situations may allow little or no flexibility in the delivery times , locations , and load configurations . although exact numbers fluctuate daily , amc generally has about 85 c - 5 and c - 17 aircraft available daily for strategic airlift missions . however , special events and maintenance problems can reduce the number and type of aircraft available for these missions . officials told us that at the beginning of oef , 17 c - 5 aircraft were broken and grounded at guam for maintenance . efforts to improve the readiness rate of c - 5 aircraft from 65 percent reduce the availability of these aircraft further and increase the need for c - 17s . according to an amc official , three c - 17s are needed to replace each c - 5 . because c - 17 aircraft are also being used for intratheater airlift in iraq , united states central command officials expressed concern about having enough c - 17s to meet strategic airlift demands . aircraft characteristics , such as the size and shape of the aircraft's cargo compartment and strength of the aircraft floors and ramps , operational tempo , and chronological age , can impact an aircraft's capacity and the payload that can be transported . aircraft have weight , height , and width restrictions that can limit the amount or type of cargo that can be transported . for example , the maximum weight limit on a c - 5 ramp is 7.5 short tons , and some locations within the aircraft require a 14-inch safety aisle to allow aircrew members clearance while securing cargo . our review of mission planning files showed that sometimes cargo was not placed on the aircraft ramps because of weight constraints , thereby leaving some available space unused . moreover , aircraft differ on what they can carry . for instance , the c - 5 and c - 17 can carry all cargo types as well as troops , while the c - 141 can carry troops , cargo loaded on a standard - sized pallet ( bulk ) , and oversized cargo — nonpalletized cargo that is larger than bulk , such as vehicles .