doe agreed with our recommendations . in addition , broader doe management challenges affect em and have implications for em's ability to effectively manage its cleanup work and begin reducing its environmental liability . em , like doe , executes its program activities primarily through the use of contracts . we have reported that about 90 percent of doe's budget is spent on contractors that manage the laboratories and carry out doe's programs . doe's contract management , however , is one of the areas we have identified as posing a high risk of fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement because of doe's record of inadequate management and oversight of contractors . as a result , doe's contract and project management has been on our high risk list since 1990 . most recently , we found in march 2019 that doe did not always ensure that contractors audited subcontractors' incurred costs as required in their contracts . we identified more than $3.4 billion in subcontract costs incurred over a 10-year period that had not been audited as required , and some subcontracts remained unaudited or unassessed for more than 6 years . completing audits in a timely manner is important because of a 6-year statute of limitations to recover unallowable costs that could be identified through such audits . we recommended that doe develop procedures that require local offices to monitor contractors to ensure timely completion of required subcontract audits . doe partially concurred with this recommendation and stated that it plans to review existing requirements and guidance and to consider the extent to which it requires monitoring of contractors' progress in completing required subcontract audits . as we noted in the march 2019 report , we believe that doe's plans to further examine the issues raised in our report is a positive step toward resolving the issues ; however , we continue to believe that the actions called for in our recommendations remain valid and that doe could more efficiently resolve the issues by proceeding to implement those actions . accurate and reliable information on the status and progress in a program is essential for effective management and to ensure key stakeholders are provided the information they need to fulfill their oversight , advisory , and other essential roles . however , em's performance measures for operations activities do not provide a clear picture of overall performance , and em has not followed best practices in implementing its performance reporting systems . in addition , em has historically not provided all of the statutorily required information about the status of its cleanup effort , and the information em has reported has been incomplete or inaccurate . finally , in its recent budget materials , em did not include the funding it says it needs to meet its schedule cleanup milestones . in february 2019 , we found that em's performance measures for operations activities — which constitute most of its cleanup activities — do not provide a clear picture of overall performance . according to em documentation and officials , em uses three tools to measure the overall performance of operations activities: earned value management ( evm ) , performance metrics , and cleanup milestones . we found problems with em's use of each of these tools .