however , other policies addressed this issue . these activities are shown in table 2 below . over the past 5 years , there have been several reviews of the department's ability to rapidly respond and field urgently needed capabilities in the 21st century security environment . some of these studies were initiated at the direction of congress . in fiscal year 2009 , the house armed services committee approved the department's designation of a process improvement officer who was tasked with applying lean six sigma process improvement techniques to the business practices of the department . the committee recommended that the process improvement officer examine the processes for rapid acquisition activities that have been established since the wars in iraq and afghanistan began and determine whether there were lessons learned that might be integrated into the department's main acquisition process . the department conducted the study and found ( 1 ) significant variability in response time at the beginning of the process , indicating unnecessary delays ; ( 2 ) senior leadership involvement in the process enables rapid decision making ; ( 3 ) shorter decision processes and focused organizations enable quicker response than under normal requirements ; and ( 4 ) reprogramming authority is cumbersome and adds time to the urgent needs process . furthermore , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 included a provision that would require best practices and process improvements to ensure that urgent operational needs statements and joint urgent operational needs statements are presented to appropriate authorities for review and validation not later than 60 days after the documents are submitted . specifically , the committee report noted that over the last several years , operational commanders in iraq had identified urgent operational needs for mrap vehicles , nonlethal laser dazzlers , and other critical equipment . further , the committee stated it was aware of allegations that requests for some of these items not only went unmet , but were not even presented for more than a year to the senior officials responsible for validating the requests . in 2009 , congress required the secretary of defense to commission a study by an independent commission or a federally funded research and development center to assess and report on the effectiveness of the processes used by dod for the generation of urgent operational need requirements , and the acquisition processes used to fulfill such requirements . in response to this requirement , the under secretary of defense , acquisition , technology and logistics , asked the defense science board to establish a task force to conduct a study on the effectiveness of the processes used by the department for the generation of urgent operational needs requirements and the acquisition processes used to fulfill such requirements . in july 2009 , the defense science board released its report with recommendations on potential consolidations necessary to rapidly field new capabilities for the warfighter in a systematic and effective manner . moreover , section 803 of the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2011 ( the fy 2011 ndaa ) amended the existing rapid acquisition authority . previously , the authority could be used to eliminate deficiencies that resulted in combat fatalities .