this will occur for several reasons . first , in fiscal year 2001 , the congress substantially increased fta's authority to commit future federal funding ( referred to as contingent commitment authority ) . this allowed fta to make an additional $500 million in future funding commitments . without this action , fta would have had insufficient commitment authority to fund all of the projects ready for a grant agreement . second , to preserve commitment authority for future projects , fta did not request any funding for preliminary engineering activities in the fiscal year 2002 and 2003 budget proposals . according to fta , it had provided an average of $150 million a year for fiscal years 1998 through 2001 for projects' preliminary engineering activities . third , fta took the following actions that had the effect of slowing the commitment of funds or making funds available for reallocation: fta tightened its review of projects' readiness and technical capacity . as a result , fta recommended fewer projects for funding than expected for fiscal years 2002 and 2003 . for example , only 2 of the 14 projects that fta officials estimated last year would be ready for grant agreements are being proposed for funding commitments in fiscal year 2003 . fta increased its available commitment authority by $157 million by releasing amounts associated with a project in los angeles for which the federal funding commitment had been withdrawn . although the new starts program will likely have unused commitment authority through fiscal year 2003 , the carry - over commitments from existing grant agreements that will need to be funded during the next authorization period are substantial . fta expects to enter the period likely covered by the next authorization ( fiscal years 2004 through 2009 ) with over $3 billion in outstanding new starts grant commitments . in addition , fta has identified five projects estimated to cost $2.8 billion that will likely be ready for grant agreements in the next 2 years . if these projects receive grant agreements and the total authorization for the next program is $6.1 billion — - the level authorized under tea - 21 — most of those funds will be committed early in the authorization period , leaving numerous new starts projects in the pipeline facing bleak federal funding possibilities . some of the projects anticipated for the next authorization are so large they could have considerable impact on the overall new starts program . for example , the new york long island railroad east side access project may extend through multiple authorization periods . the current cost estimate for the east side access project is $4.4 billion , including a requested $2.2 billion in new starts funds . by way of comparison , the east side access project would require about three times the total and three times the federal funding of the bay area rapid transit district airport extension project , which at about $1.5 billion was one of the largest projects under tea - 21 . in order to manage the increasing demand for new starts funding , several proposals have been made to limit the amount of new starts funds that could be applied to a project , allowing more projects to receive funding .