iii ) . in addition to the areas identified by irs in its budget request , there may be additional opportunities for efficiency gains . increasing electronic filing: in an era of tight budgets , continued growth in electronic filing may be necessary to help fund future performance improvements . one proposal for continuing to increase electronic filing is additional use of electronic filing mandates . currently , irs mandates electronic filing for large corporations . the 2007 budget request proposes a legislative change that would expand its authority to require electronic filing for businesses . moreover , 12 states now mandate electronic filing for certain classes of tax practitioners ( see app . iv for more information on state mandates ) . as we have reported , although there are costs and burdens likely to be associated with electronic filing mandates for paid tax preparers and taxpayers , state mandates have generated significant increases in electronic filing . irs has an electronic filing strategy , which the agency is updating . changing the menu of taxpayer services: irs currently lacks a comprehensive strategy explaining how its various taxpayer services ( including its telephone , walk - in , volunteer , and web site assistance ) will collectively meet taxpayer needs . in response to a congressional directive , irs is developing such a strategy . the strategy is important because some taxpayers may not be well served by the current service offerings . irs's attempts to reduce some taxpayer services , namely reducing the hours of telephone operations and closing some walk - in sites , have met with resistance from the congress . although congressional directives to study the impact of irs's actions exist , we still believe there may be opportunities to adjust irs's menu of services to reduce costs , without affecting irs's ability to meet taxpayers' needs . consolidating telephone call sites: irs operates 25 call sites throughout the country . consistent with earlier plans , irs closed two of its smallest call sites — chicago and houston — in march 2006 , to realize savings in its toll - free telephone operations . also , irs has gained efficiencies from using a centralized call router located in atlanta . as a result , there are currently more than 850 workstations that are not being used ; consequently , irs may have the potential to close several additional call sites . consolidations would not affect telephone service and would be invisible from the taxpayer's perspective . managing a federal agency as large and complex as irs requires managers to constantly weigh the relative costs and benefits of different approaches to achieving the goals mandated by the congress . management is constantly called upon to make important long - term strategic as well as daily operational decisions about how to make the most effective use of the limited resources at its disposal . as constraints on available resources increase , these decisions become correspondingly more challenging and important . in order to rise to this challenge , management needs to have current and accurate information upon which to base its decisions , and to enable it to monitor the effectiveness of actions taken over time so that appropriate adjustments can be made as conditions change .