nasa concurred with our recommendation . it has acknowledged that shuttle workforce management and critical skills retention will be a major challenge for the agency as it progresses toward retirement of the space shuttle and has taken action to address this issue . for example , since we made our recommendation , nasa has developed an agencywide strategic human capital plan and developed workforce analysis tools to assist it in identifying critical skills needs . nasa has also developed a human capital plan specifically for sustaining the shuttle workforce through the retirement and , then transitioning the workforce . additionally , in march 2006 , the senate appropriations subcommittee on commerce , justice , science , and related agencies , and nasa asked the national academy of public administration ( napa ) to assist the agency in planning for the space shuttle's retirement and transition to future exploration activities . in february 2007 , a napa panel recommended that the space shuttle program adopt a rand model for projecting a core workforce because of its emphasis on “long - term scheduling projections , quantification of core competencies and proficiencies , and analysis of overlapping mission needs.” under the rand model , an organization maintains a core capability for any competency that will be needed in the future . according to napa , this model is useful where a given expertise is not immediately required , but is likely to be needed in the future — in this case , for the orion crew exploration vehicle . in july 2006 , we reported that nasa's acquisition strategy for the orion crew exploration vehicle placed the project at risk of significant cost overruns , schedule delays , and performance shortfalls because it committed the government to a long - term contract before establishing a sound business case . our past work has shown that developing a sound business case — one that matches requirements to available and reasonably expected resources before committing to a new product development effort — reduces risk and increases the likelihood of successful outcomes . for a program to increase its chances of success , high levels of knowledge should be demonstrated before significant commitments are made ( i.e. changes to the policy , including the incorporation of key decision points throughout the project development life cycle , should provide an avenue for decision makers to reassess project decisions at key points in the development process to ensure that continued investment is appropriate . however , it should be noted that implementation of the policy in a disciplined manner will ensure success , not the existence of the policy itself . currently , we are evaluating the development of nasa's latest human - rated launch vehicle — the ares i crew launch vehicle . when completed , the ares i vehicle will be capable of delivering the orion spacecraft to low earth orbit for iss missions and for exploration missions to the moon . the project is in the early stages of development . should these commercial services prove to be unreliable or more costly than anticipated , nasa will need to purchase space transportation from its international partners to meet obligations to the iss until the new orion spacecraft become operational .