omb circular no . a - 123 states that management is responsible for establishing and maintaining internal control to achieve the objectives of effective and efficient operations , reliable financial reporting , and compliance with applicable laws and regulations . omb circular no . a - 123 provides guidance to federal managers on improving the accountability and effectiveness of federal programs and operations by establishing , assessing , correcting , and reporting on internal control . omb circular no . a - 123 requires federal agencies and managers to take systematic and proactive measures to , among other things , assess the adequacy of internal control in federal programs and operations and report annually on internal control through management assurance statements . to assess the adequacy of internal controls , federal agencies conduct an annual assessment that includes testing key controls , identifying needed improvements , and developing and implementing corrective action plans . as part of this assessment , omb circular no . a - 123 states that management should consider a variety of internal and external sources , including management knowledge and internal program reviews , financial statement audit reports , single audit reports , and improper payment reviews and reports . further , omb circular no . a - 123 provides that the agency head should consider input from senior program officials and the oig . omb circular no . a - 123 requires management to annually provide assurances about the adequacy and effectiveness of its internal control in a management assurance statement . this statement of assurance , which is included in an agency's performance and accountability report or agency financial report , represents the agency head's informed judgment as to the overall adequacy and effectiveness of internal control within the agency based on management's assessment as described above , including the consideration of outside sources such as the results of financial statement audits . management will give an unqualified statement of assurance when there are no material weaknesses to report and will give a qualified statement of assurance when there are material weaknesses related to internal control . federal agencies , including the five in our review , use other mechanisms and processes , in addition to omb circular no . a - 123 , to oversee and monitor their grants internal controls . the single audit — audit of federal awards , including grant funds , administered by state and local governments and nonprofit organizations — is intended to be an important mechanism used by federal agencies to ensure accountability for federal funds.expenditures , adequacy of internal controls over federal funds , compliance with grant rules and regulations , and questioned amounts . grant - making agencies use single audit reports to monitor grantees' compliance with program and financial requirements . the agencies also single audit reports provide information about the validity of grant use other mechanisms to monitor their grant programs , for example , creating annual grant performance plans , performing eligibility determinations , reviewing grantee financial reports , and conducting management control reviews . congress passed three successive acts from 2002 to 2013 toward eliminating improper payments .