training . opm officials reported that opm provides training opportunities to agencies which include semi - annual multi agency conferences , training for benefit officers , webcasts , self - paced online training , and onsite training if requested . dod and hhs reported that they were satisfied with the training , and nasa and usps reported that they were dissatisfied . for example , nasa reported that opm's training would be improved with more virtual trainings that are shorter . nasa also reported that cost constraints prohibited sending all retirement staff to in - person training while virtual training is accessible to more staff . liaisons and emails . opm officials stated that it communicates with agencies by assigning all agencies a liaison to contact for technical assistance and communicating directly via email . for example , hhs reported that its previous liaison had helped locate missing records , such as a federal employee's federal service history . all of the four selected agencies reported that the interaction with the liaisons was very important , and dod , nasa , and usps reported that the interactions were very helpful and about the right frequency . opm also stated that it communicates with benefit officers and other interested parties through emails . usps reported that the emails from opm included benefit administration letters and announcements about meetings and upcoming trainings . dod , nasa , and usps reported that emails were the most helpful form of communication with opm . error reports . opm provides agencies with a monthly error report after it analyzes each agency's batch of applications . this report includes information on the type of error found and the volume of applications with the same error , according to opm . the error report includes retirement applications for those who retired while working for the federal government , which , for example , does not include disability retirement applications , according to opm officials . opm officials reported that the intent of the error reports is to educate the agencies . dod and usps reported that the error reports were helpful for identifying application errors . however , all four selected agencies reported that aspects of the error reports were not user - friendly . for example , the error reports are in a format that cannot be manipulated , thereby requiring agencies to manually enter data to track the type of errors found , and analyze the data and share the information internally . such manual entry increases the risk of data entry errors that could compromise the accuracy of the original data . the four selected agencies also reported that the error reports lack some types of information , such as clear descriptions of errors , data on trends , and information on disability retirement applications . opm officials reported they review two of the four types of assistance ( guidance and training ) and also conducted a review of error reports in 2014 . they also stated that they had taken some actions in response to agency feedback . however , opm did not provide documentation of their assessments of guidance or training . guidance . opm officials reported that they continue to evaluate their guidance and had taken some actions in response to agency feedback .