dod considered these outcomes to be the same as objectives . table 1 below shows the roadmap's goals and selected objectives . for each roadmap goal , dod identified several tasks that it planned to complete in support of the objectives , and assigned responsibility to various organizations for initiating efforts to complete the tasks . for example , to support the goal of creating foundational language and regional area expertise , one of the tasks dod identified was to publish an annual strategic language list . this list reflects languages for which dod has current and projected requirements and for which it intends to allocate resources , such as to provide training and testing , and pay incentives . the defense language office has been responsible for monitoring completion of the roadmap tasks , which totaled 43 tasks . as of june 2010 , dod officials stated that they had completed all of the tasks except one related to developing policy and doctrine , which they consider to be an ongoing effort . using the roadmap as guidance or a complementary document , each military service has developed or is in the process of developing a service - specific strategy for language and regional - proficiency transformation . these strategies are intended , in part , to guide service training efforts . the military services provide predeployment training to general purpose forces — the amount of which depends on the unit's mission and the amount of time available for such training as articulated by the commander of the unit . dod had also not identified the resources required to implement the tasks in the roadmap or linked the roadmap to its funding requests . in short , the roadmap did not contain any funding information ; therefore , dod had not identified the total cost of its transformation effort . in its annual budget requests , dod had requested funding for 22 major language and regional proficiency programs that it considered to be priorities , as reflected in what it calls the defense language program of record . however , the two documents were not clearly linked ; therefore we were unable to determine how the 22 programs related to the tasks and activities outlined in the roadmap . at the time of our work , dod recognized that the roadmap was not a true strategic plan , and that the department had reached a point with its transformation efforts where such a plan was needed . in the absence of a comprehensive strategic plan that includes measurable performance goals and objectives , funding priorities linked to goals , and accountability for achieving results , we concluded it would be difficult for dod to guide the military services as they develop and implement their strategies , and supporting programs and activities , and also to ensure these efforts were synchronized and consistent with departmentwide goals . furthermore , for both the department and congress , the lack of a comprehensive plan would make it difficult to develop or evaluate funding requests , respectively , and assess progress towards achieving successful transformation of language and regional proficiency capabilities . therefore , we recommended that dod develop a strategic plan with all the key elements i have mentioned .