app . i of our 2008 report provides detailed information on our scope and methodology . the four major federal land management agencies administer approximately 628 million acres , or about 28 percent of the land area in the united states . these public lands are mostly in alaska and the 11 western states: arizona , california , colorado , idaho , montana , nevada , new mexico , oregon , utah , washington , and wyoming . alaska is not currently participating in the fltfa program because of its priority to settle alaska native land claims . blm is authorized to sell or exchange land identified in its land use plans ; the other three land management agencies have limited or no sales authority . once blm has sold land , fltfa directs blm to deposit the revenue generated from these sales into a special u.s. treasury account created by fltfa . however , the act limits the revenue deposited into this account to that generated from sales or exchanges of public lands identified for disposal in a land use plan in effect as of july 25 , 2000 — the date of fltfa's enactment . money in the new account is available to blm and the other three agencies to purchase inholdings , and in some cases , land adjacent to federally designated areas that contain exceptional resources . the federal land management agencies have two methods for identifying land to acquire under fltfa . first , the agencies can nominate parcels through a process laid out in state - level implementation agreements that were developed under the direction of a national memorandum of understanding ( mou ) . second , the secretaries can directly use a portion of fltfa revenue to acquire specific parcels of land at their own discretion . the national mou laid out the expectation that most acquisitions would occur through the state - level process . fltfa places several restrictions on using funds from the new u.s. treasury account . among other things , fltfa requires that ( 1 ) no more than 20 percent of the revenue can be used for blm's administrative and other activities necessary to carry out the land disposal program ; ( 2 ) of the amount not spent on administrative expenses , at least 80 percent must be expended in the state in which the funds were generated ; and ( 3 ) at least 80 percent of fltfa revenue required to be spent on land acquisitions within a state must be used to acquire inholdings ( as opposed to adjacent land ) within that state . in addition , the national mou sets the allocation of funds from the fltfa account for each agency — 60 percent for blm , 20 percent for the forest service , and 10 percent each for the fish and wildlife service and the park service , but the secretaries may vary from these allocations by mutual agreement . at the time of our review , blm had raised $95.7 million in revenue , mostly from selling 16,659 acres . as of may 2007 , about 92 percent of the revenue raised , or $88 million , came from land sales in nevada .