effects not studied . dose , duration , adverse effects to and sex development indicated . no adverse developmental effects indicated . nonadverse and adverse effects indicated . nonadverse and adverse effects indicated . nonadverse effects indicated . no information available on adverse effects . nonadverse effects indicated . no information available on adverse effects . nonadverse effects indicated . no information adverse effects . analysis of dose - marcus response functions for effects of perchlorate on serum hormone from data of greer et al . ( 2000 , 2002 ) and merrill ( 2001a ) nonadverse effects indicated . no information available on adverse effects . nonadverse effects indicated . potential adverse developmental effects indicated . anion selectivity by van sande , ministere de cells the sodium iodide et al . symporter la politique scientifique , and fonds effects indicated . no information available on adverse effects . not identified / not identified / review / unknown unknown effects indicated . no information available on adverse effects . effects not studied . nonadverse effects indicated . no information available on adverse developmental effects . effects not studied ( model developed ) . effects not studied ( model developed ) . effects not studied . effects not studied ( model developed ) . effects not studied ( model developed ) . carr , et al . nonadverse effects indicated . no adverse developmental effects indicated . carr , et al . adverse developmental effects indicated . carr , et al . adverse developmental effects indicated . carr , et al . adverse developmental effects indicated . effects not studied ( reference dose developed ) . sharma , et perchlorate al . dose , repeated no adverse study , bacteria strain , and sex effects indicated . dose , duration , nonadverse and switched exposed / control no information litters with exposed / control dams effects indicated . available on adverse developmental effects . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is presented in appendix i . we conducted our work from june 2004 to march 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards , including an assessment of data reliability and internal controls . perchlorate is a primary ingredient in solid rocket propellant and has been used for decades by dod , nasa , and the defense industry in the manufacturing , testing , and firing of rockets and missiles . on the basis of 1998 manufacturer data , epa estimated that 90 percent of the perchlorate produced in the united states is manufactured for use by the military and nasa . total typical production quantities average several million pounds per year . private industry has used perchlorate to manufacture products such as fireworks , flares , automobile airbags , and commercial explosives . perchlorate is a salt , both manufactured and naturally occurring , and is easily dissolved and transported in water . it has been found in drinking water , groundwater , surface water , and soil across the country . there is no national primary drinking water regulation for perchlorate . in 1992 and again in 1995 , epa established a provisional reference dose range for perchlorate of 0.0001 to 0.0005 milligrams per kilogram of body weight per day .