dhs agreed with the recommendation . in 2007 , we reported and testified on the cybersecurity aspects of cip plans for 17 critical infrastructure sectors , referred to as sector - specific plans . specifically , we found that none of the plans fully addressed the 30 key cybersecurity - related criteria described in dhs guidance . we also determined that while several sectors' plans fully addressed many of the criteria , others were less comprehensive . in addition to the variations in the extent to which the plans covered aspects of cybersecurity , there was also variance among the plans in the extent to which certain criteria were addressed . for example , fewer than half of the plans fully addressed describing ( 1 ) a process to identify potential consequences of cyber attack or ( 2 ) any incentives used to encourage voluntary performance of risk assessments . we noted that without complete and comprehensive plans , stakeholders within the infrastructure sectors may not adequately identify , prioritize , and protect their critical assets . consequently , we recommended that dhs request that the lead federal agencies , referred to as sector - specific agencies , that are responsible for the development of cip plans for their sectors fully address all cyber - related criteria by september 2008 so that stakeholders within the infrastructure sectors will effectively identify , prioritize , and protect the cyber aspects of their cip efforts . the updated plans are due this month . in a september 2007 report and october 2007 testimony , we identified that federal agencies had initiated efforts to improve the security of critical infrastructure control systems — computer - based systems that monitor and control sensitive processes and physical functions . for example , dhs was sponsoring multiple control systems security initiatives , including efforts to ( 1 ) improve control systems cybersecurity using vulnerability evaluation and response tools and ( 2 ) build relationships with control systems vendors and infrastructure asset owners . however , the department had not established a strategy to coordinate the various control systems activities across federal agencies and the private sector . further , it lacked processes needed to address specific weaknesses in sharing information on control system vulnerabilities . we concluded that until public and private sector security efforts are coordinated by an overarching strategy and specific information sharing shortfalls are addressed , there was an increased risk that multiple organizations would conduct duplicative work and miss opportunities to fulfill their critical missions . consequently , we recommended that dhs develop a strategy to guide efforts for securing control systems and establish a rapid and secure process for sharing sensitive control system vulnerability information to improve federal government efforts to secure control systems governing critical infrastructure . in response , dhs officials took our recommendations under advisement and more recently have begun developing a federal coordinating strategy to secure control systems , which is still a work in process . in addition , while dhs began developing a process to share sensitive information ; it has not provided any evidence that the process has been implemented or that it is an effective information sharing mechanism . these responsibilities are described in appendix i .