the lengths of projects also vary . the under secretary has the final authority to approve a project . ndf officials stated that in certain cases — for example , if a project is particularly urgent — the ndf review panel may not formally meet to review a proposal before it is submitted to the under secretary . in those cases , ndf instead may discuss the proposal with other review panel agencies in a different venue , such as at a national security council meeting . after the under secretary approves a project , but before work begins , state provides a 15-day advance notification to congress to inform it of state's intent to begin work on the project . as part of the notification , ndf informs congress of its intent to obligate a specified amount of funds on the project . ndf then considers these funds designated for that project and not available for use on other projects , unless a subsequent notification is made . etana finkler and jeremy sebest provided graphics support and debbie chung provided editorial assistance . julie hirshen and julia jebo grant also provided additional technical assistance . ndf has not obligated any of the funds for this project since north korea expelled international atomic energy agency inspectors and u.s. monitors from the country in april 2009 and work on the project was abruptly halted . additionally , ndf has not yet obligated any of the $750,000 notified in fiscal year 2005 for a project to support proliferation security initiative interdiction activities . according to ndf officials , no funds have been obligated to date because they have not identified any proliferation security initiative activities that warranted the use of the funds . ndf has not developed guidance that establishes time frames for closing cancelled or completed projects to ensure that they are closed out in a timely manner . ndf data show that in the past , ndf has taken years to cancel and close some projects where little or no work ended up occurring . of the 61 projects ndf has closed out since the beginning of fiscal year 2007 , 16 were cancelled projects for which less than 20 percent of the notified funds were ever obligated and expended . for six of these cancelled projects , ndf took more than 10 years to close them out from the date they were initially notified to congress , and for an additional 3 projects ndf took more than 5 years to close them out from the date they were notified to congress . in total , these 9 projects had over $8.3 million in notified funds that were never expended . in addition to cancelled projects , ndf has taken years to close some completed projects . for example , of the 61 projects ndf has closed out since the beginning of fiscal year 2007 , we identified 13 that ndf closed out more than 10 years after work on the project was completed and an additional 18 that ndf closed out more than 5 years after work on the project was completed . these 31 projects had over $3.5 million in notified but unexpended funds .