ma beneficiary sampling . after cms selects 30 ma contracts to audit , the agency selects the beneficiaries whose medical records will be the focus of review . up to 201 beneficiaries are chosen from each contract based on the individuals' risk scores using a stratified random sample: 67 beneficiaries from each of the three risk score groups ( highest one - third of risk scores , the middle one - third , and the lowest third ) . medical record collection and review . after selecting beneficiaries for review , cms requests supporting medical record documentation for all diagnoses submitted to adjust risk in the payment year . the ma organization may submit up to five medical records per audited diagnosis . cms contractors review the submitted medical records to determine if the records support the diagnoses submitted by the ma organizations . if the initial reviewer determines that a diagnosis is not supported , a second reviewer reviews the case . payment error calculation and extrapolation . when medical record review is completed , cms extrapolates a payment error rate to the entire contract beginning with contract - level audits of 2011 payments . each beneficiary's payment error is multiplied by a sampling weight and the number of months the beneficiary was enrolled in the ma contract during the payment year . after these beneficiary - level payment errors are summed , the amount cms will seek to recover will be reduced by ( 1 ) using the lower limit of a 99 percent confidence interval based on the sample and ( 2 ) reducing the recovery amount by a ffs adjuster amount that estimates payment errors that would have likely occurred in ffs claims data . once the recovery amount is finalized , cms releases contract - level radv audit finding reports to each audited ma organization , which may dispute the results of medical record review or appeal the audit findings . beginning with the contract - level radv audits of 2011 payments , cms will collect extrapolated overpayments from ma organizations once all appeals are final . recovery auditors have been used in various industries , including health care , to identify and collect overpayments . the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 directed cms to test the use of racs to identify overpayments and underpayments through a postpayment review of ffs medical claims and recoup overpayments . the tax relief and health care act of 2006 required cms to implement a permanent national recovery audit contractor program by january 1 , 2010 and to compensate racs using a contingency fee structure under which the racs are paid from recovered overpayments . the patient protection and affordable care act expanded the recovery audit program initiated in medicare ffs to ma plans under part c , among other things . in future contract - level radv audits , cms also will review diagnoses submitted through ma encounter data . while cms previously collected diagnoses from ma organizations , in 2012 the agency also began collecting encounter data from ma organizations similar to that submitted on ffs claims .