it is also to handle classified data . increment 3: provide public access . increments 4 and 5: provide additional preservation capability and storage . under the era program plan , developed in september 2006 , increment 1 was to take 2 years to develop , and the remaining increments were each to take 1 year . among the requirements that era is to fulfill are storing and providing access to electronic records from past presidential administrations . the presidential records act gives the archivist of the united states responsibility for the custody , control , and preservation of presidential records upon the conclusion of a president's term of office . the act states that the archivist has an affirmative duty to make such records available to the public as rapidly and completely as possible consistent with the provisions of the act . at the time of the last presidential transition , nara met these requirements by recreating the clinton administration's computer systems ( software and hardware ) that originally held the records and developing simple search interfaces so that nara personnel could search for requested information . nara reported that it took about 400 days to process the 2 terabytes of data from the clinton administration . according to nara , it planned to use era to receive the bush administration's presidential records when the archivist takes custody of them in january 2009 . the era schedule had planned for the required capabilities ( part of increment 2 ) to be available in mid - 2008 . we have issued several reports on era and its development . most recently , in july 2007 , we reported that nara had taken action to implement our prior recommendations . the agency ( 1 ) established a baseline and target architecture , a plan to transition from the baseline to the target , and an architecture review board ; ( 2 ) revised four of five key acquisition policies and planned to comply with appropriate standards ; and ( 3 ) developed a fiscal year 2007 expenditure plan that contained an appropriate level and scope of information needed for the congress to understand its plans and commitments relative to system capabilities , benefits , schedules , and costs . however , we also reported that the era project had experienced schedule delays and cost increases . although the development is continuing , challenges remain . in particular , because nara and the contractor are still negotiating the detailed development plans and specific system requirements , the ioc date for the eop system and specific details regarding functionality remain uncertain . the scope of work and requirements for the eop are not settled . in response to nara's request for a proposal describing detailed plans for developing the system , the contractor delivered a proposal in february 2008 . after review , nara asked the contractor to respond to over 200 comments and provide a revised proposal . the revision , delivered april 25 , 2008 , is currently being reviewed . nara expects to complete its review on or before may 16 , and it expects to reach agreement with its contractor no later than may 30 , with a signed contract modification by mid - june .