affordability . the haitian government has determined that beneficiaries must make monthly payments of 1500 haitian gourdes for 5 years before receiving title to a house . these monthly fees will go toward the maintenance of housing , public spaces , and septic tanks ; management costs incurred by the haitian government ; and incidental expenses . beneficiaries will also face charges for utilities and services , such as electricity and water . community cohesion: the new settlements program currently plans to create eight new “communities,” each consisting of 148 to 1,283 households , with beneficiaries from various locations in haiti and with varied income levels . usaid officials acknowledged that discord may arise among the beneficiaries or between the settlements and surrounding communities . to mitigate these concerns , usaid has put community development programs in place at two sites and plans to fund or pursue ngo partnerships to support such programs at the remaining sites . for caracol - ekam , usaid obligated about $4.8 million to develop and manage the beneficiary selection process , establish a provisional community management committee , and create other mechanisms to support community development . in addition , in august 2013 , usaid signed a $1.5 million agreement with another implementing partner to provide support for the phased occupation of caracol - ekam and management of the settlement , among other activities designed to help ensure its sustainability . for community development activities at dla 1.5 , usaid has entered into a partnership with an ngo that is providing such support through its own funding . usaid has allocated an additional $3.3 million to support community development efforts , including beneficiary selection and site management and operations , at the eight new settlement sites . in addition , usaid plans for partner organizations to contribute to these activities at some of the settlement sites . for example , the memorandum of understanding between usaid and partner donors building houses on three sites notes that partner donor funds are to be provided for community development activities at those settlements ; however , that memorandum does not fully secure such a financial commitment . in addition , it is unclear whether such partnerships will be available to support all of the remaining settlements . usaid officials have stated that it is crucial that these support mechanisms are in place to ensure a smooth transition when beneficiaries move in and to set the tone for interaction among beneficiaries . in our june report , we recommended that the usaid administrator direct the mission in haiti to ensure that each new settlement has community support mechanisms in place prior to beneficiary occupation , including by making funds available as necessary to help ensure this support . usaid agreed with this recommendation and noted that the mission is prepared to provide additional resources if they are needed to finance community development activities . usaid also elaborated on the ongoing and planned activities to facilitate community development and sustainability at the first two settlement sites . we acknowledge usaid's efforts to provide community development support at these two sites and support the agency's intentions to implement our recommendation at future settlement sites .