commerce stated that it had no comments . we conducted this review from august 2003 to march 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to other interested congressional committees , the secretary of state , and the secretary of commerce . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no cost on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8979 if you or your staff have any questions about this report . key contributors to this report were f. james shafer , beverly ann bendekgey , joseph brown , john f. miller , joe zamoyta , mark dowling , martin de alteriis , and lynn cothern . to determine the legal authorizations for the programs funded through the nadr account , and the extent to which the types of activities funded met program authorizations , we obtained the statutory authorizations from program officials and from our independent legal searches ; we discussed those authorizations with program officials and reviewed them to determine if they were the statutes that applied to their respective programs . we obtained from program officials information and related documentation , as well as project data , on the types of activities funded by the programs . we compared those types of activities with program authorizations to determine if the activities funded were generally in accord with the authorizations . to determine the extent to which program management utilized outside experts , we met with program officials responsible for implementing the nadr programs to discuss , and obtain information and documentation on , the composition of program management staff and the extent to which programs utilized outside experts in project implementation . program managers provided us with information on each filled position on the program staff and whether the position was filled with federal employees or outside experts hired under contract . to develop program funding histories for the report appendixes , we obtained a 5-year funding history ( fiscal years 1999 through 2003 ) of individual projects for the major programs . we reviewed the reliability of the project data provided by program officials by performing initial testing of the funding data for completeness , consistency , and reasonableness . we also interviewed program officials responsible for managing the data to assess how the data are developed and maintained , including the security of access to the data . we found the data sufficiently reliable for representing program activities . we conducted this review from august 2003 to march 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the department of state's nonproliferation programs funded through the nonproliferation , anti - terrorism , demining , and related programs ( nadr ) account are designed to help achieve u.s. national security interests by preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruction , their delivery systems , and related materials .