, most urban ) . for independent cities that administer their own elections but are contained geographically within a single county , the city received the code assigned to the county . see figure 1 . within the optical / digital scan equipment category , the most widely used model of optical / digital scan equipment was the precinct count optical / digital scan , with jurisdictions having an estimated 46 percent of the population nationwide using it as their predominant voting equipment . figure 2 shows the predominant types of voting equipment that were used by jurisdictions during the 2016 general election , broken out by model of equipment used . what factors are considered when deciding whether to replace voting equipment and what approaches have selected jurisdictions taken to replace their equipment ? what are selected stakeholders' perspectives on how federal voting system guidelines affect the replacement and development of voting equipment , and what actions has the eac taken to update the guidelines ? to address our first objective , we conducted a web - based survey of officials from a stratified random sample of 800 local election jurisdictions nationwide . in total , we received 564 completed questionnaires for a weighted response rate of 68 percent . in stratifying our nationwide sample , we used a two - level stratified sampling method in which the sample units , or jurisdictions , were broken out into rural and non - rural strata . we surveyed the officials about the types of voting equipment they used , various characteristics of the equipment used , their perspectives on the benefits and challenges they experienced while using the equipment , and how satisfied they were with its performance during the election . unless noted otherwise , the point estimates we report are national - level point estimates representing the experiences , views , and opinions of all local election jurisdictions nationwide with populations greater than 2,500 . we also provide some point estimates for jurisdiction population subgroups , such as large jurisdictions ( greater than 100,000 persons ) , medium jurisdictions ( 25,001 to 100,000 persons ) , and small jurisdictions ( 2,501 to 25,000 persons ) , and jurisdictions that used a particular type of voting equipment , in cases where statistically significant differences exist between the subgroups that may be of interest . the jurisdictions we surveyed were selected with probability proportionate to population size , so rather than expressing the point estimates in terms of the percentage of jurisdictions nationwide that had a specified characteristic , we express the point estimates for the survey responses in terms of the percentage of the population nationwide that resides within jurisdictions that had a specified characteristic . similarly , in instances where we report point estimates for jurisdiction subgroups , we express the point estimate in terms of the percentage of the population that resides within jurisdictions of that respective subgroup that had a specified characteristic . to address our second objective , we used our local election jurisdiction survey described above to obtain information from jurisdictions about the factors they consider when determining whether to replace their voting equipment .