she owns her house . she lives in miami , florida , 33129 . default answer for other questions: “i don't know.” information from medicare.gov that gao used to develop accuracy criteria: if your annual gross income is currently no more than $12,569 ( $1,048 per month ) as a single person or no more than $16,862 ( $1,406 per month ) for a married couple , you might qualify for a $600 credit to help pay for your prescription drugs and medicare may pay your annual enrollment fee . could she qualify for the credit ? i know she has three sources of income . she has about $765 per month from social security . she also gets $250 each month in rental income from the apartment in the downstairs part of her house . she has a tenant that pays rent to her . she's also getting a payout from my father's life insurance policy of $70 each month . other information to provide to the csr if asked: she is single and lives alone . she only has fee - for - service medicare as health insurance . if you and your spouse both qualify for the credit , the credit will be put on each of your cards . tricare for life provides secondary military health coverage available for medicare - eligible uniformed services beneficiaries , their eligible family members , and survivors enrolled in medicare part b . the following sources of income should be included when calculating your gross income for your $600 credit enrollment form: employee compensation ( salary , wages , tips , bonuses , awards , etc. ) unemployment compensation pensions and annuities social security benefits ( including social security equivalent portion of railroad retirement ) railroad retirement benefits veterans affairs benefits military and government disability pensions – armed forces , public health service , national oceanic and atmospheric administration , foreign service ( based on date pension began , combat - related pension , etc. ) individual retirement account distributions interest ( savings accounts , checking accounts , etc. ) ordinary dividends ( stocks , bonds , etc. ) refunds , credits , or offsets of state and local income taxes alimony received business income capital gains farm income rental real estate , royalties , partnerships , trusts , etc . other gains ( sale or exchange of business property ) other income ( lottery winnings , awards , prizes , raffles , etc. ) the following sources of income should not be included when calculating your income for $600 credit enrollment form: inheritances and gifts ( taxed to estate or giver if not under limits for exemption ) interest on state and local government obligations ( eg , bonds ) workers compensation payments federal employees compensation act payments supplemental security income benefits income from national senior service corps programs public welfare and other public assistance benefits proceeds from sale of a home lump sum life insurance benefits paid upon death of insured life insurance benefits paid in installments accelerated life insurance death benefit payments ( eg , viatical settlements , terminal illness , chronic illness ) . question 3 posed to csrs: i'm calling with a question about my grandmother .