air cargo inspections . between cargo placed on passenger aircraft versus all - cargo aircraft in regards to type or degree of inspection . iv ) . information from these three assessments provides input for setting priorities , evaluating alternatives , allocating resources , and monitoring security initiatives . tsa has completed an assessment of air cargo threats , but has not assessed air cargo vulnerabilities or critical assets . in september 2005 , tsa's transportation security intelligence service ( tsis ) completed an overall threat assessment for air cargo , which identified general and specific threats related to both domestic and inbound air cargo . according to tsa , the primary threats to inbound air cargo focus on the introduction of an explosive device in cargo loaded on a passenger aircraft , and the hijacking of an all - cargo aircraft resulting in its use as a weapon to inflict mass destruction . as stated previously , tsa , cbp , and industry stakeholders have also identified the introduction and transport of a wmd or its component parts as a potential threat . tsa has characterized the threats to inbound air cargo as high and has identified air cargo as a primary aviation target for terrorists in the short term . however , tsa has not evaluated the relative security risk presented by inbound air cargo compared to other areas of aviation security , such as passengers and checked baggage . while tsa has acknowledged that the vulnerabilities to inbound air cargo would likely be similar to those of domestic air cargo , tsa has not conducted a vulnerability assessment , nor has it identified vulnerabilities specific to inbound air cargo . tsa officials stated that the agency is first planning to conduct an assessment of domestic air cargo vulnerabilities before initiating an assessment of inbound air cargo vulnerabilities . tsa does not plan to complete its assessment of domestic air cargo vulnerabilities until late in 2007 , thus potentially delaying the start of an assessment of the inbound air cargo vulnerabilities until 2008 . according to tsa officials , limited resources and competing priorities have delayed agency efforts to conduct an assessment of inbound air cargo security vulnerabilities . we also found some inspections in the dataset that had occurred at u.s. airports . we identified these by the airport name and removed them from the data . nevertheless , tsa officials acknowledge that vulnerabilities to inbound air cargo exist and that these vulnerabilities are in some cases similar to those facing the domestic air cargo supply chain . we discussed how , if at all , dhs efforts could be strengthened to secure inbound air cargo with tsa and cbp officials and air cargo industry stakeholders . to identify any challenges dhs and its components may face in strengthening inbound air cargo security , we interviewed tsa and cbp officials about how they coordinate and share information on their respective inbound air cargo security efforts . we obtained information on dhs's , tsa's , and cbp's efforts to apply risk management principles to inform their decisions related to securing inbound air cargo and compared these actions against our risk management framework .