mr . chairmen , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members may have at this time . for questions regarding this testimony , please call joseph a. christoff at ( 202 ) 512-8979 or christoffj@gao.gov . other key contributors to this statement were stephen lord , assistant director ; lynn cothern ; kathleen monahan ; and timothy wedding . table 1 provides the data used in figures 3 and 4 of this testimony . department of state data on iraq's crude oil production and exports are collected by state department officials in iraq through iraq's ministry of oil . we calculated iraq's production for domestic consumption ( the amount of oil produced that remains in the country ) as the remainder of iraq's production of crude oil after exports , based on state department's data . data from the department of energy's energy information administration ( eia ) are based on eia's own analysis and a variety of sources , including dow jones , the middle east economic survey , the petroleum intelligence weekly , the international energy agency , opec's monthly oil market report , the oil & gas journal , platts , and reuters . we recognize that these actions are ultimately the responsibility of the iraqi government . however , it remains clear that the u.s. government wields considerable influence in overseeing iraq stabilization and rebuilding efforts . we also believe additional actions are warranted given the lack of progress that has been made over the last 4 years in achieving iraq reconstruction goals . the deteriorating security environment has led to project delays and increased costs . insurgents have destroyed key oil infrastructure , threatened workers , compromised the transport of materials , and hindered project completion and repairs by preventing access to work sites . moreover , looting and vandalism have continued since 2003 . u.s. officials reported that major oil pipelines in the north continue to be sabotaged , shutting down oil exports and resulting in lost revenues . for example , according to the army corps of engineers , although eight gas oil separation plants in northern iraq have been refurbished , many are not running due to interdictions on the iraq - turkey pipeline and new stabilization plant . the corps noted that if the lines and plant were in operation today , an additional 500,000 barrels per day could be produced in northern iraq . the u.s. government has developed a number of initiatives to protect the oil infrastructure and transfer this responsibility to the iraqi government . such efforts include fortifying the infrastructure and improving the capabilities of rapid repair teams and protection security forces such as the oil protection force and the strategic infrastructure battalions ( sib ) . the u.s. government has paired these security forces with coalition partners and has trained and equipped the sibs . however , u.s. officials stated that the capability and loyalty of some of these units are questionable . according to department of defense ( dod ) and center for strategic and international studies reports , these security forces have been underpaid , underequipped , and poorly led , and are sometimes suspected of being complicit in interdiction and smuggling .