( see fig . 6 for the numbers of army requirements for captains , majors , and lieutenant colonels compared with the numbers of these officers the army had in its operating strength from fiscal years 2003 through 2013. ) as figure 6 shows , the army projects the shortages of captains , majors , and lieutenant colonels to continue . our analysis of these projections shows that by fiscal year 2012 , the supply of captains will have caught up with the demand . the shortage of majors , however , is projected to remain more severe and to continue beyond 2013 with no significant change in the operating strength of majors , despite growing authorizations . according to projections , the shortage of lieutenant colonels will have lessened but also will continue through the end of fiscal year 2013 . aside from the general shortage of officers at these two ranks , officers are in short supply in particular career areas . when the rate at which a career area , or branch , is filled falls below 85 percent , the army considers the branch to have a critical shortage . on the basis of calculations performed on army data , army officials believe that there are several areas where the army does not have enough officers to meet current demand , including transportation , military intelligence , foreign area expertise , and the special branches . ( see app . iv for a list of branches with fill rates below 85 percent. ) the army initiated an incentive program for captains and continues to offer incentives to cadets just prior to their commissioning . dod directive 1304.21 states that bonuses should be awarded only when less costly methods have proven inadequate or impractical and , similarly , that it is wasteful to authorize the use of financial incentives when less costly but equally effective methods are available . in order to fill immediate needs for captains , the army offered a “menu of incentives” to 23,053 captains in branches with fill rates below 90 percent who began service as officers between 1999 and 2005 . from september 2007 until march 2008 — phase one of this program — the army offered these captains a choice of five incentives in return for taking on extended service obligations: ( 1 ) a cash bonus of up to $35,000 ; ( 2 ) a graduate education ; ( 3 ) a choice of branch ; ( 4 ) a choice of location ; or ( 5 ) military school . in phase two , from april 2008 until november 2008 , the army did not offer captains the choice of branch or choice of location , and it limited the military school option to language training . captains were offered these incentives in exchange for committing to at least 3 additional years of active - duty service . of the 15,317 captains who accepted one of these incentives , 94.6 percent chose the cash bonus ( see table 8 ) . according to the most recent army estimate , the cash bonus has cost the army $443.5 million ; based on that estimate , the average bonus was $30,488 .