ii. ) in making its recommendations , the council was not restricted by fiscal constraints . the council endorsed 60 slep upgrade projects for fiscal year 2004 costing $416 million . by contrast , nasa's fiscal year 2004 budget request , submitted in february 2003 , asked for $379 million . nasa management has also not yet made explicit decisions about the basic requirements for key elements in its integrated space transportation plan — the iss , the osp , and the space shuttle . the agency's lack of a long - term plan , caused by frequent changes in the life of the shuttle , has made it hard to fully define , select , and prioritize shuttle upgrade requirements , which form a basis for identifying needed upgrades . such a long - term plan needs to be developed now in conjunction with activities to return the shuttle to fly safely . in addition , accurate and reliable life - cycle cost estimates are important for determining resources needed for the selection and priority of upgrades and to determine annual budget requests . even though an estimate of the total life - cycle cost has not been made , it is evident that the cost of upgrades through 2020 could be billions more than nasa's current rough order of magnitude estimate if potential projects , such as a crew escape system and new projects resulting from the caib recommendations , are included . unless improvements are made in nasa's shuttle modernization efforts , nasa will not be able to ensure upgrades are being made to address the most necessary needs or to articulate the extent of safety that has been enhanced , and determine the total cost of the program . to strengthen the agency's efforts to modernize the space shuttle , we recommend that the nasa administrator take the following four actions: fully define the requirements for all elements of the istp so that those responsible for identifying , selecting , and prioritizing shuttle upgrades will have the guidance and a sound basis to ensure their decisions on upgrade projects are completely integrated with all other elements of the transportation plan . the shuttle columbia tragedy has accentuated this need . at your request , we reviewed the shuttle modernization efforts to determine ( 1 ) nasa's past requirements and plans to upgrade the shuttle through 2020 , ( 2 ) how nasa will identify what upgrades are required in the future and how those upgrades will be selected and prioritized , and ( 3 ) nasa's estimated life - cycle cost for shuttle upgrades through 2020 and identify the potential program uncertainties that may affect cost . the space shuttle is the world's first reusable space transportation system . it consists of a reusable orbiter with three main engines , two partially reusable solid rocket boosters , and an expendable external fuel tank . the space shuttle is an essential element of nasa's transportation plan that includes a framework for maintaining shuttle fleet capability to fly safely through 2020 . the space shuttle is nasa's largest individual program accounting for about 25 percent of the agency's fiscal year 2004 budget request .