 usaid . in march 2011 , usaid issued , jointly with state , the “foreign operations fy 2010 performance report , fy 2012 performance plan” ( state - usaid apr / app ) as part of state's and usaid's congressional budget justification for fiscal year 2012 . the document provides , among other things , information on 2010 targets and results for two pepfar indicators: ( 1 ) number of individuals receiving antiretroviral treatment , and ( 2 ) number of individuals infected or affected by hiv / aids , including orphans and vulnerable children , who were receiving care and support services . the state - usaid apr / app cites pepfar's 5-year target for number of hiv infections averted and provides an annual target for 2010 but does not report on annual results .  cdc . cdc's “fiscal year 2012 justification of estimates for appropriation committees” and “fy 2012 online performance appendix” constitute its performance report and performance plan for fiscal years 2010 and 2012 , respectively . in these documents , cdc reports on 2010 targets and results using four pepfar indicators: ( 1 ) number of individuals receiving antiretroviral treatment ; ( 2 ) number of individuals infected and affected by hiv / aids , including orphans and vulnerable children , receiving care and support services ; ( 3 ) number of pregnant women receiving hiv counseling and testing ; and ( 4 ) number of hiv - positive pregnant women receiving antiretroviral prophylaxis . ogac's most recent annual performance documents do not provide information related to annual targets , as required by the 2008 leadership act and consistent with gpra . ( see fig . pepfar country and regional operational plans contain country - level and regional targets for the coming year and data showing program targets and results , measured by pepfar indicators . however , the annual pepfar operational plans and reports that ogac submitted to congress for fiscal years 2009 and 2010 do not contain any information on annual targets . moreover , ogac's annual reports to congress for fiscal years 2009 and 2010 do not compare annual results with annual targets . according to the 2008 leadership act , these reports are to include an assessment of progress toward the achievement of annual goals and , if annual goals are not being met , the reasons for such failures . in addition , gpra calls for annual performance reports to compare results with previously established targets . state - usaid's and cdc's annual performance documents present some information on pepfar targets and results ( see fig . the state - usaid apr / app cites two targets for treatment and care programs for fiscal year 2010 . cdc's fiscal year 2010 performance report and fiscal year 2012 performance plan cite four fiscal year targets — two for prevention , and one each for treatment and care programs . both agencies' performance documents compare pepfar 2010 results with targets set for the same year and rate pepfar's performance against those targets . for example , the documents report that pepfar exceeded its 2010 target for number of individuals on antiretroviral treatment but did not meet its target for number of individuals receiving care and support services .