other partnerships can be more complex . for example , a private entity may assume control over the operations and maintenance of an existing public asset , such as a toll road , for a fixed period of time as part of a revenue - sharing agreement with the public sector . alternatively , a private entity may take responsibility for all aspects of a new , publicly - sponsored infrastructure project — including design , finance , construction , and operations and maintenance — in exchange for periodic , performance - based payments from the public sector , from which the private sector expects to profit . in in more straightforward examples of public - private prior work , we have noted that there is no “free” money in public - private partnerships — for example , while highway public - private partnerships can be used to obtain financing for highway infrastructure without the use of public sector funding , this funding is a form of privately issued debt that must be repaid to private investors seeking a return on their investment by collecting toll revenues . in recent years , the federal government has placed an increasing emphasis on the nation's freight transportation system in its surface transportation authorizing legislation . in 2012 , the president signed into law the moving ahead for progress in the 21st century act ( map - 21 ) . map - 21 established seven goals for a national freight policy . none of these goals explicitly encompasses addressing community impacts of freight , such as local traffic - congestion impacts . one of the goals is to invest in infrastructure improvements and implement operational improvements that reduce congestion — which could potentially incorporate local traffic congestion caused by freight flows . however , according to dot officials , dot has generally treated congestion as a source of delay in the delivery of freight shipments and hence as a factor that reduces economic productivity , not as a factor that produces adverse community impacts . in addition , another goal , to reduce the environmental impacts of freight movement on the national freight network , refers to a type of community impact that can be caused by , map - 21 also freight congestion . unlike its predecessor legislationrequires dot to establish a national freight strategic plan in consultation with state departments of transportation and other transportation stakeholders . map - 21 includes as a required element of the freight strategic plan the identification of best practices to mitigate the impacts of freight movement on communities . also unlike its predecessor legislation , map - 21 requires dot to establish a national freight network . the national freight network is to include a primary freight network and critical rural freight corridors to assist states in strategically directing resources toward improved system performance for efficient movement of freight on highways . the act established a deadline of october 1 , 2013 for dot to designate the highway primary freight network . in november 2013 , dot released for comment a draft primary freight network .