this is an issue that needs to be addressed in the short - term . jpdo faces the challenge of determining the nature and scope of the research and technology development necessary to begin the transition to nextgen , as well as identifying the entities that can conduct that research and development . according to officials at faa and jpdo , they are currently studying these issues and trying to assess how much research and development faa can assume . an faa official recently testified that the agency proposes to increase its research and development funding by $280 million over the next 5 years . ( 2 ) what is the status of jpdo's planning and facilitation of the transition to nextgen ? and ( 3 ) what are some key challenges that faa and jpdo need to address in moving toward nextgen ? we conducted this work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . during the last few years , faa has made significant progress in implementing businesslike operations and procedures for acquiring and managing air traffic control systems which have improved faa's management of the current system and should better position the agency to manage the enormously complex transition to nextgen . however , further work remains to fully address past problems in acquiring systems and to institutionalize changes throughout the agency . by creating the air traffic organization and appointing a chief operating officer , faa established a new management structure and adopted more leading practices of private sector businesses to address the cost , schedule , and performance shortfalls that have plagued air traffic control acquisitions . my statement is based on our november 2006 report and recent testimonies as well as on - going work . my testimony today focuses on the following questions: ( 1 ) what progress is faa making in implementing initiatives that could provide a solid foundation for managing the transition to nextgen ? one outcome of these changes is that for the past 3 fiscal years , faa has reported exceeding its system acquisition goals . for fiscal year 2006 , faa reported that its critical acquisitions were 100 percent on budget and over 97 percent on schedule . faa has also improved its management of the air traffic control system through increased efforts to achieve cost savings by outsourcing and consolidating facilities . currently , faa is seeking savings through outsourcing its planned nationwide deployment of a critical nextgen surveillance technology . to help sustain progress in managing acquisitions and address remaining program risks , faa is working with the office of management and budget ( omb ) to develop goals and milestones for faa to meet in further reducing acquisition risks . despite faa's progress , however , the faa administrator's term ends in september 2007 and the chief operating officer left in february 2007 , after serving 3 years . thus , faa will have lost two of its significant agents for change by the end of september . faa's new leaders will need to demonstrate the same commitment to improvement as the outgoing leaders . jpdo has made progress in furthering its key planning documents , but continues to face challenges in institutionalizing its collaborative practices .