ii ) . for instance , georgia bureau of investigation officials said that the state used nchip funding in 1999 to provide smaller law enforcement agencies a cost - effective approach to electronically submit fingerprints . the funds were used , for example , to purchase card - scanning equipment to digitally convert paper fingerprint cards for electronic transmission to the state repository . other key contributors to this report were amy bernstein , michele fejfar , ann h. finley , jason kelly , george quinn , deena richart , and jason schwartz . at the request of the ranking minority member , senate committee on appropriations , we addressed the following questions regarding the submission of criminal fingerprints by local and state law enforcement agencies to the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) for processing by the integrated automated fingerprint identification system ( iafis ) : why is iafis processing of criminal fingerprints important to local and state law enforcement agencies ? what efforts are being made to improve the timeliness of criminal fingerprint submissions from local and state law enforcement agencies ? to address these questions , we visited the fbi's criminal justice information services division ( clarksburg , wv ) , which manages iafis . we interviewed fbi officials and reviewed available statistics , studies , and other information about the issues . also , we contacted the bureau of justice statistics ( bjs ) , which administers a federal grant program to help states automate criminal history records . further , we discussed the fingerprint issues with representatives of the international association of chiefs of police , the national sheriffs' association , the major county sheriffs' association , the national district attorneys association , and search . also , we discussed these issues with ( and analyzed statistics or other information maintained by ) local and state law enforcement agencies in five states — connecticut , georgia , missouri , nevada , and new mexico . we selected these states to reflect a range of factors or considerations — volume of fingerprint submissions , the “age” of such submissions ( i.e. , the average amount of time from the date of arrest to when the fingerprints were entered into iafis ) , and the level of automation in the state's criminal justice information system , as well as to encompass different geographic areas of the nation . we conducted our work from march through december 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . more details about the scope and methodology of our work are presented in appendix i . historically , before the invention of automated fingerprint identification systems , paper fingerprint cards were used by law enforcement agencies to report arrest information to state repositories and to the fbi . the process was time - consuming , given that the local arresting agency mailed the fingerprint cards to the state repository , which mailed the information to the fbi — and , in return , the fbi's response ( based on a search of national records ) would be mailed back to the state repository , which would then mail the information to the local arresting agency .