of these , about 900 were in hotels and 800 were in apartments . in september 2003 , the prices that macdill had obtained for hotel rooms ranged from $44 to $93 per person per day , and for apartment units from $55 to $93 per person per day ( see table 1 ) . the agreements with apartment vendors do not require security deposits and also allow reservists to leave earlier than their scheduled departure dates without paying penalties . in addition to using bpas to procure off - base lodging for reservists , macdill used installation - specific guidance on sharing lodging to further reduce off - base lodging costs in two - bedroom apartments . the guidance requires officers at or below the rank of lieutenant colonel and enlisted personnel at or below the rank of chief master sergeant or sergeant major to share two - bedroom apartments . this practice allowed macdill to achieve a cost savings of up to 55 percent of the gsa rate ( table 1 ) . for example , if two reservists were sharing a two - bedroom apartment that costs $93 per day , each would pay half of that amount , significantly less than the gsa daily rate of $93 per person . of a total of 800 reservists housed in apartments , about 600 shared two - bedroom units . macdill officials responsible for lodging operations told us that they try to place military personnel who are on temporary duty for 45 days or longer in apartments . this allows personnel to have access to cooking facilities , as well as more room than they would have in a hotel room . macdill officials indicated that they consider three criteria in placing personnel in apartments: ( 1 ) whether or not personnel have access to transportation to get to the base , ( 2 ) whether they are compatible in terms of rank and gender to fill a vacancy in a two - bedroom apartment , and ( 3 ) if these two criteria are met , officials randomly assign personnel to a unit . however , the officials also must consider such factors as security or the ability of a particular apartment complex to accommodate an entire reserve unit . based on data that we received from macdill lodging officials , the base spent about $23.3 million for 386,466 bed - nights in off - base lodging , including both short - and long - term stays , in fiscal year 2003 . however , had macdill paid the maximum allowable gsa rate of $93 per day for the same number of days , the costs would have amounted to $35.9 million . as a result , the installation reported that it saved an estimated $12.6 million for off - base lodging costs by using blanket purchase agreements and requiring apartment sharing . of the $23.3 million spent in fiscal year 2003 , macdill paid about $13.9 million for apartment rentals and about $9.3 million for hotels . the estimated savings attributable to apartments is about $7.6 million and about $5 million in savings is attributable to hotels .