iv for further details ) . for one measure , the letter error rate , irs's performance declined and the 2006 goal was not met . irs officials said that computer system errors were partially to blame for the higher letter error rate , along with some errors as a result of the lack of training of new employees at one submission processing center . more importantly , however , irs's processing performance has significantly improved for all nine measures compared to 2001 or for measures not in existence in 2001 , compared to their first year in existence . in addition to the processing measures results , representatives of the tax preparer industry reported that returns processing went well . groups and organizations that we talked to included the national association of enrolled agents and the american institute of certified public accountants . in addition , tigta testified and later reported no significant problems during the filing season . irs officials corroborated the view that returns processing went smoothly . cade , the cornerstone of irs's investment in systems modernization , also performed well . for the 2006 filing season , cade processed about 7.4 million , or 5.6 percent , of the 131 million income tax returns filed electronically or on paper , and disbursed about 6.6 million refunds totaling over $3.4 billion . while the percentage of returns cade processed is modest , cade is important because it is ultimately expected to replace irs's antiquated master file legacy system , which contains the agency's repository of taxpayer account information . a major benefit of cade is that it is much faster compared to the master file legacy system , partly due to cade's daily processing cycle , compared to the master file's weekly processing cycle . for example , according to irs officials , direct deposit refunds are issued by cade 1 – 5 business days faster than the current system , and paper check refunds are issued 4 – 8 business days faster . the benefits of cade , in terms of faster processing , are likely to expand to more taxpayers because the next release of cade is expected to process an estimated 33 million returns in 2007 , over four times more than the number processed through cade in 2006 . because cade processes returns and refunds more quickly , it can help minimize the need for refund anticipation loans ( ral ) . reducing the need for rals matters because of the high interest rates that taxpayers are often charged for these short - term loans , making them controversial . systems modernization has been a key part of irs's efforts to improve taxpayer services . cade is a major investment , with almost $200 million spent on development and implementation through fiscal year 2006 , and the cornerstone of irs's systems modernization program . cade is only partially completed , and irs estimates that over $500 million more is required to fully implement the individual tax return processing part of the system . in its proposed fiscal year 2007 budget request to the congress , irs did not report the benefits from cade to date in terms of faster refund timeliness .