gao - 06-458t . february 16 , 2006 . ( see fig . the number of unauthorized workers arrested during worksite enforcement operations has also declined since fiscal year 1999 . as shown in figure 4 , the number of worksite arrests for administrative violations of immigration law , such as for violating the terms of a visa , declined by about 84 percent from 2,849 in fiscal year 1999 to 445 in fiscal year 2003 . ice attributes the decline in the number of notices of intent to fine issued to employers and number of administrative worksite arrests to various factors including the widespread availability and use of counterfeit documents and the allocation of resources to other priorities . various studies have shown that the availability and use of fraudulent documents have made it difficult for ice agents to prove that employers knowingly hired unauthorized workers . ice officials also told us that employers who agents suspect of knowingly hiring unauthorized workers can claim that they were unaware that their workers presented false documents at the time of hire , making it difficult for agents to prove that the employer willfully violated irca . in addition , according to ice , the allocation of ins and ice resources to other priorities has contributed to the decline in the number of notices of intent to fine and worksite arrests . for example , ins focused its worksite enforcement resources on egregious violators who were linked to other criminal violations , like smuggling , fraud or worksite exploitation , and de - emphasized administrative employer cases and fines . furthermore , ice investigative resources were redirected from worksite enforcement activities to criminal alien cases , which consumed more investigative hours by the late 1990s than any other enforcement activity . after september 11 , 2001 , ins and ice focused investigative resources on national security cases , and in particular , focused worksite enforcement efforts on critical infrastructure protection , which is consistent with dhs's primary mission to combat terrorism . according to ice , the redirection of resources from other enforcement programs to perform national security - related investigations resulted in fewer resources for traditional program areas like fraud and noncritical infrastructure worksite enforcement . additionally , some ice field representatives , as well as immigration experts , noted that the focus on critical infrastructure protection does not address the majority of worksites in industries that have traditionally provided the magnet of jobs attracting illegal aliens to the united states . as part of the secure border initiative , in april 2006 ice announced a new interior enforcement strategy to target employers of unauthorized aliens , immigration violators , and criminal networks . under this strategy , ice plans to target employers who knowingly employ unauthorized workers by bringing criminal charges against them . ice has reported increases in the numbers of criminal arrests , indictments , and convictions between fiscal years 2004 and 2005 as a result of these efforts . between fiscal years 2004 and 2005 , ice reported that the number of criminal arrests increased from 160 to 165 .