gao - 07-1040 . washington , d.c.: september 13 , 2007 . we did not conduct work at those other federal agencies . in addition to representatives of the nine domestic army gaining installations we visited and nearby community leaders , we contacted the following organizations during our review: office of the secretary of defense office of the deputy under secretary of defense ( installations and environment ) , brac office , arlington , virginia office of the deputy under secretary of defense for military community and family policy , arlington , virginia oea , arlington , virginia assistant chief of staff for installation management , arlington , virginia deputy chief of staff for operations and plans , arlington , virginia installation management command headquarters , arlington , virginia installation management command , northeast region , hampton , virginia installation management command , northwest region , rock island , illinois installation management command , southeast region , atlanta , georgia installation management command , southwest region , san antonio , texas army corps of engineers headquarters , washington , d.c. training and doctrine command , hampton , virginia military surface deployment and distribution command , newport our analysis was complicated by the evolving nature of the army's infrastructure implementation plans , which continued to change throughout our review . business plans intended to direct the implementation of the brac recommendations affecting the gaining bases were in draft at the time of our review . army officials said that the information they provided to us and that we present in our report represented their current plans at the time of our review and should be considered an approximation of their projected restationing and funding actions because these plans are subject to change . consequently , civilian planning for providing infrastructure was subject to change based on changes in the army's plans . although we found some discrepancies in the army's data , we concluded that , overall , they were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we conducted our review from march 2006 through july 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in addition to the contact named above , barry w. holman , director ( retired ) ; james r. reifsnyder , assistant director ; nelsie s. alcocer ; grace a. coleman ; nancy t. lively ; richard w. meeks ; david f. nielson ; and roger l. tomlinson made major contributions to this report . military base realignments and closures: plan needed to monitor challenges for completing more than 100 armed forces reserve centers . military base realignments and closures: observations related to the 2005 round . gao - 07-1230r . washington d.c.: september 06 , 2007 . military base closures: projected savings from fleet readiness centers likely overstated and actions needed to track actual savings and overcome certain challenges . gao - 07-304 . washington , d.c.: june 29 , 2007 . military base closures: management strategy needed to mitigate challenges and improve communication to help ensure timely implementation of air national guard recommendations . gao - 07-641 . washington , d.c.: may 16 , 2007 . defense acquisitions: future combat system risks underscore the importance of oversight . gao - 07-672t . washington , d.c.: march 27 , 2007 .