( recommendation 6 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dod for review and comment . in its written comments , which we received on september 20 , 2017 , dod concurred with our six recommendations and noted planned actions to address each recommendation . dod's comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix ii . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated into the report as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics ; the secretaries of the army , the navy and the air force ; the commandant of the marine corps , and the director of the defense contract management agency . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-5257 or merrittz@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff members who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . to determine the extent to which the department of defense's ( dod ) report on single source of supply risks addresses the direction in the senate report , we compared dod's october 2016 report against the elements identified in the provision of senate report 114-49 . the provision directed dod to develop a classified report that addressed the following four elements: 1 . identify major defense acquisition programs with operational implications . include a list of critical components of such programs provided by single source and single provider suppliers . identify risk management actions with associated implementation plans and time lines dod will take to prevent negative operational impact in the event of a loss of such suppliers . identify severity of the operational impact of the loss of such suppliers . that work is planned for completion in 2018 . for the first objective , we compared dod's october 2016 report against the four elements directed by senate report 114-49 . we assessed whether the information included in dod's report addressed , partially addressed , or did not address each element . two gao analysts independently reviewed dod's report and determined the degree to which each element was addressed . we also reviewed available dod information and data on single sources of supply and compared the report and related information and data to criteria outlined in , standards for internal control in the federal government such as those that state that agency management should obtain and use quality information to achieve the entity's objectives and should communicate the quality information internally and externally . we discussed the report with dod officials who have a role in identifying and assessing single source of supply risks in the defense industrial base . for the second objective , we reviewed dod and military department guidance related to weapon systems acquisition and program management , supply chain management , and risk mitigation .