establish goals for the process . the secretary of defense emphasized the importance of transforming the military to make it more efficient as part of the 2005 brac round . other goals for the 2005 brac process included fostering jointness among the four military services , reducing excess infrastructure , and producing savings . prior rounds focused more on reducing excess infrastructure and producing savings . develop criteria for evaluating closures and realignments . dod proposed selection criteria , which were made available for public comment via the federal register . this increase was , in part , because high - level leadership ensured that the options were approved not by the military departments but rather by a dod senior - level group , known as the infrastructure steering group . as shown in figure 4 , the infrastructure steering group was placed organizationally on par with the military departments . establish a common analytical framework . to ensure that the selection criteria were consistently applied , the office of the secretary of defense , the military departments , and the seven joint cross - service groups first performed a capacity analysis of facilities and functions . before developing the candidate recommendations , dod's capacity analysis relied on data calls to hundreds of locations to obtain certified data to assess such factors as maximum potential capacity , current capacity , current usage , and excess capacity . then , the military departments and joint cross - service groups performed a military value analysis for the facilities and functions based on primary military value criteria , which included a facility's or function's current and future mission capabilities , physical condition , ability to accommodate future needs , and cost of operations . develop brac oversight mechanisms to improve accountability for implementation . in the 2005 brac round , the office of the secretary of defense for the first time required the military departments to develop business plans to better inform the office of the secretary of defense of the status of implementation and financial details for each of the brac 2005 recommendations . these business plans included: ( 1 ) information such as a listing of all actions needed to implement each recommendation ; ( 2 ) schedules for personnel relocations between installations ; and ( 3 ) updated cost and savings estimates by dod based on current information . this approach permitted senior - level intervention if warranted to ensure completion of the brac recommendations by the statutory completion date . involve the audit community to better ensure data accuracy . the dod inspector general and military department audit agencies played key roles in identifying data limitations , pointing out needed corrections , and improving the accuracy of the data used in the process . in their oversight roles , the audit organizations , which had access to relevant information and officials as the process evolved , helped to improve the accuracy of the data used in the brac process and thus strengthened the quality and integrity of the data used to develop closure and realignment recommendations .