subscribers . due in part to the consolidation of carriers and spectrum , the top national carriers have increasingly dominated the acquisition of subscribers . one metric of competition is net adds , or the change in the number of subscribers a carrier has within a specific period , which takes subscriber turnover into consideration . figure 7 illustrates the net adds , by carrier , since 2005 . these data show that over the past 4 years , net subscriber additions have primarily and consistently accrued to the top national carriers . data from the second quarter of 2009 alone show that the top national carriers accrued about four times the number of net adds as the next carrier . indeed , some stakeholders stated that a reason for the high number of net adds is because the large national carriers have exclusive handsets and consumers are choosing those carriers because of their offerings . without net adds , small and regional carriers can face challenges securing investments because non - negative net adds are indicative of a steady revenue source . the trend in subscriber turnover , though incorporated into net subscriber additions , on its own also indicates that subscribers are mostly accruing to the top national carriers . subscriber turnover is most commonly measured as the churn rate , which is the number of subscribers disconnecting from service during a given period as a percentage of the average total number of subscribers for a carrier . as the penetration rate moves past 90 percent , there are fewer new consumers to gain . the difficulty for small and regional carriers is retaining the subscribers that they have . as figure 8 indicates , the top two national carriers have generally had lower average monthly churn rates than the next two national carriers , as well as small and regional carriers . while a low churn rate could be due to a number of different factors , these data indicate that over the past three years , small and regional carriers as well as some national carriers have had difficulty retaining subscribers . network investments . the size and scale of large national carriers gives them the advantage of being able to deploy faster networks ahead of their competitors , thus reinforcing their competitive advantage . developing and expanding networks require significant capital investment . without pressure to keep their networks and , therefore , their services competitive , carriers may not be willing to undertake this investment . therefore , capital expenditure is one way to measure the level of competition in a given market . we encountered divergent views on the extent of investment being made by wireless carriers . while some stakeholders maintained that their investment in wireless networks remains a significant portion of their costs , others pointed to data showing that some wireless carriers do not appear to be investing aggressively , based on capital expenditures as a percentage of revenue . according to some industry analysts , carriers generally continue to invest significant capital in networks , despite the recent economic downturn . in the past 3 years , large national carriers have been able to invest more money in their networks than other carriers .