among them is the prohibition against tying arrangements . in general , section 106 of the bank holding company act amendments of 1970 ( section 106 ) prohibits banks from tying the availability or price of a product or service to a customer's purchase of another product or service or the customer's providing some additional credit , property or service . in recent years , investment bank affiliates of large commercial banks have gained an increasing share of the annual $1.3 trillion debt underwriting market . a controversy has arisen over whether or not unlawful tying has contributed to this increased market share . some unaffiliated investment banks ( investment banks ) and some corporate borrowers contend that commercial banks have facilitated investment affiliates' increased market share of debt underwriting by unlawfully tying the availability of bank credit to debt underwriting by the bank's affiliate , a violation of section 106 . in addition , some investment bankers assert that large commercial banks engage in unlawful tying by offering reduced rates for corporate credit only if the borrower also purchases debt underwriting services from the bank's investment affiliate . if such a reduced rate were conditioned only on the borrower's purchase of debt underwriting services from the commercial bank's investment affiliate , the arrangement would constitute unlawful tying . should the reduced rate constitute an underpricing of credit ( that is , the extension of credit below market rates ) , the underpricing could also violate section 23b of the federal reserve act of 1913 ( section 23b ) . section 23b generally requires that certain transactions between a bank and its affiliates occur on market terms ; that is , on terms and under circumstances that are substantially the same , or at least as favorable to the bank , as those prevailing at the time for comparable transactions with unaffiliated companies . section 23b applies to any transaction by a bank with a third party if an affiliate has a financial interest in the third party or if an affiliate is a participant in the transaction . the banking regulators suggest that the increase in debt underwriting market share by the investment affiliates of large commercial banks can be explained by a number of market and competitive factors not associated with tying , such as industry consolidation and acquisition of investment banking firms by bank holding companies . in addition , representatives from large commercial banks with investment affiliates contend that they sell a range of products and services to corporate customers , including credit , but do not unlawfully tie bank credit or credit pricing to underwriting services . furthermore , officials from large commercial banks , federal banking and securities regulators , and investment bankers observe that ties between credit and other banking products are often customer - initiated , and thus exempt from the laws governing tying .