sffas no . 4 also states that to fully account for the costs of the goods and services they produce , reporting entities should include the cost of goods and services received from other entities . further , the standard states that , “ideally , all inter - entity costs should be recognized . this is especially important when those costs constitute inputs to government goods or services provided to non - federal entities for a fee or user charge . the fees and user charges should recover the full costs of those goods and services.” during fiscal year 2002 , the board did not have a process in place to fully accumulate and report costs , including those of the ipa , the board , and working group in conformance with sffas no . as mentioned earlier , in fiscal year 2002 , the congress appropriated $2 million for costs to implement the program , which the board decided to use exclusively for an ipa and other consulting services . during fiscal year 2002 , the working group participated in a number of organizational meetings , coordinated the board's initial meeting , and participated as technical evaluation staff on the procurement for the ipa . the working group also worked with ernst and young to develop the underwriting criteria and with the board to assist in the development of the program regulations and other procurement activities . because the board did not request additional funding in fiscal year 2002 to support working group activities , the respective departments and agencies of the working group members absorbed these costs . we requested that the board estimate the costs that the working group incurred during fiscal year 2002 in support of the program's administrative activities . the board estimated that the working group incurred $78,000 in administrative expenses . table 1 provides a summary of these cost estimates . without accumulating and reporting the costs of administering the program , the board will not comply with sffas no . 4 or have the cost information needed to make informed decisions about the program . the board acknowledged that if the costs incurred by the working group were accumulated and reported , it would more accurately reflect the total cost of this program . more importantly , the act directed the board to charge and the administrator to collect loan guarantee application and origination fees to cover , but not exceed , certain costs of administering the program such as reviewing and approving applications . the board has proposed in its draft regulations an application fee of $10,000 to $40,000 , depending on the size of the loan , and a loan guarantee origination fee equal to the lesser of 2 percent of the loan amount or $500,000 . without knowing the costs of administering the program , the board cannot determine whether the aggregate amount of fees collected is sufficient to recover , but not exceed , certain costs of administering the program . it is expected that the board will approve a small number of loans ; therefore , it has a limited opportunity to charge the appropriate fees . the local tv program has not been implemented within the time frames specified in the local tv act .