gao - 09-3sp . gao - 09-3sp . data for the glm and abi instruments we found inconsistencies in the contractor's monthly and cumulative reports that made it more difficult for noaa to effectively oversee the contractor's performance . specifically , we found inconsistencies between cumulative and monthly budget totals in contractor performance reports that ranged from hundreds of thousands to millions of dollars . for instance , the cumulative amount of budget allocated to complete work for glm between february 2013 and march 2013 increased by just under $2 million , while the stated monthly change was $3.8 million . also , the cumulative amount of budgeted work accomplished for abi between may 2013 and june 2013 increased by $3.2 million , while the stated monthly change was $5.4 million . month - to - month discrepancies such as this occurred in each of 6 months for the glm instrument and each of 9 months for the abi instrument in the period between august 2013 and july 2014 . program officials stated that these issues were addressed in later contractor reports , and that program analysts communicate with contractors and program management regularly to resolve any found discrepancies . however , more recent monthly reports continue to show discrepancies . if the instrument's cost data are unreliable , it is difficult for managers and program officials to make financial projections and assess reserve needs and usage . the goes - r program is considering eliminating or deferring planned functionality on its ground system due to issues experienced during development . specifically , the goes - r program is considering deferring functionality on the ground system in order to provide schedule relief in the case of further delays . we analyzed earned value management ( evm ) data to compare levels of cost variance over time for key program components , and calculated earned value management metrics using program cost performance reports . to ensure that the program's cost data were reliable , we compared formulas from the gao cost guide to the program's evm approach . we also compared evm data across a series of monthly program cost performance reports . in doing so , we found inconsistencies in the monthly evm data for selected components , and reported on those inconsistencies in this report . however , the data were sufficient for our purpose of assessing overruns because these inconsistencies were small in comparison to cost variances . we assessed recently enacted and potential changes in functionality for key program components . we also interviewed program officials regarding changes in schedule milestones , cost performance and reserve funding , and functionality . we recommended the program strengthen its process for planning and reporting on reserves . more recently , in september 2013 , we reported on weaknesses in the process for reporting reserves to management and recommended the agency take action to brief senior executives on a regular basis regarding the status of reserves . the agency agreed with our recommendations and took steps to address them by identifying needed reserve levels and providing a more detailed breakdown of reserve percentage calculations . however , noaa is not yet identifying the reserves associated with each satellite in the series .