gao - 14-749 . washington , d.c.: july 30 , 2014 . littoral combat ship: deployment of uss freedom revealed risks in implementing operational concepts and uncertain costs . gao - 14-447 . washington , d.c.: july 8 , 2014 . total starred deficiencies are those identified during acceptance trials . the data we collected represents the deficiencies at a particular moment in time . further , deficiencies may be subdivided into multiple deficiencies or consolidated into a smaller number when the navy and its shipbuilding contractors determine whether the government or the shipbuilder is responsible for correcting the respective deficiencies . we reviewed existing information about the data and the system that produced them , including previous data reliability testing performed on the same data collected for previous engagements on navy shipbuilding , and interviews with agency officials knowledgeable about the data . we determined that the tsm data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report for the ships we reviewed . to further corroborate documentary evidence and gather additional information in support of our review for both objectives , we conducted interviews with relevant navy and contractor officials responsible for managing lcs 1 and lcs 2 contracts , construction , acceptances , and post - delivery activities , including the program executive office , lcs ; lcs seaframe program office ; lcs fleet introduction program office ; supship ; insurv ; office of the chief of naval operations — surface warfare directorate ; naval sea systems command ( navsea ) — contracts directorate ; lockheed martin and marinette marine ( lcs 1 prime contractor and shipbuilder ) ; general dynamics and austal usa ( lcs 2 prime contractor and shipbuilder ) ; and the american bureau of shipping . we also held discussions with attorneys from navsea and the office of the assistant secretary of the navy for research , development and acquisition . we conducted this performance audit from november 2013 to september 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the contact named above , key contributors to this report were diana moldafsky , assistant director ; christopher r. durbin , analyst in charge ; george bustamante ; laura greifner ; kristine hassinger ; heather b. miller ; roxanna t. sun ; and ozzy trevino . littoral combat ship: additional testing and improved weight management needed prior to further investments . navy shipbuilding: opportunities exist to improve practices affecting quality . gao - 14-122 . washington , d.c.: november 19 , 2013 . navy shipbuilding: significant investments in the littoral combat ship continue amid substantial unknowns about capabilities , use , and cost . gao - 13-738t . washington , d.c.: july 25 , 2013 . navy shipbuilding: significant investments in the littoral combat ship continue amid substantial unknowns about capabilities , use , and cost . gao - 13-530 . washington , d.c.: july 22 , 2013 .