the army reported slightly more funding than obligations for the war . at the end of fiscal year 2003 , the army reported obligations that initially appeared to be more than $500 million less than the available funding . however , as of january 2004 , the army has subsequently updated its fiscal year 2003 reporting to reflect about $470 million in additional reported obligations . dod's accounting systems capture the obligation of funds . specifically , for fiscal year 2003 we ( 1 ) analyzed the obligations reported by dod in support of the war and ( 2 ) compared whether the amount of funding received by the military services was adequate to cover dod's incremental costs incurred in support of gwot . to identify dod's fiscal year 2003 gwot obligations , we used dod's consolidated department of defense terrorist response cost reports , which report the monthly and cumulative gwot obligations , and analyzed this data . we focused our review on dod's obligations reported for conducting military operations in support of the war . we did not review the obligations reported by the intelligence community , but mention the amount appropriated and obligated , because the amount appropriated was part of the total dod appropriation . of the $68.7 billion appropriated for gwot , almost $16 billion was appropriated in the fiscal year 2003 wartime supplemental to a transfer account called the iraqi freedom fund . the iraqi freedom fund is a special account providing funds for additional expenses for ongoing military operations in iraq , and those operations authorized by p.l . in official oral comments on a draft of this report , officials from dod's office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) stated that the department had no objections to the report . dod also provided technical comments and we have incorporated them as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the house and senate budget committees , the secretary of defense , the secretaries of the military services , and the director , office of management and budget . to support the war in fiscal year 2003 , congress appropriated $68.7 billion to dod: $6.1 billion in the consolidated appropriations resolution , 2003 , and $62.6 billion in the emergency wartime supplemental appropriations act , 2003 . while most of these funds were only available for expenditure in fiscal year 2003 , some could be expended in subsequent fiscal years . 107-40 ( sept. 13 , 2001 ) , authorization for use of military force , and other operations and related activities in support of the global war on terrorism . congress has also appropriated funds for the reconstruction of iraq and department of state and u.s. agency for international development projects . we are reviewing the contracts involved in the reconstruction , as well as the funding for other projects and will be issuing separate reports on these issues . as of september 30 , 2003 , dod reported obligating a total of over $61 billion in fiscal year 2003 in support of the war .