they are listed in appendix i . both programs were authorized for 3 years . the 1999 pilot expired in march 2002 ; the 2000 pilot , in march 2003 . for both programs , dod was required to submit preliminary and final reports to the congress on program activities . the preliminary report for the 1999 program was submitted in july 1999 . however , as of the date of this report , the three other reports have not been submitted . in fiscal year 2003 , the congress authorized another 3-year pilot program and extended the 1999 and 2000 pilot programs until 2005 . under the new 2003 pilot program , the secretary of defense is to provide one laboratory and one test center in each service the authority to use innovative personnel management methods to ensure that the participants can employ and retain an appropriately balanced workforce , and effectively shape the workforce to fulfill the organization mission ; develop or expand innovative methods of using cooperative agreements with private sector and educational organizations to promote the technological industrial base for critical defense technologies and facilitate the training of a future scientific and technical workforce ; and waive any restrictions not required by law . as of may 2003 , dod had not identified any participants for the 2003 pilot program . the 2003 legislation also requires dod to issue three reports , including a january 2003 report on its experience with the 1999 and 2000 pilot programs , barriers to implementation of these programs , and proposed solutions to overcome these barriers . according to dod officials , this report has been drafted , but as of may 2003 , it had not been submitted to the congress . since the inception of the pilot programs in 1999 , 178 initiatives have been proposed , but only 4 — or 2 percent — have been implemented under the pilot programs . participating laboratories and test centers proposed initiatives covering a variety of areas , including business - like practices , partnerships with industry and academia , and human capital innovations . we found that laboratories focused many of their proposals on human capital innovations , while test centers tended to concentrate on business - like practices and partnerships . over the course of the 1999 and 2000 pilot programs , the laboratories and test centers proposed 178 human capital , business , and partnership initiatives . as shown in table 1 , slightly over half of the initiatives dealt with human capital and the remainder dealt with business - like practices and partnerships . overall , the laboratories proposed substantially more initiatives than did the test centers . furthermore , the laboratories and test centers focused on different types of initiatives . the laboratories more often proposed human capital initiatives , while the test centers overwhelmingly focused on business and partnership initiatives . laboratory officials told us that they are especially concerned about attracting top - quality scientists to replace a retiring workforce . test center officials told us that they are focused on modernizing their infrastructure and developing new methods of sharing the cost of operations . proposals for business - like practices included many initiatives to streamline or improve local operations .