aoc agreed with these recommendations . aoc and its major construction contractors have moved the cvc project forward since the subcommittee's june 14 hearing , although the majority of the selected milestones scheduled for completion by today's hearing have not been completed on time . according to the construction management contractor , the base project's construction was about 70 percent complete as of june 30 , compared with about 65 percent as of may 31 . the sequence 1 contractor , centex construction company , which was responsible for the project's excavation and structural work , has continued to address punch - list items , such as stopping water leaks . although aoc had expected the sequence 1 contractor to complete the punch - list work and be off - site by june 30 , some of this work remains to be done . the sequence 1 contractor has closed its on - site project office and plans to send workers back to the site to complete the remaining work . aoc has retained funds from the sequence 1 contractor that it believes will be sufficient to cover the cost of the remaining work . furthermore , the sequence 2 contractor , which is responsible for the mechanical , electrical , plumbing , and finishing work , has continued to make progress in these areas , including erecting masonry block , placing concrete , and installing finish stone , drywall framing , plaster , and granite pavers . because of the fire protection system's increasing costs , disagreements within the cvc team and between the team and the fire marshal division over fire safety requirements , problems in scheduling fire safety activities , and other related issues , we suggested that aoc take appropriate steps to address the coordination of fire protection activities related to the cvc project . aoc agreed and has taken action . for example , starting this week , aoc's fire marshal division agreed to have a staff member work at the cvc site 2 days a week , and aoc cvc staff recently agreed to provide the necessary documentation to the fire marshal division before its inspections or observations were needed . second , as we indicated earlier in our testimony , we are concerned about the integration of planning , scheduling , and budgeting for cvc construction and operations . while the cvc project team has been overseeing cvc construction , other aoc staff have been assisting the operations planning contractor in planning and budgeting for cvc operations . close coordination between the two groups will be especially important in the next few months , when decisions will likely have to be made on how to use the $7.8 million remaining from the $10.6 million that congress made available to the cvc project for either operations or construction . the architect of the capitol agreed to give this issue priority attention . finally , we are concerned that aoc may incur additional costs for interim measures , such as temporary walls that it may have to construct to open cvc to the public in september 2006 . such interim measures may be needed to make the project safe for visitors if some other construction work has not been completed .