labs . & offices dev . labs . & offices production ( alpha - 5 ) production ( beta - 4 ) production ( alpha - 1 ) production ( beta - 2e ) . dev . richard burkard , r. scott fletcher , cindy gilbert , paul kinney , alison d. o'neill , karen richey , jack wang , and jessica wintfeld also made important contributions . labs & offices dev . in addition to the individual named above , nathan anderson , assistant director ; wyatt r. hundrup ; emily c. pinto ; and cody j. raysinger made key contributions to this report . the facility's roof has failed and is leaking over contaminated areas . radiological contaminants have migrated , and there are areas of the facility that are inaccessible because of contamination . in 2003 , the site spent about $22,000,000 to remove materials and equipment from the facility and reduce hazards , but contamination remains dispersed throughout the facility and its systems . nnsa now estimates that mitigating the risks associated with the facility's failing roof and air filtration systems will cost at least $1,000,000 . nnsa data show that the agency spent almost $34 million maintaining the 27 facilities still in operation that will become nonoperational within the next 25 years and over $10 million in fiscal year 2013 on surveillance and maintenance activities for the 56 nonoperational facilities ( see table 2 ) . site officials at both y - 12 and llnl told us that nonoperational facilities continue to degrade because of limited surveillance and maintenance resources . officials at y - 12 said that balancing the needs of operational facilities with the need to prevent the spread of contamination at nonoperational facilities is a challenge with limited resources because both types of facilities require maintenance to protect workers and the environment . the facility is located half a mile from a residential neighborhood . when developing its annual plans and schedules for decontaminating and decommissioning facilities , em does not consider the human health and environmental risks of nnsa's contaminated nonoperational facilities that are eligible for transfer , but have not yet been transferred to em . furthermore , when establishing its cleanup priorities , em does not take into account the costs of deferring disposition of nnsa's contaminated nonoperational facilities . em considers the risks to human health and the environment of the facilities it is responsible for when prioritizing them for decontamination and decommissioning , but it does not consider the risks posed by facilities it has not yet accepted from nnsa . consequently , nonoperational facilities maintained by nnsa that meet em's transfer requirements may continue to degrade while lower - risk facilities already under em's responsibility are decontaminated and decommissioned . em prioritizes its facilities for decontamination and decommissioning each year as part of its process for preparing its submission to doe's annual budget justification . under this process , em asks each site to create a prioritized list of facilities for disposition and other cleanup activities for the forthcoming fiscal year . when developing such lists , officials at em's sites consider facilities currently under em's responsibility .