( see fig . the 10 selected states also varied in the types of data they made available about their ineligible providers . all 10 states included providers' first names , last names , and middle names or initials . seven states included providers' npi in their information on ineligible providers . seven states included a category for a medical license number in their information on ineligible providers , but these data were not consistently presented across states . four states included provider addresses , and seven states included provider type or specialty . one state included alias' that the ineligible providers might be using , and one state provided information on ineligible providers' affiliations with other provider groups or practices . ( see fig . the 10 states also varied in the information they provided about why providers became ineligible and in the terminology they used . all 10 states included the effective date providers became ineligible . five states provided information on the action type that led to the provider becoming ineligible , which included , among other things , the terms “exclusion,” “terminated,” and “voluntary withdrawal.” while the hhs - oig defines excluded providers as those providers it has determined to be ineligible for participation in federal health programs , states used varying terminology . six states also included the reason for the exclusion . ( see fig . unlike states , mmc plans are not required to make their data on ineligible providers publicly available . the 16 selected mmc plans reported sharing these data with their state medicaid agencies at varying intervals and in rare cases , with other plans . representatives from the 16 selected plans said they might share their data on ineligible providers with their states during periodic meetings that covered a variety of issues . however , the frequency and scope of these meetings varied . according to plan representatives , 1 plan met with the state at least monthly , 3 plans met with the state quarterly , 7 plans met with the state annually , and 3 plans met with the state biennially ; officials from 1 plan said they met with the state frequently but did not provide a specific frequency for the meetings ; and 1 plan did not provide this information . representatives from the mmc plans said they generally did not share these data with other plans , with a few exceptions . for example , representatives from 1 plan said that they share information on ineligible providers with another plan they contract with in their state . similarly , representatives from 3 mmc plans that were subsidiaries of large health care corporations with mmc plans in multiple states told us that they shared data on ineligible providers with the other plans in their networks . however , there is no process or requirement from cms for them to share on a consistent basis . because states and mmc plans are prohibited from paying federal funds to providers that have been determined to be ineligible anywhere in the united states , sharing data on ineligible providers is an important control activity for preventing providers who are ineligible to participate in medicaid in one state from enrolling in or billing medicaid programs in other states .