volunteers are not supplied with vehicles . although the peace corps accepts older volunteers and has made a conscious effort to recruit minorities , the current volunteer population has a median age of 25 years and is 85 percent white . more than 60 percent of the volunteers are women . volunteer health , safety , and security is peace corps' highest priority , according to the agency . to address this commitment , the agency has adopted policies for monitoring and disseminating information on the security environments in which the agency operates , training volunteers , developing safe and secure volunteer housing and work sites , monitoring volunteers , and planning for emergencies such as evacuations . headquarters is responsible for providing guidance , supervision , and oversight to ensure that agency policies are implemented effectively . peace corps relies heavily on country directors — the heads of agency posts in foreign capitals — to develop and implement practices that are appropriate for specific countries . country directors , in turn , rely on program managers to develop and oversee volunteer programs . volunteers are expected to follow agency policies and exercise some responsibility for their own safety and security . peace corps emphasizes community acceptance as the key to maintaining volunteer safety and security . the agency has found that volunteer safety is best ensured when volunteers are well integrated into their host communities and treated as extended family and contributors to development . reported incidence rates of crime against volunteers have remained essentially unchanged since we completed our report in 2002 . reported incidence rates for most types of assaults have increased since peace corps began collecting data in 1990 , but have stabilized in recent years . the reported incidence rate for major physical assaults has nearly doubled , averaging about 9 assaults per 1,000 volunteer years in 1991-1993 and averaging about 17 assaults in 1998-2000 . reported incidence rates for major assaults remained unchanged over the next 2 years . reported incidence rates of major sexual assaults have decreased slightly , averaging about 10 per 1,000 female volunteer years in 1991-1993 and about 8 per 1,000 female volunteer years in 1998-2000 . reported incidence rates for major sexual assaults averaged about 9 per 1,000 female volunteer years in 2001 - 2002 . peace corps' system for gathering and analyzing data on crime against volunteers has produced useful insights , but we reported in 2002 that steps could be taken to enhance the system . peace corps officials agreed that reported increases are difficult to interpret ; the data could reflect actual increases in assaults , better efforts to ensure that agency staff report all assaults , and / or an increased willingness among volunteers to report incidents . the full extent of crime against volunteers , however , is unknown because of significant underreporting . through its volunteer satisfaction surveys , peace corps is aware that a significant number of volunteers do not report incidents , thus reducing the agency's ability to state crime rates with certainty . for example , according to the agency's 1998 survey , volunteers did not report 60 percent of rapes and 20 percent of nonrape sexual assaults .