hhs had no comments . education provided a response , which is included as appendix v of this report , and technical comments , which we incorporated when appropriate . education agreed that dropping out is a serious issue for american schools , emphasized the importance of school improvement efforts in the no child left behind act of 2001 , and provided additional information about relevant education programs and activities . in response to our recommendations that education evaluate the quality of existing dropout prevention research and determine how best to encourage or sponsor rigorous evaluation of the most promising state and local dropout prevention programs and practices , education agreed that rigorous evidence is needed and said that it will consider commissioning a systematic review of the literature on this topic . what does the research say about factors associated with dropping out ? what state , local , or private efforts have been implemented to address the factors associated with dropping out ? what federal efforts exist to reduce dropout rates and what is known about their effectiveness ? in conducting this work , we interviewed officials at the national center for education statistics ( nces ) and reviewed nces annual reports , statistics , and studies related to dropout rates . we also contacted and reviewed the reports of dropout prevention experts at universities , federal agencies , and private research organizations . we conducted site visits at state , local , and private dropout prevention programs in six states — california , florida , nevada , pennsylvania , texas , and washington . these programs were selected based on recommendations obtained from a variety of sources , including federal program administrators , evaluations of programs , and program experts . we interviewed , in all 50 states and the district of columbia , state at - risk coordinators that were either identified by the national dropout prevention center in south carolina or who were referred to us by state program administrators . in addition , we interviewed officials from the federal programs that could fund local dropout prevention efforts . we also reviewed evaluations of programs funded by the federal school dropout demonstration assistance program ( sddap ) in fiscal years 1988-1995 . appendix i further describes our scope and methodology . we conducted our review between january and october 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the adverse impact that dropping out of school has on both those who drop out and society itself has long been recognized . multiple studies have shown that dropouts earn less money and are more frequently unemployed than graduates . the 1968 amendments to the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 established local demonstration projects aimed at reducing the dropout rate . from 1969 through 1976 , some 30 projects received $46 million in grants from the department of education ( then the office of education ) to develop and demonstrate educational practices that showed promise in reducing the numbers of youth who failed to complete their secondary education .