( see fig . 3 , example 1. ) as we reported , project officers were linking the grant to the agency's goal after the award decision , so that the linkage was a recordkeeping activity rather than a strategic decision . while the interim policy is a positive first step , it does not require project officers to link grant funding to environmental outcomes . instead , it “encourages” project officers to link grant funding to outputs , outcomes , and performance goals , as illustrated in figure 3 , example 2 . epa officials explained that the interim policy did not require the full strategic plan / gpra “architecture” — goals , objectives , subobjectives , program / project , outputs , outcomes , and annual performance goals — because not all epa staff are trained on how to implement the strategic plan / gpra architecture . however , when epa's outcome policy becomes effective , it will require every grant workplan to address the full strategic plan / gpra architecture , including outcomes . finally , epa will not meet the grant management's plan first - year ( 2004 ) target for the performance measure of the environmental outcomes goal — the percentage of grant workplans , decision memoranda , and terms of conditions that discuss how grantees plan to measure and report on environmental outcomes . for this performance measure , using 2003 as its baseline year , epa determined that , as previously discussed , less than one - third of its grant workplans had environmental outcomes . epa established targets that progressively increase from this baseline to 70 percent in 2004 , to 80 percent in 2005 , to 100 percent in 2006 . epa officials do not expect that epa will meet its target for 2004 because its outcome policy is not yet in place . epa has drafted a policy and guidance on environmental outcomes in grants . as drafted , this policy appears to have epa moving in the right direction for addressing environmental outcomes . the policy is binding on managers and staff throughout the agency , according to epa officials . previously , the office of grants and debarment targeted only project officers through brief guidance on outcomes in their training manual . emphasizes environmental results throughout the grant life cycle — awards , monitoring , and reporting . in terms of awards , the draft policy applies to both competitive and noncompetitive grants . for example , program offices and their managers must assure that competitive funding announcements discuss expected outputs and outcomes . in terms of grant monitoring , the policy requires program offices to assure that grantees submit interim and final grantee reports that address outcomes . requires that grants are both aligned with the agency's strategic goals and linked to environmental results . specifically , the draft policy requires that epa program offices ( 1 ) ensure that each grant funding package includes a description of the epa strategic goals and objectives the grant is intended to address and ( 2 ) provide assurance that the grant workplan contains well - defined outputs , and to the “maximum extent practicable,” well - defined outcome measures .