reviews of compliance . overall , compliance levels with disclosure requirements have improved since our 2003 review of privately insured credit unions , which included an assessment of their compliance with federal disclosure rules . in 2003 , we found that 36 of 57 credit unions had the required disclosures on premises . similarly , in 2003 , 39 of 78 websites and 93 of 227 printed materials we reviewed had the required disclosures . cfpb has not had any findings , observations , or evaluations regarding privately insured credit unions' disclosures . cfpb staff told us the agency has not received any complaints related to private deposit insurance . cfpb staff said they have reviewed privately insured credit unions' websites at a very informal level and the websites seemed to be complying with regulation i . as previously noted , cfpb shares enforcement authority for regulation i with ftc . cfpb staff told us that state credit union supervisors and attorneys general also have the authority to enforce regulation i , as necessary . the state credit union supervisors in the nine states with privately insured credit unions similarly told us that compliance with disclosure requirements has not been a problem in recent years . they said that their routine examinations of state - chartered credit unions check for disclosures on premises , on websites , in advertising materials , and , as noted earlier , by reviewing selected periodic statements , account records , and signature cards . they said that if examiners observe noncompliance with disclosure requirements , they cite it as an examination finding and expect the credit union to promptly correct the issue and display the proper signage or disclosure . while we generally found that compliance levels were high , regulation i may be interpreted and enforced differently by different credit unions and state regulators . without clarity on whether or not drive - through windows are required to have disclosures , some credit unions may continue to not display them at these windows . additionally , without more clarity or guidance around dimensions and font sizes for disclosures , the disclosures may be too small to be easily read or noticed . further , there may continue to be confusion about what constitutes “advertising” and whether certain printed materials are required to include disclosures . as a result , the state credit union supervisors and the credit unions themselves may face challenges consistently monitoring and complying with regulation i . in turn , credit union members may not always be consistently and adequately informed that deposits are not federally insured . deposit insurance helps protect depositors from losing their money in the event a financial institution fails . by law , any institution that does not have federal deposit insurance must clearly and conspicuously inform consumers that the institution is not federally insured and privately insured credit unions we reviewed largely complied with disclosure requirements . however , the instances we observed of missing disclosures or disclosures that were too small to be easily read or inconspicuous suggest that the lack of specificity in some provisions of regulation i has led to inconsistencies in interpretation .