we have incorporated these comments as appropriate . the remaining agency to which we did not make recommendations stated that it did not have any comments . furthermore , for appropriate coverage of a federal - wide information technology contract issue , the department of defense suggested we add a recommendation that contract language be included in the federal acquisition regulation "to ensure new acquisitions include fdcc settings and products of information technology providers operate effectively using them. however , it was not within the scope of our review to evaluate whether such standard contract language was necessary or what it would entail . nonetheless , the department of defense may wish to pursue this suggestion with omb and other stakeholders for possible promulgation of a federal acquisition regulation rule that would serve as a governmentwide template in solicitations or contracts for ensuring that fdcc settings are effectively incorporated and applied . acquire a scap tool and use it to monitor fdcc . agencies are required to acquire a nist - validated scap tool and to use these tools when monitoring the settings . ensure that new acquisitions include security configuration settings . the log will detail why and when the connection was formed . document deviations and have them approved by a designated accrediting authority . agencies were required to document deviations initially as part of their draft implementation plan efforts . omb later required agencies to report these deviations to nist in march 2008 . omb also later noted that configuration setting deviations are to be approved by the department or agency accrediting authority . agencies are required to ensure that new acquisitions include fdcc settings and products of information technology providers operate effectively using them . submit fdcc compliance reports to nist by march 31 , 2008 . agencies were required to submit a spreadsheet that summarized workstation counts , setting deviations , and descriptions of plans of action and milestones for the deviations , along with related reports generated by a scap tool for each operational environment present within the agency . report on status of fdcc compliance in annual fisma reporting . none of the agencies has fully implemented all fdcc configuration settings on all applicable workstations , although most have complied with other requirements . specifically , 11 agencies reported they had completed implementation of an agency - approved subset of the fdcc settings and do not plan to implement all the configuration settings , while the remaining agencies reported they are still completing implementation of the settings . however , most agencies have generally complied with other initiative requirements . for instance , 19 agencies have fully documented their deviations and 16 have established a policy for having those deviations approved by a designated authority . in addition , 15 agencies have acquired and deployed a nist - validated scap tool to monitor the compliance of their setting implementation . eight agencies have also incorporated language into their contracts to ensure that new acquisitions comply with fdcc . while agencies were required to submit a draft implementation plan to omb by may 1 , 2007 , fewer than half of the agencies developed plans that addressed the seven actions necessary to fully implement the initiative .