we provided a draft of this report to epa for review and comment . in written comments , which are included in appendix i , epa agreed with the report's recommendations . epa manages its environmental enforcement and compliance responsibilities primarily through its oeca . oeca monitors the compliance of regulated entities , identifies national enforcement concerns and sets priorities for addressing them , and provides overall direction on enforcement policies . oeca can take enforcement actions , such as fining entities that are in noncompliance with epa regulations , but most of epa's enforcement responsibilities are carried out by its 10 regional offices . these offices carry out program activities under each of the major federal environmental statutes , such as the clean air act and the clean water act , have compliance related responsibilities , and also take enforcement actions . for example , among other things , a regional office can conduct inspections , provide compliance assistance and training to state enforcement programs , and take enforcement actions such as assessing fines for noncompliance with epa regulations . the regional offices also oversee certain state enforcement programs and implement certain programs in indian country . many federal environmental statutes direct epa to approve or authorize qualified states to implement and enforce environmental programs consistent with federal requirements , and most states have responsibility for multiple laws . epa - authorized states are to monitor compliance of regulated entities , conduct inspections , take enforcement actions against entities found in noncompliance , and report their actions to epa . as part of this effort , epa developed a training workbook for staff on how to design rules with an emphasis on increasing regulated entity compliance . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . epa proposed the next generation compliance initiative in fiscal year 2012 to capitalize on advanced technical capabilities and efficiencies in enforcement and compliance . these actions , according to epa , created more pressure on states to enforce and on these entities to comply with npdes permit requirements . in developing this new initiative , epa stated that it wanted to go beyond its traditional enforcement approach of inspecting individual entities and make available , among other things , new and more complete enforcement and compliance information . according to agency documents , the long - term goals of the initiative are to improve compliance and obtain greater health and environmental benefits from epa's regulations . we conducted this performance audit from march 2012 to december 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the proposed elements of the initiative are described in a brief overview document and some slide presentations that the agency has prepared about the initiative . in summary , according to these materials , the five components of the next generation compliance initiative are the following: rulemaking — designing and structuring rules and regulations to ensure greater compliance , such as including requirements for regulated entities to regularly assess their compliance .