app . vii for detailed information on the location of these taxpayer's offshore accounts , including country and bank names. ) some of these taxpayers with ubs accounts transferred funds from swiss bank ubs in 2008 — the time when the u.s. government was actively trying to compel ubs to name its u.s. account holders . the funds were often transferred to other , smaller swiss banks that generally did not operate in the united states . a few taxpayers claimed that they transferred funds at the recommendation of their ubs financial advisors . taxpayers transferring funds to other banks may have been attempting to keep their offshore accounts hidden before deciding to participate in the 2009 ovdp . the 95 percent confidence interval for the estimated 70 percent of taxpayers receiving large penalties with accounts at swiss bank ubs is 51 percent to 85 percent . see appendix i for more information on our scope and methodology and appendix vii for more counts by case file . many taxpayers in the 30 large penalty cases that we reviewed had resided outside the united states for extended periods of time — either as u.s. citizens or prior to obtaining u.s. citizenship . many taxpayers who disclosed extended periods of non - u.s. residency reported that they had opened their offshore accounts with income earned outside of the united states . a few of these taxpayers had been living and working overseas as u.s. citizens for decades . others within this group opened accounts before immigrating to the united states . although some taxpayers in these cases became u.s. residents decades ago , they maintained their offshore accounts and did not disclose them on tax returns or fbars . some taxpayers reported opening bank accounts in switzerland as a means of protecting family assets during periods of war or instability in their native country . further , a few taxpayers who immigrated to the united states reported that they had been unaware of their fbar reporting requirements , that they had to state that they had foreign accounts on the form 1040 , schedule b , or that the united states taxes the worldwide income of its residents , including overseas investment income . ( see sidebars for representative examples from our case file reviews. ) taxpayers in some of the cases that we reviewed disclosed that the original source of funds for their offshore accounts came from post - tax u.s. source income . a few of these taxpayers cited family histories or personal fears about the safety of u.s. banks as their reasons for moving savings offshore . others reasons cited included the need to protect or shelter assets from possible u.s. lawsuits . we estimate that 47 percent of taxpayers receiving large penalties inherited offshore accounts from a parent , spouse , or other relative — some of whom were not u.s. citizens or residents.taxpayers reported inherited accounts that were jointly owned or managed by extended family members , such as siblings and cousins , who also applied to the 2009 ovdp and sometimes split the penalties .