part 1614 . eeoc management directive 110 ( federal complaints processing manual ) provides general guidance on how agencies should process employment discrimination complaints . agencies are also required to provide eeo discrimination complaint data to eeoc ( 29 c.f.r.1614.602. ) eeoc compiles these data and reports them to congress each year in the eeoc annual report on the federal workforce . information contained in epa's discrimination complaint data system was unreliable because of data entry problems . epa officials also maintain that the computer software , which was obtained from a now defunct supplier , was flawed and not able to report data accurately . reliable discrimination complaint data are necessary for epa's ocr to track complaints and look for trends that might indicate the need for specific actions and to respond to eeoc reporting requirements . epa recently implemented a new eeo data system and is taking steps to train staff members and hold them accountable for maintaining the data system . officials attributed data system weaknesses in part to a now defunct data management company whose data system was used to track and process discrimination complaint information . officials said the system was flawed and was further compromised because epa's eeo specialists did not always enter , update , or maintain discrimination complaint data . as a result , epa had difficulty providing accurate eeo information . moreover , epa had trouble discerning if there are trends in workplace problems that lead to eeo complaints ; this in turn has inhibited understanding sources of conflict and planning corrective actions . eeoc regulations point out that agencies should make every effort to ensure accurate record keeping and reporting of eeo data . data fosters transparency , which provides an incentive to improve performance and enhance the image of the agency in the eyes of both its employees and the public . we initially requested discrimination complaint data for a 10-year period ( 1991-2000 ) . however , ocr officials said they had no confidence in discrimination complaint data prior to fiscal year 1995 because the data are unreliable and source documents were not available to permit its reconstruction . ocr provided discrimination complaint data for fiscal years 1995 through 2002 ; however , in reviewing these data , we found that the information was incorrect . these data understated the actual number of discrimination complaints on hand , the number of new discrimination complaints filed , the number of complaints closed , and the year ending numbers . also the data provided to us differed from the discrimination complaint data reported to eeoc . for example , the number of discrimination complaints on hand at the end of fiscal year 2000 was reported to us as 176 , but epa reported to eeoc that the number was 264 . the number of new discrimination complaints filed in 2000 was reported to us as 79 , but the number reported to eeoc was 75 . eeoc is responsible for enforcing all of these laws . in addition , a person who files a complaint or participates in an investigation of an eeo complaint or who opposes an employment practice made illegal under any of the statutes enforced by eeoc is protected from retaliation or reprisal .