pub . l. 107-173 ( may 14 , 2002 ) . attachment 4 detailed description of increments and component systems adis also provides the ability to run queries on foreign nationals who have entry information but no corresponding exit information . adis receives status information from the computer linked application information management system and the student and exchange visitor information system on foreign nationals . the exit process includes the carriers' electronic submission of departure manifest data to apis . this biographic information is passed to adis , where it is matched against entry information . traveler arrives for inspection . travelers subject to us - visit are processed at secondary inspection , rather than at primary inspection . inspectors' workstations use a single screen , which eliminates the need to switch between the tecs and ident screens . obtained when the machine - readable zone of the travel document is swiped . if visa information about the traveler exists in the datashare database,it is used to populate the form . fields that cannot be populated electronically are manually entered . a copy of the completed form is printed and given to the traveler for use upon exit . no electronic exit information is captured . non - citizen traveler arrival and departure data received from air and sea arrival data captured by cbp officers at air and sea poes , form i - 94 issuance data captured by cbp officers at increment 2b land status update information provided by the student and exchange visitor information system ( sevis ) and the computer linked application information management system ( claims 3 ) ( described below ) . adis provides record matching , query , and reporting functions . the passenger processing component of the treasury enforcement communications systems ( tecs ) includes two systems: advance passenger information system ( apis ) captures arrival and departure manifest information provided by air and sea carriers , and interagency border inspection system ( ibis ) maintains lookout data and interfaces with other agencies' databases . cbp officers use these data as part of the admission process . the results of the admission decision are recorded in tecs and adis . biometric data on foreign visitors , including data such as federal bureau of investigation informationon all known and suspected terrorists , selected wanted persons ( foreign - born , unknown place of birth , previously arrested by dhs ) , and previous criminal histories for high - risk countries ; dhs immigration and customs enforcement information on deported felons and sexual registrants ; and dhs information on previous criminal histories and previous ident enrollments . attachment 4 detailed description of increments and component systems us - visit also exchanges biographic information with other dhs systems , including sevis and claims 3: sevis is a system that contains information on foreign students and claims 3 is a system that contains information on foreign nationals who request benefits , such as change of status or extension of stay . some of the systems involved in us - visit , such as ident and aidms , are managed by the program office , while some systems are managed by other organizational entities within dhs .