we did not review the accuracy of these figures . to review the status of mms's efforts to implement management control over its rik program , we reviewed the federal managers' financial integrity act of 1982 , the standards for management control that we issued entitled standards for internal control in the federal government ( gao / aimd - 00-21.3.1 , november 1999 ) , and the implementation guidance issued by the office of management and budget in omb circular a - 123 . minimize the cost of royalty administration . reduce business cycle time ( the time to collect , disburse , audit , and reconcile revenues ) . accelerate timing of revenue collections . adopt energy industry business practices and controls wherever feasible . overall , none of the seven objectives address the revenue impacts of the rik sales . there are concerns about the accuracy and reliability of these data . although mms is responsible for auditing these data , with more than 22,000 producing leases and often several companies paying royalties on each lease each month , the auditing becomes a formidable task . in addition , there has been considerable disagreement between industry and mms over the value of the oil and gas produced and the cost of transportation and processing deductions , leading to time - consuming and costly appeals and litigation . while most companies that lease federal lands pay their royalties in cash , the federal government can instead take a portion of the oil and gas that these companies produce — known as “taking royalties in kind.” the congress authorized royalties in kind under the mineral leasing act of 1920 and under the outer continental shelf lands act of 1953 . standard leases for the exploration of oil and gas on federal properties reserve the right for the federal government to take its royalties in kind . furthermore , the first three objectives are not expressed in either a quantitative or measurable form . the last four objectives , although being quantitative , address administrative efficiency only . without objectives to guide agency staff in the quantitative evaluation of the revenue impacts of rik sales , mms will be unable to determine whether rik sales generate more or less revenue than traditional cash royalty payments ; whether mms obtains fair market value ; and hence , whether it should convert the rik pilots to an operational status . mms has also not developed any performance measures that it linked to the seven strategic objectives for its rik program . however , mms has developed two performance measures — ( 1 ) confirm and reconcile , within 90 days , all production royalties taken in kind and ( 2 ) accelerate the timing of revenue receipt by 5 days over traditional cash royalty payments ( royalty in value ) — that are linked to the broader agency - wide objective of “collecting royalties in the shortest time possible.” in addition to supporting the broad agency - wide objective , these two performance measures support rik program objectives that are designed to improve administrative efficiency .