industries . the agencies , international partners , and industry associations we interviewed were those that we identified as contributors to ongoing counterpiracy activities in the gulf of guinea or those representing or insuring vessel owners and operators in the region . while the statements of the industry officials cannot be generalized to the entire industries they represent , their perspectives provide valuable insight since each is actively involved in international collaborative efforts to combat piracy . we compared agency efforts and their coordination against recommended practices in the national maritime domain awareness plan and the strategy to combat transnational organized crime which are used to guide the efforts and , in general , call for risk - based assessments . a full description of our objectives , scope , and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from june 2013 to june 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . under the 1958 geneva convention on the high seas and the united nations convention on the law of the sea ( unclos ) , piracy consists of any of several acts , including any illegal act of violence or detention , or any act of depredation , committed for private ends by the crew or the passengers of a private ship and directed against another ship , aircraft , persons , or property onboard another ship on the high seas , or against a ship , aircraft , persons or property in a place outside the jurisdiction of any state . according to both conventions , all states have the duty to cooperate to the fullest extent possible in the repression of piracy on the high seas or in any other place outside the jurisdiction of any state and are authorized to seize pirate ships or a ship under the control of pirates and arrest the persons and seize the property onboard on the high seas or in any other place outside the jurisdiction of any state . when crimes that would constitute piracy are committed in the territorial waters of a coastal state , they are generally referred to as maritime crime . for the purposes of this report , we describe the criminal conduct in the gulf of guinea as piracy and maritime crime in order to include piracy on the high seas ( i.e. , outside the jurisdiction of any one sovereign state ) , as well as hijacking , armed robbery , kidnapping , and attempts at these crimes within the territorial waters of a state . piracy and maritime crime off the horn of africa and in the gulf of guinea affect countries around the globe . in 2013 , over 42,000 vessels transited the waters off the horn of africa , which include some of the world's busiest shipping lanes . within these waters , pirates target merchant vessels , fishing ships , and dhows .