( see fig . in our past work we noted that the national funding formula used to allocate funding to states does not include factors to target older adults in greatest need , such as the very old and low - income older adults , although states are required to consider such factors when developing the intrastate formulas they use to allocate funds among their local agencies . the federal grant amounts are further divided into separate allocations for title iii parts b , c , and e. in fiscal year 2010 , the allocations by part were as follows: part b support services such as home - based care and transportation programs were allocated a total of $366 million . part c home - delivered meals programs were allocated $216 million and part c congregate meals programs were allocated $438 million . part e national family caregiver support program was allocated $153 million . the oaa provides states with some authority to transfer federal funding allocations among programs . a state may transfer up to 40 percent of allocated funds for the home - delivered meals programs to the congregate meals program , or visa versa , and the assistant secretary of aging can grant a waiver for a state to transfer an additional 10 percent . in addition , a state may transfer up to 30 percent of allotted funds for part b support services to the meal programs and vice versa , and the assistant secretary of aging may grant a waiver of the 30 percent limit . a number of the demographic variables are , however associated with whether individuals had received congregate meals . the odds on having done so were more than twice as high for individuals over 70 than for those under 60 ( and by implication about 1.5 to 2 times as high for individuals over 70 than for those 60 to 69 ) . the odds that african american older adults and other older adults from minority groups received congregate meals were about 1.5 times higher than for white older adults , and hispanic older adults had similarly larger odds than non - hispanic older adults of receiving congregate meals ( i.e. data limitations did not allow us to identify individuals likely to need and / or receive services based on the third identified purpose of promoting health and well - being . to conduct our analysis , we used nationally representative data from the 2008 current population survey ( cps ) , including the food security supplement and the civic engagement supplement . as described below , the cps includes various questions related to receipt of meals services like those provided by title iii and having characteristics that indicate likely need . our analyses focused on people age 60 and over as well as spouses of older adults and individuals with disabilities living with older adults because they are also eligible for meals services . our analysis was limited to older adults living in households with incomes that were below 185 percent of the poverty threshold and is not generalizable to older adults with higher incomes .