human capital flexibilities . gao - 02-1050r . washington , d.c.: august 9 , 2002 . results - oriented cultures: insights for u.s . agencies from other countries' performance management initiatives . gao - 02-862 . washington , d.c.: august 2 , 2002 . hud human capital management: comprehensive strategic workforce planning needed . gao - 02-839 . washington , d.c.: july 24 , 2002 . nasa management challenges: human capital and other critical areas need to be addressed . gao - 02-945t . washington , d.c.: july 18 , 2002 . managing for results: using strategic human capital management to drive transformational change . gao - 02-940t . washington , d.c.: july 15 , 2002 . post - hearing questions related to federal human capital issues . the marine corps has collected data on workforce competencies . it has a system under development ( the civilian workforce development application ) that will be used to store and manage data on these competencies . the target date for completing construction of the application is july 2005 . the air force has identified leadership competencies for the total force ( i.e. , active duty military , air national guard , air force reserves , and civilians ) . it has begun to develop an analytical information system — the total human resource managers' information system — to capture occupational codes for the total force . but according to air force officials , the system will not collect , store , and manage data on workforce competencies . dla also currently lacks competency data but has included an objective in its 2002-2007 strategic plan to identify gaps between the workforce competencies and the skills to meet mission requirements for all dla positions by the end of fiscal year 2007 . according to a dla official , the agency is in the process of constructing a skills management tool . with the help of a contractor , dla plans to roll out an automated skills inventory tool ( competency analysis management tool ) expected in july 2004 to capture the competencies of its current workforce . the analysis tool will be a web - based system that employees can access and provide input regarding their proficiency levels in competencies that have been identified for the respective job families , according to a dla official . dod's current efforts to establish a new personnel system and convert thousands of military positions to civilian positions , and permanent authority to offer annual cash buyouts to thousands of employees — when taken together — provide for wide - ranging changes in dod's civilian personnel reforms . however , it is questionable whether dod's implementation of these reforms will result in the maximum effectiveness and value because dod has not developed comprehensive strategic workforce plans that identify future civilian workforce needs . although dod and the components have taken steps to develop and implement civilian strategic workforce plans to address future civilian workforce needs , they generally lack some key elements essential to successful workforce planning .