i for more information on these sources. ) other than for public transit , the extent of compliance with the ada's requirements for surface transportation and public rights - of - way is unknown because little reliable information is available , although there are indications that accessibility is improving . we made changes to reflect these comments . dot collects some accessibility data from urban public transit agencies and helped fund several surveys to determine certain accessibility information for rural and specialized transportation services . much of the data for other modes , however , are either unreliable or still being developed . for public transit , data are available on the percent of vehicles and stations that are wheelchair accessible in urban areas . dot reports that accessibility in the urban transit vehicle fleet is increasing as new , accessible vehicles are replacing older ones , since the ada requires that all new or refurbished transit vehicles be accessible . in 1989 , before passage of the ada , 36 percent of public transit buses in the united states were accessible . by 2005 , 97 percent were lift - or ramp - equipped , according to fta's national transit database . for example , in november 2006 , peter pan bus lines brought suit against fmcsa with the allegation that the modal administration had not ensured that another commercial bus company was complying with the ada . little is known about compliance by small charter - tour companies , but according to dot officials , they have limited anecdotal evidence suggesting that many such companies are unaware of ada rules or do not comply with them . there are no national data on the accessibility of public rights - of - way , in part because there are no requirements for either fhwa or doj to collect such information , although individual localities may collect this information . the ada does not require localities to retrofit existing public rights - of - way ( such as curb ramps ) to make them accessible , unless deemed necessary to ensure public access to programs or services — including state and local government offices , places of public accommodation , places of employment , and transportation , among other things . however , after january 26 , 1992 , any new construction , alteration , or renovation ( including road resurfacing ) must comply with doj regulations . many localities are also required to inventory the accessibility of public rights - of - way under their jurisdiction as part of developing an ada - required transition plan for improving that accessibility . many of the national and local disability advocacy groups we spoke with , however , said that access to public rights - of - way is still a major barrier to the mobility of people with disabilities . for example , a local disability advocacy group cited several recent examples in which a locality had a major construction project in the downtown area where the renovated sidewalks and medians did not include curb ramps and were inaccessible ( see fig . some groups added that inaccessible routes to bus stops also hinder access to public transit .