usenet . usenet newsgroups also provide access to pornography , with several of the image - oriented newsgroups being focused on child erotica and child pornography . these newsgroups are frequently used by commercial pornographers who post “free” images to advertise adult and child pornography available for a fee from their web sites . peer - to - peer networks . although peer - to - peer file - sharing programs are largely known for the extensive sharing of copyrighted digital music , they are emerging as a conduit for the sharing of pornographic images and videos , including child pornography . in a recent study by congressional staff , a single search for the term “porn” using a file - sharing program yielded over 25,000 files . in another study , focused on the availability of pornographic video files on peer - to - peer sharing networks , a sample of 507 pornographic video files retrieved with a file - sharing program included about 3.7 percent child pornography videos . table 2 shows the key national organizations and agencies that are currently involved in efforts to combat child pornography on peer - to - peer networks . the national center for missing and exploited children ( ncmec ) , a federally funded nonprofit organization , serves as a national resource center for information related to crimes against children . its mission is to find missing children and prevent child victimization . the center's exploited child unit operates the cybertipline , which receives child pornography tips provided by the public ; its cybertipline ii also receives tips from internet service providers . the exploited child unit investigates and processes tips to determine if the images in question constitute a violation of child pornography laws . the cybertipline provides investigative leads to the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , u.s. customs , the postal inspection service , and state and local law enforcement agencies . the fbi and the u.s. customs also investigate leads from internet service providers via the exploited child unit's cybertipline ii . the fbi , customs service , postal inspection service , and secret service have staff assigned directly to ncmec as analysts . two organizations in the department of justice have responsibilities regarding child pornography: the fbi and the justice criminal division's child exploitation and obscenity section ( ceos ) . the fbi investigates various crimes against children , including federal child pornography crimes involving interstate or foreign commerce . it deals with violations of child pornography laws related to the production of child pornography ; selling or buying children for use in child pornography ; and the transportation , shipment , or distribution of child pornography by any means , including by computer . ceos prosecutes child sex offenses and trafficking in women and children for sexual exploitation . its mission includes prosecution of individuals who possess , manufacture , produce , or distribute child pornography ; use the internet to lure children to engage in prohibited sexual conduct ; or traffic in women and children interstate or internationally to engage in sexually explicit conduct .