environmental inspections data . an agency official knowledgeable about afmss also told us that there are many checks on the environmental inspections data and , as a result , that they are also generally accurate and complete . in our efforts to corroborate these data , we asked the five blm state and eight blm field offices we visited to provide data on the total number of required , planned , and completed federal inspections in their jurisdiction for fiscal years 1999 through 2003 . a knowledgeable official indicated that although the primary idle - well report in afmss is retrieving data in an accurate manner at this time , questions have been raised as to the consistency of data used for the report . at this time , there is no formal guidance from blm headquarters making it mandatory to enter that data into afmss . also , officials in five of the eight field offices stated they did not believe that their current idle - well inventory was accurate . as a result of our work to assess the accuracy and completeness of these data , we have determined that the data are of uncertain reliability . these data , along with information from knowledgeable officials , are used in this report to illustrate the problems with the idle - well data . in summary — with the exception of the data describing wells in idle status — although there are definite limitations associated with the data describing approved permits , environmental inspections , temporarily abandoned wells , and wells in abandoned status , these data are sufficient to provide indications of general trends , given the magnitude of the changes occurring over time . we conducted our work from february 2004 through april 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . resource monitoring generally involves assessing cumulative impacts to resources over broad geographic areas and can be incorporated into resource management plans or environmental impact statements for large - scale oil and gas projects . blm managers stated that it is important to assess cumulative impacts to air quality , groundwater , surface water , and wildlife and its habitat over broad geographic areas . when issues are raised about the extent of impacts or the effectiveness of mitigation measures , federal managers may propose to design and implement a resource monitoring plan . however , in different geographic areas , certain resources are more susceptible to the impacts of oil and gas development and , hence , more important to monitor than in other areas . for example , in the powder river basin of wyoming and montana , groundwater is very susceptible to the impacts of coal - bed methane gas production because production entails the simultaneous pumping of both gas and groundwater out of shallow aquifers , lowering the aquifers' pressure and decreasing the amount of groundwater that can be used to supply homes and ranches . because of this impact , blm is developing a monitoring plan for groundwater in the powder river basin . in contrast , the proper extraction of gas in northwestern colorado does not impact shallow groundwater resources to this degree because these shallow aquifers are sealed off during drilling and gas is extracted from much deeper zones .