hud regulations . hud regulations for esg administrative costs define such costs by way of example only , to include costs associated with: accounting for the use of grant funds , preparing reports for submission to hud , obtaining program audits , similar costs related to administering the grant after the award , and staff salaries associated with these administrative costs . under the regulations , administrative costs do not include the costs of carrying out eligible activities under the esg program . hud esg program desk guide . the desk guide provides an overview of the esg program , describes the funding process , and covers topics including the initial application , grant administration , project implementation , and performance monitoring . for administrative costs , the desk guide also works on the basis of example , stating that eligible administrative costs include staff to operate the program , preparation of progress reports and audits , and monitoring of recipients . ineligible administrative costs include the preparation of the consolidated plan and other application submissions , conferences or training in professional fields , and salary of an organization's executive director , except to the extent they are involved in carrying out eligible administrative functions . in addition to the regulations and the desk guide , hud also publishes the guide for review of esg cost allowability and the guide for review of esg financial management as resources for grantees . these guides , however , do not provide any additional details on the appropriateness of administrative expenses . we interviewed grantees and subgrantees in the states we visited to obtain information on administrative activities performed , the cost of performing those activities , and related topics . see appendix ii for key contributors to this report . to determine the types of administrative activities performed and costs incurred under the emergency shelter grants program ( esg ) of the u.s. department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , and the extent to which grant proceeds cover these administrative costs , we made site visits to four states: california , georgia , michigan , and pennsylvania . we selected these states based on the amount of esg funding distributed to these grantees for fiscal year 2009 and their geographic location across the country . we initially identified state - level grantees receiving more than $1.5 million in esg funding , in order to focus on states with relatively more esg activity . this criterion reduced our target group to 20 states . we also researched the legislative history of the esg program . we examined hud guidance , federal regulations , and relevant office of management and budget ( omb ) circulars on allowability of administrative costs , including circulars a - 87 , cost principles for state , local , and indian tribal governments , and a - 122 , cost principles for non - profit organizations . further , we reviewed state and local government esg solicitation documents , such as notices of funding availability and requests for proposal .