defining the industries . how the industries are defined would significantly affect the number of workers who would become eligible for taa through an industry certification approach . our analysis defined industries according to industry classification systems used by government statistical agencies . however , some of these industry categories are broad and may encompass products that are not adversely affected by trade . notifying workers and initiating the delivery of services . notifying workers of their eligibility for taa has been a challenge and would continue to be under industry certification . under the current certification process , workers are linked to services through the petition process . the specific firm is identified on the petition application , and state and local workforce agencies work through the firm to reach workers in layoffs of all sizes . for industry certification , however , there are no such procedures in place to notify all potentially eligible workers in certified industries . for large layoffs in a certified industry , agencies could make use of the existing worker adjustment and retraining notification ( warn ) notices to connect with workers . however , in smaller layoffs in certified industries , or when firms do not provide advance notice , workforce agencies may not know that the layoff has occurred . verifying worker eligibility . verifying that a worker was laid off from a job in a certified industry to ensure that only workers eligible for taa receive taa benefits may be more of a challenge under industry certification than under the current system . for example , it may be difficult to identify the specific workers who made a product in the certified industry if their employer also makes products that are not covered under industrywide certification . in addition , determining who should conduct this verification may also present challenges . a centralized process conducted by labor would likely be unwieldy , while verification by state or local workforce agencies could take less time , but ensuring consistency across states might prove challenging . an approach using trade remedies presents some of the same challenges as an industry certification approach based on three petitions certified in 180 days . through our work on the trade adjustment assistance program since passage of the reform act in 2002 we have identified a number of areas where labor and the congress should take action . taking steps to limit confusion , ease restrictions , and provide support for case management would facilitate workers' access to services and benefits . states' ability to assist these workers would be enhanced by an improved process for allocating training funds . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have at this time . for information regarding this testimony , please contact sigurd r. nilsen , director , education , workforce , and income security issues , at ( 202 ) 512- 7215 . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include dianne blank , wayne sylvia , yunsian tai , michael hoffman , and rhiannon patterson . trade adjustment assistance: changes to funding allocation and eligibility requirements could enhance states' ability to provide benefits and services .