changes in beneficiary eligibility . gaps in children's eligibility for medicaid and movement of children between medicaid and other health insurance plans may also cause problems in accurately determining the extent that medicaid children received dental and other required epsdt services . one official told us that interrupted medicaid eligibility , accompanied by the implementation of the state children's health insurance program , has also caused problems in the data on the number of children eligible for services . as children move between health insurance programs as their program eligibility changes , officials reported that it becomes difficult to maintain an accurate count of medicaid - eligible children . without an accurate count , an accurate rate of the provision of the dental and other required epsdt services to eligible children cannot be calculated . the type of data collected on the cms 416 has limited usefulness for purposes of oversight , as officials from states and national health associations have noted . many officials from national health associations told us that the cms 416 did not provide enough information to allow cms to assess the effectiveness of states' epsdt programs . one official who works with many state medicaid agencies told us that states do not generally use the cms 416 to inform their monitoring and quality improvement activities , but instead rely on other sources of data . some state officials reported using the cms 416 data , but noted that they supplement the data with additional information . the limitations noted generally fell into three categories . first , while states report the total number of children enrolled in managed care plans , dental and other required epsdt services delivered to managed care enrollees are not reported separately from fee - for - service enrollees . consequently , the data captured by the cms 416 cannot be used to specifically monitor the provision of dental and other required epsdt services under either fee - for - service or managed care arrangements . second , the information captured by the cms 416 is limited to summary statistics , such as age group , eligibility , state requirements , and services delivered , and does not provide information that would illuminate whether children have received the recommended number of visits for dental and other required epsdt services . for example , a concern raised by a national health association official was that the cms 416 did not provide information about whether eligible children had received the number of biannual preventive dental visits that are required by the state or recommended by the american academy of pediatric dentistry . because each child is counted only once each fiscal year , regardless of the number of dental services or preventive dental services the child received that year , the data do not reflect the total number of dental appointments each child had in any given year . third , cms 416s do not contain information that would illuminate any of a number of factors that may contribute to low use of dental and other required epsdt services among children enrolled in medicaid .