ii. ) in these situations , dol officials said claims examiners manually review all previously denied claims that could be affected . of the more than 7,000 reopened claims for contracted energy employees from 2012 through 2017 , more than 6,000 had been previously denied versus receiving another outcome . when reopened , whether initiated by dol or claimants , most ( 70 percent , or 4,307 ) were approved ( see table 2 ) . in addition , as with all claims , a higher percentage of previously denied claims were approved ( 75 percent ) if reopened at dol's initiative compared to those reopened at claimants' initiative ( 52 percent ) . how many compensation claims for illnesses resulting from exposure to toxins did dol reopen and what was their final outcome ? to what extent has an advisory board on toxic substances and worker health reviewed and advised dol on the scientific soundness of dol's database on toxins and their potential links to occupational diseases , and how has dol responded ? there is no generally accepted definition of the term “scientific soundness.” for the purposes of this review , we define scientific soundness in terms of the quality of the evidence on the health effects of specified toxic substances , as determined by a systematic and independent process to review and validate that evidence . we arrived at this definition after consulting members of the advisory board and officials of the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine who reviewed the sem . additionally , we consulted with dol officials , who agreed that scientific soundness is related to the information in the sem on linkages between toxins and illnesses . to answer our research questions , we reviewed dol guidance and procedures , including relevant bulletins and circulars , and the federal eeoicpa procedure manual . we also reviewed an internal dol analysis of reopened claims conducted in 2017 ; annual reports of the office of the ombudsman ; an independent review of the sem conducted by the institute of medicine in 2013 ; and the charter , minutes , and related documents of the advisory board from april 2016 to january 2018 . we reviewed all recommendations of the advisory board and dol's responses to those recommendations . we also reviewed federal laws , regulations , and executive orders . in addition , we interviewed officials from dol and the office of the ombudsman , an office within dol that compiles and reports on claimants' concerns ; officials of the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine ; members of the advisory board on toxic substances and worker health ( advisory board ) ; and a claimant advocate . to identify reopened part e claims and their outcomes , we analyzed dol program data for calendar years 2012 through 2017 . we selected data beginning in 2012 to avoid any potential irregularities resulting from a transition to a new data system in 2012 . because a claim may be reopened at any time after it has been adjudicated with no limit to the number of reopenings , we reviewed the most recently reopened claims and their outcomes after reopening .