according to unhcr , most of its referrals are families . as part of the resettlement application process , uscis officers travel overseas to conduct in - person interviews of usrap applicants and adjudicate their applications for refugee status pending the results of required security and background checks . rscs provide interpreters to uscis officers during the interviews , as necessary . program integrity describes the extent to which the resettlement referral process is free from fraud , waste , and abuse by both staff and applicants . an important aspect of ensuring program integrity is designing , implementing , and evaluating the efficacy of antifraud measures . according to gao's standards for internal control in the federal government , fraud , such as malfeasance conducted by staff , poses a significant risk to the integrity of a program . accordingly , management should consider the potential for fraud when identifying , analyzing , and responding to program risks . management responds to identified fraud risks by developing antifraud activities designed to reduce or eliminate the potential for fraud . antifraud activities are a critical component for ensuring the integrity of a program such as usrap . to help ensure that control activities are designed to mitigate identified rsc staff fraud risks , the secretary of state should direct the bureau of population , refugees , and migration to regularly review rsc staff fraud risk assessments and use them to examine the suitability of existing staff fraud controls and revise controls as appropriate . the organization documents this information in a resettlement referral form . while most registered refugees receive some form of protection assistance from the organization , less than 1 percent are referred for resettlement in a third country , according to unhcr . we also interviewed officials from iom and various ngos . we spoke with officials at all nine rscs , including during visits to rscs in austria , jordan , kenya , and the rsc latin america suboffice in el salvador . observations from our site visits are not generalizable to all rscs but provide illustrative examples and apply to the usrap program through fiscal year 2016 . second , to analyze the extent to which rscs reported compliance with the 72 required control activities listed in state's usrap program integrity guidelines ( see app . i ) , we examined the most recent internal malfeasance prevention and mitigation measures and actions report submitted to state by all nine rscs . for each required measure , rscs report the actions taken to comply with the measure . if an rsc reported an action that met the measure required by state , we determined the rsc to have reported compliance . if an rsc ( a ) reported an action that met some , but not all , of the parts of the required measure ; ( b ) reported progress toward compliance but had not yet fully complied with the required measure ; ( c ) reported an action that did not meet any parts of the required measure ; or ( d ) did not report actions related to a measure , we determined that the rsc did not report compliance .