this report will be released next year . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . cindy fagnoni ( 202 ) 512-7215 , fagnonic@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included andrew sherrill , tamara fucile , mallory barg bulman , scott spicer , rachael valliere , walter vance , richard burkard , bill jenkins , and norm rabkin . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . charities were also able to share information through can databases . other officials told us that some of the smaller organizations that tried to establish “tent cities” to house evacuees were not prepared to provide the water , sanitation , and electricity these types of shelters require . in closing , the devastation of hurricanes katrina and rita once again challenged federal , state , and local governments and charitable organizations' abilities to provide large - scale aid to hundreds of thousands of survivors . we will be reviewing this issue in more detail over the next several months . gao is currently engaged in ongoing work on the coordination of charitable efforts in response to hurricanes katrina and rita and will further examine how effectively charities coordinated their responses to recent hurricanes . charities are organizations established to serve broad public purposes , such as the needs of the poor or distressed and other social welfare issues . the internal revenue service reported that for 2002 , 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations , which include charities , had total assets of over $1.7 trillion . in 2004 , the internal revenue service ( irs ) recognized 820,000 charities , accounting for about 90 percent of 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations . charities can include organizations with missions such as helping the poor , advancing religion , educating the public , or providing disaster relief services . although the federal government indirectly subsidizes charities through their tax - exempt status and by allowing individuals to deduct charitable contributions from their income taxes , the federal government has a fairly limited role in monitoring charities . states provide the primary oversight of charities through their attorneys general and charity offices . charities have historically played a large role in the nation's response to disasters . for example , after the september 11 attacks , 35 of the nation's larger charities — including the american red cross and the salvation army — collected almost $2.7 billion to provide food , shelter , mental health services , and other types of aid . charities' roles in responding to disasters can vary .