this analysis identified 363 contracts . from this population , we selected a probability sample of 160 contracts , including 60 indefinite delivery contracts , and reviewed associated solicitations , source selection decision documents , and other contract documents to determine the solicitation approach dod used . we verified the obligations and contract award fields in fpds - ng with contract data to ensure that the contracts within our sample were within scope . thirty - one contracts from our initial sample of 160 contracts were outside the scope of our review because they were incorrectly coded in key parameters , such as being coded as competitively awarded when they were not or had misreported the amount of obligations made on the contract or task order . we excluded these contracts from our sample and determined that fpds - ng was sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review after adjusting for these errors . because we followed a probability procedure based on random selections , our sample is only one of a large number of samples that we might have drawn . since each sample could have provided different estimates , we express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample's results as a 95 percent confidence interval ( eg , plus or minus 8 percentage points ) . this is the interval that would contain the actual population value for 95 percent of the samples we could have drawn . unless otherwise noted , percentage estimates based on our sample have 95 percent confidence intervals that are within plus or minus 8 percentage points of the estimate itself . confidence intervals for other numeric estimates are reported along with the estimate itself . table 1 summarizes the estimated percentage of contracts of various source selection approaches reviewed . based on our analysis of the remaining 129 sample contracts , we estimate that the total number of best value tradeoff , lowest price technically acceptable , or sealed bid award decisions ( in - scope contracts ) in the full population of interest was about 293 . for contracts that utilized a best value tradeoff process , we categorized them based on the relative importance placed on price . for example , the air force set up an acquisition center of excellence ( ace ) at tinker air force base , which provides pre - award source selection assistance to contract and program staff . air force officials stated that ace reviews the evaluation factors within individual source selection plans , serves in an advisory capacity on source selection teams and holds workshops for contracting officers . similarly , army officials at ft. monmouth's communications — electronics command have developed an online business tool — the assist tool — that shepherds contracting officers through the solicitation process . for example , the tool provided a list of steps that must be completed for best value tradeoff procurements and automatically routes documents through source selection evaluation boards and other participating officials for review , as required . dod is also drafting a departmentwide source selection guide to improve consistency and standardize source selection procedures for competitively awarded negotiated procurements .