individual agencies are also beginning to consider adaptation actions . for example , in may 2009 , the chief of naval operations created task force climate change to address the naval implications of a changing arctic and global environment . my testimony today addresses ( 1 ) the data challenges that federal , state , and local officials face in their efforts to adapt to a changing climate , ( 2 ) the actions federal agencies could take to help address these challenges , and ( 3 ) federal climate change strategic planning efforts . the information in this testimony is based on prior work , largely on our recent reports on climate change adaptation and federal climate change funding . many federal entities manage climate change programs and activities . according to the office of management and budget's june 2010 federal climate change expenditures report to congress , 9 of the 15 cabinet - level departments , along with 7 other federal agencies , received funding for climate change activities in fiscal year 2010 . in addition , entities within the executive office of the president , such as the office of science and technology policy , and federal interagency coordinating bodies , like usgcrp , work together to ensure federal climate change activities are guided by the latest climate science . a september 2010 report by the national academy of public administration , which was prepared for the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) and congress , referred to this set of federal activities as the federal “climate change enterprise.” federal climate programs are shifting their focus to adaptation and climate services . our october 2009 report on climate change adaptation found no coordinated national approach to adaptation , but our may 2011 report on climate change funding cited indications that federal agencies were beginning to respond to climate change more systematically . according to noaa documents , such a climate service would provide a single , reliable , and authoritative source for climate data , information , and decision support services to help individuals , businesses , communities , and governments make smart choices in anticipation of a climate changed future . a september 2010 report by the national academy of public administration discusses the factors needed for a noaa climate service to succeed — such as the designation of a lead federal agency to be the day - to - day integrator of the overall federal effort regarding climate science and services — and makes recommendations on how to achieve those factors . other respondents to our questionnaire , however , were less enthusiastic about the creation of a climate service . some voiced skepticism about whether it was feasible to consolidate climate information , and others said that such a system would be too rigid and may get bogged down in lengthy review processes . furthermore , certain officials stated that building such capacity may not be the most effective place to focus federal efforts because the information needs of decision makers vary so much by jurisdiction . several officials noted that climate change is an issue that requires a multidisciplinary response , and a single federal service may not be able to supply all of the necessary expertise .