10-year plan . by a presidential memorandum , ntia was directed to collaborate with fcc to make available 500 mhz of spectrum over the next 10 years , suitable for both mobile and fixed wireless broadband use , and complete by october 1 , 2010 , a specific plan and timetable for identifying and making available the 500 mhz for broadband use . do you have other responsibilities in addition to spectrum management ? if so , please describe . how long have you been working in federal spectrum management ? ( please include in your estimate experience throughout your career not just in your current position ) federal agency frequency assignments: 7 . currently , how many frequency assignments in each of the following frequency band ranges does the irac agency you represent have ? for what general purpose does the irac agency you represent use spectrum assigned in the 300 mhz to 3 ghz range ? if you do not have any spectrum assigned in the 300 mhz to 3 ghz range , please skip toq9 9 . for the irac agency you represent , which of the following usage categories has your assigned spectrum been designated ? ( select one for each row. ) the next series of questions asks about the types of technologies your agency operates within specific spectrum band ranges . for the irac agency you represent , please indicate whether your agency operates fixed microwave systems within any of these frequency ranges . ( select one for each row ) 11 . for the irac agency you represent , please indicate whether your agency operates fixed transportable systems within any of these frequency ranges . ( select one for each row ) 12 . for the irac agency you represent , please indicate whether your agency operates land mobile radio systems within any of these frequency ranges . select one for each row ) 13 . for the irac agency you represent , please indicate whether your agency operates maritime mobile radio systems within any of these frequency ranges . ( select one for each row ) 14 . for the irac agency you represent , please indicate whether your agency operates fixed microwave point to point radio systems within any of these frequency ranges . ( select one for each row ) 15 . for the irac agency you represent , please indicate whether your agency operates digital microwave systems within any of these frequency ranges . ( select one for each row ) 16 . for the irac agency you represent , please indicate whether your agency operates satellite systems within any of these frequency ranges . ( select one for each row ) 17 . for the irac agency you represent , what is / was the federal agency's 18 . for the irac agency you represent , how much did you pay ntia in administrative fees for each of the following years ? in general , how satisfied or dissatisfied is the irac agency you represent with the following resources available at your agency to manage spectrum ? ( select one for each row ) 20 . what additional resources , if any , would the irac agency you represent like to have to manage your spectrum ?