it has been fielded . increment 3.1 began fielding in november 2011 and adds enhanced radar and enhanced air - to - ground attack capabilities . increment 3.2a is a software upgrade to increase the f - 22a's electronic protection , combat identification , and link - 16 communications and data link capabilities . increment 3.2b will increase the f - 22a's electronic protection , geo - location , and intra flight data link ( ifdl ) capabilities , and adds aim - 9x and aim - 120d missiles . in addition to these efforts , in 2006 , the air force began a reliability and maintainability maturation program ( rammp ) . although the air force does not consider this part of the modernization program , it is integral to making the f - 22a weapon system more available , reliable , and maintainable . since the f - 22a's initial fielding in 2006 , maintenance issues have prevented it from achieving reliability and availability requirements , and fleet operating and support ( o&s ) costs are much higher than projected earlier in the program . total projected cost of the f - 22a modernization program has more than doubled since it started . while the program has completed and fielded some of its planned capabilities , the overall schedule to complete integration and testing of planned capabilities and deliver them to the warfighter has slipped by nearly 7 years . the content , scope , and phasing of planned capabilities also shifted over time with changes in requirements , priorities , and annual funding decisions . visibility and oversight of the program's cost and schedule is hampered by a management structure that does not directly track and account for the full cost of specific capability increments . the air force plans to separately break out and manage the fourth increment as a major defense acquisition program , which should improve management and oversight . the air force is now expected to spend around $11.7 billion to modernize and improve the reliability of the f - 22a , compared with the $5.4 billion projected soon after the start of development . officials underestimated the scope of the total program and the time and money that would eventually be needed to develop and field new capabilities . contributing factors to this cost growth include ( 1 ) changed and added requirements ; ( 2 ) unexpected expenses for building a support infrastructure ; and ( 3 ) unplanned efforts to improve aircraft reliability and maintainability . program officials also said that instability in modernization funding contributed to some of the cost growth by stretching the time required to complete projects . figure 1 shows increased cost estimates over time for the modernization program and other related costs . modernization increments include development and procurement costs directly tied to one of the four increments for acquiring upgraded capabilities . these include infrastructure costs for lab support , test operations , program management , retrofit to bring all aircraft to a common configuration , and other efforts integral to supporting modernization increments . other improvement costs principally include the rammp reliability and maintainability projects and making structural repairs needed for the aircraft to achieve its required 8,000 hour service life .