agencies . gprama requires that agencies make their respective strategic plans , performance plans and reports , and information about their apgs ( as applicable ) , including quarterly updates , available for publication on performance.gov . twenty - two agencies have web pages on performance.gov that provide links to their strategic plans , annual performance plans , and annual performance reports ; report agency progress on government - wide management initiatives ; and show agency contributions to the cap goals . there are 31 additional agencies that do not have a dedicated web page on performance.gov . instead , they provide links to their strategic plans or to their agency plans and reports pages . agencies submit their annual and , as applicable , quarterly performance information for publication on the website through the performance reporting entry portal ( prep ) system . while omb and pic give feedback on updates to the information or suggest changes , ultimately , the agency decides what information is published on its performance.gov page . general services administration . gsa builds the technical platform , provides project management of performance.gov , and determines the business requirements and priorities . we recommended that omb , working with the pic , identify practices participating agencies can use to improve their public reporting in their performance plans and reports of how they are ensuring the quality of performance information used to measure progress towards apgs . additionally , while the ekuber contract , awarded august 19 , 2015 , has options to address some usability issues , omb has not prioritized which usability issues need to be addressed first or a timeline for addressing these issues . specifically , the contract contains an option to enhance the usability of the site , which gsa can exercise at a later date during the contract period . these contract options include improving the website search function and enhancing data visualizations on performance.gov , among other things . in 2013 , we also found that some performance.gov users reported issues with accessibility , navigation , and search capabilities . specifically , we found that omb had not articulated ways that intended audiences , such as members of the public , congress , and agency staff , could use the website or the information available through it to accomplish other specific tasks . for example , the website gave no indication or examples of the ways that various audiences could use performance.gov to facilitate coordination or communication about goals , activities , and performance between agencies . at that time , we recommended omb clarify ways that intended audiences could use the information on performance.gov to accomplish specific tasks and identify the design changes that would be required to facilitate that change . omb agreed with our recommendation and subsequently conducted the usability test . although the actions omb has taken are a step in the right direction , they do not fully address our prior findings with regard to how people could use the website to complete specific tasks . as a result , our prior recommendation remains open . thus , if usability issues are not addressed , performance.gov users could continue to have difficulties using and understanding the content posted on the site .