the ruc . cms was unable to provide additional supporting documentation on its review of the service when asked , and ruc staff told us they did not have any information about cms's clinical review of its recommendations for the service apart from what was included in the federal register . ruc and others have 60 days to comment in december 2012 , the ruc commented in writing on cms's final rule , including cms's decisions regarding the ruc's recommendations for cpt code 31647 . according to the comment letter , the american thoracic society agreed with cms's refinements to its clinical labor dpei recommendations for cpt code 31647 ; ruc staff told us that the american college of chest physicians did not comment on cms's refinements to the service . cms's interim final values included in the november 2012 final rule went into effect for the 2013 payment year beginning january 1 , 2013 . ( see fig . thus , while relative values determine the payment rate of one service relative to another , they do not directly determine services' medicare payment rates . cms establishes relative values annually , and the effect of any changes on cms's payment rates generally must be budget neutral . in particular , if any changes to relative values result in changes to annual estimated expenditures of more than $20 million , cms is required to make adjustments to ensure that overall expenditures do not increase or decrease by more than this amount . however , certain adjustments may also be made to medicare payment rates that are not subject to the budget neutrality limitation . for example , if the annual net reduction in expenditures resulting from the revision of relative values does not meet the savings target for that year ( 1.0 percent of medicare physicians' services payments in 2016 and 0.5 percent in 2017 and 2018 ) , adjustments to reduce overall medicare expenditures to achieve that target are not subject to the budget neutrality limitation . the process to develop and establish relative values involves three main steps: ( 1 ) cms , the ruc , and ama's current procedural terminology ( cpt ) editorial panel identify services for ruc review , ( 2 ) the ruc works with specialty societies to use surveys and other methods to develop work relative value and dpei recommendations for cms for identified services , and ( 3 ) cms reviews each ruc recommendation it receives to determine whether to use it when establishing relative values for physicians' services . ( see fig . stakeholders should have opportunities to comment and provide input on cms's process per federal internal control standards . however , unless stakeholders monitor the ruc's activities , they are unaware that these services are under review and that payment rates for them may change until cms publishes its responses to the ruc's recommendations for these services . thus , stakeholder participation in cms's process is limited because of incomplete information regarding which services are undergoing ruc — and eventually cms — review . moreover , while cms provides general information on how it reviews ruc recommendations , it does not document a process for reviewing recommendations that would identify the resources considered during its review of specific ruc recommendations .