( fig . 2 is a simplified diagram depicting the interrelationships among the views. ) the operational architecture view defines the operational elements , activities and tasks , and information flows required to accomplish or support an organizational mission or business function . according to dod , it is useful for facilitating a number of actions and assessments across dod , such as examining business processes for reengineering or defining operational requirements to be supported by physical resources and systems . the systems architecture view defines the systems and their interconnections supporting the organizational or functional mission in context with the operational view , including how multiple systems link and interoperate , and may describe the internal construction and operations of particular systems . according to dod , this view has many uses , such as helping managers to evaluate interoperability improvement and to make investment decisions concerning cost - effective ways to satisfy operational requirements . the technical architecture view defines a minimum set of standards and rules governing the arrangement , interaction , and interdependence of system applications and infrastructure . it provides the technical standards , criteria , and reference models upon which engineering specifications are based , common building blocks are established , and applications are developed . this report contains recommendations to you . as you know , 31 u.s.c . 720 requires the head of a federal agency to submit a written statement of the actions taken on our recommendations to the senate committee on governmental affairs and to the house committee on government reform not later than 60 days from the date of this letter and to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of this letter . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees . we are also sending copies to the honorable thomas e. white , secretary of the army ; the honorable gordon r. england , secretary of the navy ; the honorable james g. roche , secretary of the air force ; general james l. jones , commandant of the marine corps ; the honorable mitchell e. daniels , jr. , director , office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . we will make copies available to others upon request . the report will also be available on our homepage at http: / / www.gao.gov . we are encouraged by the department's initiatives . in concurring with our recommendation related to the development and use of an enterprise architecture , dod stated that two of the three views forming that architecture — the operational and systems views — are to be developed in the near - term . the department added — as we recommended — that these views can then be used as a guide to review and adjust systems requirements and to determine if gaps exits that may require new development efforts . dod also stated that development of the technical architecture view will be initiated once development of the other views has progressed to an appropriate point . dod agreed with our recommendation that the department develop and annually update a written , formalized management framework to guide its combat identification efforts .