employment of veterans . congress created a hiring authority called the veterans' recruitment appointment authority that allows for certain exceptions from the competitive examining process . specifically , agencies may appoint eligible veterans without competition under limited circumstances or otherwise through excepted service hiring procedures . employment of students and recent graduates . to ensure that the federal government continued to compete effectively for students and recent graduates , a 2010 executive order created the pathways program . pathways replaced two former student programs and incorporated the presidential management fellows program . opm decentralized and delegated many personnel decisions to federal agencies . it also has encouraged agencies to use human capital flexibilities , such as hiring authorities , to help tailor their personnel approaches to accomplish their missions . in january 1996 , for example , opm delegated competitive examining authority to federal agencies for virtually all positions in the competitive service . opm is responsible for ensuring that the personnel management functions it delegates to agencies are conducted in accordance with merit system principles , and the standards established by opm for conducting those functions . the exceptions authorized under title 5 to the competitive examining process , and the creation of exceptions to hiring rules through new agency - specific non - title 5 hiring authorities mentioned above , also affect oversight responsibilities . oversight of hiring actions depends on the origin of the authorized exception . for example , if the position was excepted from the competitive service by opm , opm is responsible for ensuring that the hiring actions taken to fill those positions are consistent with merit principles and other relevant title 5 laws and regulations . however , if congress directly granted an agency authority to appoint individuals into the excepted service without regard to title 5 and opm authority , generally the agency ( rather than opm ) must ensure that it is meeting relevant standards under that grant of authority or additional oversight provisions detailed by congress . further , the chief human capital officers ( chco ) act of 2002 established the chco council to advise and coordinate the activities of member agencies on such matters as the modernization of human resources systems , improved quality of human resources information , and legislation affecting human resources operations and organizations . the chco council is chaired by the director of opm and serves to coordinate and collaborate on the development and implementation of federal human capital policies . our analysis of opm data found that overall , agencies used a relatively small number of hiring authorities to fill nearly all of the vacancies in 2014 , and a large number of hiring authorities to fill the small proportion of positions that remained . specifically , we found that agencies used 105 hiring authority codes for 196,226 new appointments in fiscal year 2014 . these appointments were for competitive service positions , as well as for excepted service positions , made under both title 5 and agency - specific non - title 5 authorities . the use of hiring authorities was influenced by particular hiring levels at certain agencies .