in accordance with p.l . 103-160 , the secretary designated the assistant to the secretary for nuclear , chemical , and biological defense ( atsd ) as the principal officer responsible for oversight and coordination of the program . however , this position was vacant from 1998 through late 2001 . the deputy atsd , who exercises day - to - day oversight over the program , was also vacant for more than a year during that period . we believe these osd vacancies adversely affected the high - level attention received by the program as well as its ability to compete for funding against other defense needs , thereby sending a message throughout the department about the relative priority and importance attached to the program . dod has requested almost $1.4 billion for the chemical and biological defense program in fiscal year 2003 — more than three times the fiscal year 1994 amount . nevertheless , the program has consistently had difficulty competing against other service priorities , such as those associated with traditional mission tasks . despite the emphasis placed on this program by the quadrennial defense review , spending on chemical and biological defense represents about a third of a percent of the entire $369 billion dod budget request . dod officials and field commanders alike have repeatedly stressed that they must balance chemical and biological defense requirements against all other defense needs , and do so within a constrained budget environment . for example , as we reported in 1996 , officers have cited other - than - war deployments , quality of life considerations , and peacetime medical care as higher priorities than chemical and biological defense . we have previously recommended that chemical and biological defense needed direct representation by a general officer on the joint staff in order to receive the appropriate program emphasis and support . dod has recently implemented this change . it remains to be seen what the effect of this change will be . figure 4 shows the growth in chemical and biological defense program funding since fiscal year 1994 . there is also competition within the program between the main categories of research and development and procurement . at present , some components of the clothing ensemble , such as the jslist glove and next - generation mask , are in the developmental phase ; others , like the jslist suit , are in procurement . in deciding how much money to allocate to each of the various categories and specific projects , dod relies on the joint priority list , which integrates and rank - orders the preferences of combatant commanders for all chemical and biological equipment needs . on this year's joint priority list , for example , the jslist suit ranked 35 out of 72 items . biodetection capabilities occupied the first spaces on that list . in fiscal year 2003 , $96 million is earmarked for the procurement of jslist suits . conflicts over internal program priorities thus can also affect issues such as shortages of jslist suits . figure 2 illustrates this trend .