this continues to be a risk to the program . lockheed martin officials stated they have a number of initiatives aimed at improving supplier performance , including conducting additional oversight of some suppliers and assisting some suppliers with developing corrective action plans . as a result , lockheed martin officials believe the performance of some key suppliers has improved over the last year . this is consistent with the prior lot . engineering design changes remained the same . in 2015 , changes averaged 23 per month , the same as in 2014 . although it has improved , lockheed martin's supply chain continues to deliver parts late to production , resulting in inefficiencies and requiring workarounds . since 2014 , there has been a 53 percent reduction in part shortage occurrences . in 2015 , there were a total of 269 less severe shortages , and 89 most severe shortages on average per month ( see figure 7 ) . the severity of part shortages is measured in four categories , category 1 being the least severe , and category 4 and above being the most severe with those shortages requiring a major workaround or work stoppage . according to lockheed martin and f - 35 program officials , parts continue to be delivered late largely because of late contract awards and because the supply base is not yet capable of handling large quantities . we found in april 2015 that inefficiencies related to limited supply base capabilities could be exacerbated if this trend continues as production increases . overall , the delivery rate of the engine manufacturer , pratt & whitney , increased from 27 in 2011 to 42 in 2015 . a total of 218 engines have been delivered to date . in 2015 , pratt & whitney delivered nearly half of the engines to dod ahead of contract requirements . the labor hours required to assemble an f - 35 engine decreased quickly and has remained relatively steady since engine number 70 was delivered . pratt & whitney officials largely attribute this improvement to lessons learned by the contractor on previous fighter aircraft engine programs , such as the f - 22 . figure 8 illustrates the trend in labor hours required to build the f - 35 engine , also known as the f - 135 . according to pratt & whitney data , few additional labor hour reductions are expected ; therefore , the contractor is looking for other ways to gain more manufacturing efficiency . other pratt & whitney manufacturing metrics indicate that production efficiency and quality have remained relatively steady . scrap , rework , and repair costs have remained steady at around 1.8 percent per engine . difficulty manufacturing one of the engine rotor blades — a hollow blade design — has driven much of the scrap and rework costs in the engine program over the last year . however , pratt & whitney officials have changed the blade design to a solid design that is easier to produce . the solid blade is expected to decrease scrap and rework costs . engineering design changes are relatively low and continue to decrease . only 31 of 175 major design changes remain to complete the engine development program .