gao - 11-82r . washington , d.c.: december 8 , 2010 . we requested comments on a draft of this report from dhs . on september 12 , 2011 , dhs provided written comments , which are reprinted in appendix iii . dhs concurred with our three recommendations and described actions planned to address them . with regard to our first recommendation that dhs provide more time for consulting with stakeholders during the qhsr process and to build this time into the department's project planning for the next qhsr , dhs stated that it would endeavor to incorporate increased opportunities and time for stakeholder engagement during the next qhsr . regarding our second recommendation that dhs examine additional mechanisms for obtaining input from nonfederal stakeholders during the qhsr process and use them for obtaining nonfederal stakeholders' input , dhs stated that it will examine using panels of state , local , and tribal government officials and existing advisory groups to obtain input . with regard to our third recommendation that dhs examine the extent to which risk information could be used as one input into prioritizing qhsr implementing mechanisms and to consider such information , if appropriate , when prioritizing qhsr implementation , dhs stated that it intends to conduct risk analysis specific to the qhsr in advance of the next review . this report addresses the following question: to what extent did dhs ( 1 ) consult with stakeholders in developing the qhsr strategy ; ( 2 ) conduct a national risk assessment to develop the qhsr ; and ( 3 ) develop priorities , plans , monitoring mechanisms , and performance measures for implementing the qhsr and bur initiatives ? this report also provides information on the extent to which dhs's strategic documents and the 2010 national security strategy align with the qhsr ( see app . to address these objectives , we analyzed dhs documents related to the qhsr , bur , and budget development processes , including the qhsr report , bur report , fiscal year 2012 budget request , and fiscal years 2012-2016 future years homeland security program ( fyhsp ) . we identified criteria for evaluating these processes by analyzing our prior reports on key characteristics of effective national strategies , key practices for effective interagency collaboration , strategic planning , performance measurement , and standards for internal control , among others . based on these reports , we identified those key practices and characteristics applicable to quadrennial reviews , like the qhsr . the key practices we identified were involving stakeholders in defining qhsr missions and outcomes ; defining homeland security problems and assessing risks ; including homeland security strategy goals , subordinate objectives , activities , and performance measures ; including resources , investments , and risk management ; including organizational roles , responsibilities , and coordination across the homeland security enterprise ; and establishing dhs processes for managing implementation of bur initiatives . we vetted the key practices with our subject matter experts — staff with legal and methodological expertise and experience analyzing the quadrennial defense review — and provided them to dhs officials for review , and incorporated their comments as appropriate .