grants are not to exceed $300,000 . the population of the grantee tribes and the number of children they could potentially serve varies . for example , according to bia data , the 2010 estimated populations of navajo nation , eastern band of cherokee indians , and winnebago tribe of nebraska were 195,995 , 8,600 , and 1,450 , respectively . tribes can use development grants for any cost related to developing a title iv - e plan and meeting program requirements , such as hiring personnel or developing a cam . the act requires grantees to submit a title iv - e plan within 24 months of receiving the grant . acf awarded tribes development grants for a 24-month period , and may grant tribes an extension of the initial grant period so that the tribes can continue working on the title iv - e plan and spend the remaining grant funds . as of november 2014 , 15 of the 16 grantees that have reached the end of their initial 24-month period received a 1-year extension from acf to continue working on the title iv - e plan ( see table 2 ) . there are currently five tribes with an approved title iv - e plan ; four of these tribes received a title iv - e development grant and one did not . tribes can continue to work on the title iv - e plan after the initial development grant and grant extension periods have ended , and several have done so . in its 2014 strategic plan , acf identified approving additional tribal title iv - e plans as an agency goal . we found that challenges related to staffing were a resource constraint faced by tribal child welfare programs . adequacy of staffing is a significant workforce challenge for tribal child welfare programs in general , according to a 2011 survey by the national child welfare resource center for tribes and our interviews with tribal officials . although staffing is also an issue for state child welfare agencies , it is especially challenging for tribes because they are commonly located in rural areas , may only have one or two paid staff for all child welfare efforts , and lack funding to hire additional staff . we interviewed officials with 11 tribes that were in various stages of developing a title iv - e plan and representatives from 7 of these tribes said they have a small number of staff working on the title iv - e program , and that the staff are often managing child welfare cases and implementing other tribal programs such as child support or tanf . staff turnover has also been a challenge for tribes establishing title iv - e programs , according to hhs documents and officials . hhs documents show that at least 13 of 21 tribes that received title iv - e development grants from fiscal year 2009 through fiscal year 2013 lost at least one staff member who was working on the title iv - e plan . in one case , a tribe reported having four different child welfare directors within a 6-month period , making it difficult to identify project needs during that time .