some states had reported data for both groups . we obtained enrollment and expenditure data for calendar year 2014 — the first full year that states had the option of expanding medicaid under ppaca . this includes the first through fourth quarters of the 2014 calendar year ( ending march , june , september , and december 2014 , respectively ) . because data are reported for each month , we use the last month of the quarter to report for that quarter . for example , we used the numbers reported for march 2014 as the numbers reported by states for the first quarter of 2014 . we extracted these data from the mbes on june 2 , 2015 . we provided a draft of this report to hhs for comment . in its written comments , hhs highlighted the actions the department has taken to ensure the accuracy of medicaid eligibility determinations made through the exchanges , citing the multi - layer verification processes in place to assess applicant eligibility , and also noted that it conducts reviews of expenditure data submitted by the states . hhs agreed with our first recommendation and agreed with the concept of our second recommendation . hhs concurred with our first recommendation to conduct reviews on federal medicaid eligibility determinations to ascertain the accuracy of these determinations and institute corrective action plans where necessary . hhs noted that federal eligibility determinations in two states are currently being reviewed by the eligibility support contractor , and stated that federal determinations will be included as part of the future perm eligibility review . the increased fmap will gradually diminish to 90 percent by 2020 . states will also receive an fmap above the state's regular match for their medicaid expenditures for the state - expansion enrollees , ranging from 75-92 percent in 2014 . this fmap will gradually increase and will eventually equal the fmap for the ppaca - expansion enrollees beginning in 2019 . ( see table 1. ) consequently , a state that chooses to expand its medicaid program could potentially receive three different fmaps for its different types of medicaid enrollees . states are primarily responsible for verifying eligibility and enrolling medicaid beneficiaries . these responsibilities include verifying and validating individuals' eligibility at the time of application and periodically thereafter , and promptly disenrolling individuals who are not eligible . although states have the flexibility to use different sources of information and processes to verify eligibility factors , cms guidelines call upon states to maximize automation and real - time adjudication of medicaid applications through the use of electronic verification policies and the use of multiple application channels , including health insurance exchanges — whether federally facilitated exchanges ( ffe ) or state - based exchanges ( sbe ) — to implement ppaca's coordinated eligibility determination process . under this process , individuals can apply for health coverage through their state's medicaid agency or its health insurance exchange , whether an ffe or an sbe , and regardless of which route they choose , their eligibility will be determined for coverage under the appropriate program . consequently , ffes and sbes are designed to make assessments of medicaid eligibility .