the department of state had no comments . cbp agreed with our recommendation on csi's staffing model and said that modifications to the model would allow for program objectives to be achieved in a cost - effective manner . specifically , cbp said that it would evaluate the minimum level of staff needed at csi ports to maintain an ongoing dialogue with host nation officials , as well as assess the staffing levels needed domestically to support csi activities . if properly implemented , these actions should address the intent of this recommendation . what factors affect cbp's ability to target shipments at overseas seaports ? under csi , to what extent have high - risk containers been inspected overseas prior to their arrival at u.s. destinations ? to what extent has cbp developed strategies and related management tools for achieving the program's goals ? to address all three objectives , we met with cbp officials in washington , d.c. , who have program responsibilities for csi and reviewed available data and documentation for the program . to ascertain the degree to which high - risk shipments were targeted and inspected overseas , we obtained data on csi targeting and inspection activity for each of the csi ports . we also met with csi teams and host government officials at four overseas ports . in addition , we observed elements of the targeting and inspection processes at these ports and obtained and reviewed documentation of csi procedures provided by cbp and host government officials at these ports . we also assessed the reliability of cbp's data on the number of shipments and containers subject to targeting and inspection under csi and found the data sufficiently reliable for use in our report . in addition , we examined the status of the bureau's efforts to implement our prior recommendations for strategic and human capital plans and performance measures for the program . we conducted our work from february 2004 through february 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . more details about the scope and methodology of our work are presented in appendix i . several studies on maritime security conducted by federal , academic , nonprofit , and business organizations have concluded that the movement of oceangoing cargo in containers is vulnerable to some form of terrorist action , largely because of the movement of shipments throughout the supply chain . relatively few importers own and operate all key aspects of the cargo container transportation process , which includes overseas manufacturing and warehouse facilities , carrier ships to transport goods , and the transportation operation to receive the goods upon arrival . most importers must rely on second - hand parties to move cargo in containers and prepare various transportation documents . second - hand parties within the cargo container supply chain may include exporters , freight forwarders , customs brokers , inland transportation providers , port operators , and ocean carriers . every time responsibility for cargo in containers changes hands along the supply chain , there is the potential for a security breach ; specifically , this change in responsibility creates opportunities for contraband to be placed in containers and opportunities for fraudulent documents to be prepared .