we do not agree . part of irs's justification for closing the recommendation is that it uses estimates of the cost - benefit direct tax return on investment analysis to evaluate future scenarios and to support funding requests for new initiatives in its annual budget submissions . using such estimates of prospective return on investment information is useful for budgetary decision making , but our recommendation is for irs to develop outcome data on the actual results of its programs and activities . we have also previously recommended that irs extend the use of return on investment in future budget proposals to include major enforcement programs , develop return on investment data for its enforcement programs using actual revenue and full cost data and compare actual results to the projected return on investment data included in its budget request , and provide congress with information comparing projected savings to actual savings in the year following the budget's implementation . the intent of our recommendations is to encourage irs to develop outcome - oriented performance metrics and to use them , along with other metrics , in resource - allocation decisions . while irs has not developed or deployed such metrics for either funded initiatives or for ongoing enforcement programs and activities , irs officials informed us they are considering options to collect direct tax return on investment data for newly funded enforcement initiatives . irs officials also contended that it is not prudent to rely exclusively on direct tax return on investment as the sole determinant of resource allocation . as we have reported previously , we acknowledge that irs must consider other factors besides maximizing revenue collection and least - cost operations . the fairness of irs's implementation of the tax code and treatment of all taxpayers are important and we are cognizant of the many factors , such as coverage , that are important considerations when making resource - allocation decisions . these factors , and the decisions irs makes about how to respond to them , have a significant effect on taxpayers , as well as on tax collections . we also acknowledge that irs faces challenges in developing outcome - oriented performance metrics , such as return on investment , and integrating them into its resource allocation decision - making process . furthermore , developing such an approach is important in order for irs to make optimum use of its available resources and to be able to credibly demonstrate it is doing so to congress and the public . irs's lack of outcome - oriented performance metrics is inconsistent with federal financial management concepts as embodied in the federal accounting standards advisory board's statement of federal financial accounting concepts no . 1 , objectives of federal financial reporting . in its discussion of financial reporting concepts , fasab notes that federal financial data should provide accountability and decision - useful information on the costs of programs and the outputs and outcomes achieved , and it should provide data for evaluating service efforts , costs , and accomplishments . the absence of outcome metrics is also inconsistent with the objectives of the cfo act of 1990 .