( see app . iii for a more detailed illustration of discrepancies identified in hps. ) according to hud officials , the inconsistencies in hps are due to data entry problems , misunderstandings among staff about what data to record and how to record it , and limited verification procedures . for example , staff inconsistently record data on multi - year contracts with “base” and “option” years . hud currently has limited verification procedures in place to ensure that hps data are reliable . according to the hps administrator , ocpo staff are not required to routinely verify the accuracy of the data they are responsible for maintaining in hps . hud's program offices also record contracting obligation and expenditure information in various financial management information systems . however , these systems do not readily provide consistent and complete information for either hud's overall contracting activity or individual contracts . concerns about the effectiveness of hud's programmatic and financial management information systems are not new . we have reported that hud lacks the programmatic and financial management information systems necessary to ensure accountability over its programs since 1984 . the lack of readily available , consistent , and complete contracting information is one example of these concerns with hud's programmatic and financial management information systems . to obtain aggregate information on hud's contract obligations and expenditures , hud managers must manually query several financial management systems . however , according to a hud official , these ad hoc queries are only useful in identifying transactions that “look like” contracts . these queries do not reliably produce obligation and expenditure data on all hud's contracting activity and also include obligation and expenditure data for activities other than contracts . after attempting to obtain data for us over a period of about 5 months , hud was able to provide only partial data . hud officials provided multiple reasons for this , including that several of hud's financial management information systems do not track obligation data and hud does not have ready access to some fha data for fiscal years 1998 and 1999 because fha no longer uses the systems . as a result , hud's different information systems provide widely different pictures of hud's contracting activity . specifically , as shown in table 1 , the aggregate obligation data from hud's financial management systems were not consistent with the data hud reported from in its centralized contracting management information system , hps ( discussed further in page 27 ) . ( see app . iv for a listing and brief description of the various financial systems that maintain contracting information. ) after over 5 months of working on our request , hud was also unable to provide us obligation and expenditure data on 33 of 115 individual contracts , and what it could provide was often not consistent with data maintained in hps . we requested data on two groups of hud contracts ; for one we judgmentally selected 66 active contracts from all hud program offices and for the second we used all 49 active multifamily contracts with an obligated value over $100,000 .