iii. ) samhsa said that it already has efforts under way to address each of the report's key findings and recommendations , and that it endorses the value the report places on strategic planning , workforce planning , and collaboration with federal , state , and community partners . samhsa indicated that it will continue to engage in a strategic planning process and said that its priority issues and principles are central to this process . as we had noted in the draft report , samhsa commented that it expects to complete and approve the action plans developed by each of its priority issue work groups by june 30 , 2004 . samhsa also said that it would update its draft strategic plan to include summaries of the action plans , and then disseminate the draft for public comment , submit it to hhs for clearance , and publish the final plan . our draft report stated that samhsa did not want to issue its strategic plan before hhs issued the new departmental strategic plan . in its comments , samhsa noted that hhs published its strategic plan in april 2004 and that this was no longer an issue affecting samhsa's schedule for publishing its plan . in its comments , samhsa also stated that it places a high priority on the development of a succession plan . samhsa said that it is preparing for an anticipated increase in the agency's attrition rate over the next several years and is reviewing the pool of staff eligible to retire to identify the skills and expertise that could be lost to the organization . while samhsa is beginning to engage in succession planning , it has not developed a detailed succession strategy . we have made our recommendation more specific to communicate the need for samhsa to develop such a strategy . in response to our recommendation that samhsa complete hiring and training strategies to ensure that the agency's workforce has the appropriate expertise to implement performance partnership grants , samhsa said that it is addressing the need for its workforce to have the appropriate expertise . for example , samhsa indicated that it has initiated efforts to identify training needed by current staff and to ensure that new staff have needed skills . however , we believe it is important for samhsa to fully develop both hiring and training strategies to ensure that it has the appropriate workforce in place when it implements performance partnership grants . in response to our recommendation to develop a procedure to allow applicants to correct administrative errors in discretionary grant applications , samhsa commented that its new screening procedures have yielded a substantial increase in the percentage of applications that will be reviewed for merit . as a result , samhsa believes our recommendation is premature and said that it plans to evaluate the results of the revised procedures before making any additional changes . while early evidence indicates that the new procedures are reducing the proportion of applications rejected for administrative reasons , these procedures have not eliminated such rejections .