fra agreed with our recommendations . as of june 30 , 2018 , many railroads reported that they remain in the equipment installation and field - testing stages , which are early stages of ptc implementation . however , since we last testified in march 2018 , railroads have made progress on equipment installation . based on our analysis of the 40 railroads' reported status as of june 30 , 2018 , about half of the railroads have completed equipment installation , and many others are nearing completion of this stage . specifically , three - quarters of the 40 railroads reported being more than 90 percent complete with locomotive equipment installation . similarly , nearly three - quarters of railroads that must install wayside equipment reported being more than 90 percent complete . the remaining one - quarter of railroads are among those designated by fra as at - risk of both not meeting the end of 2018 implementation deadline and not completing the requirements necessary to qualify for an extension . specifically , in august 2018 , fra identified 9 railroads — all commuter railroads — as at - risk , fewer than the 12 railroads fra had previously designated as at risk in its june 2018 letters to railroads . since we last testified , most commuter railroads reported slow progress with testing , especially with rsd , while class i railroads and amtrak have reached later stages of testing . notably , all 7 class i freight railroads and amtrak reported having initiated field testing and entering rsd as of june 30 , 2018 . see table 1 . fra has additional oversight tools , which include use of its general civil penalty enforcement authority for failure to meet certain statutory ptc requirements . fra has used this authority in 2017 and 2018 to assess civil penalties against railroads that failed to comply with the equipment installation milestones , the spectrum acquisition milestones , or both , that the railroads had established in their implementation plans for the end of 2016 and 2017 . as part of our body of work on ptc , we found that railroads face numerous ptc implementation challenges and made recommendations to fra to improve its oversight of implementation . specifically , in 2013 and 2015 we found that many railroads were struggling to make progress due to a number of complex and interrelated challenges , such as developing system components and identifying and correcting issues discovered during testing . most recently , we found in march 2018 that fra had not systematically communicated information or used a risk - based approach to help railroads prepare for the 2018 deadline or to qualify for an extension . we also found that many railroads were concerned about fra's ability to review submitted documentation in a timely manner , particularly given the length of some required documentation such as safety plans and fra's limited resources for document review . in march 2018 , we recommended fra identify and adopt a method for systematically communicating information to railroads and use a risk - based approach to prioritize its resources and workload .