we disagree . the practical effect of raising the u.s. license exception level to 190,000 mtops is to raise the control threshold to this level since computers below this level ( 190,000 mtops ) do not require an export license . further , according to commerce officials , not all wassenaar members have license exception provisions in their regulations . consequently , a disparity exists between u.s. licensing requirements and the control thresholds used by other wassenaar member countries , as we noted in our report . finally , according to state department officials and official documents we reviewed , other wassenaar members complained that the united states unilaterally increased its export control threshold by raising the licensing exception level to 190,000 mtops . commerce and defense officials responsible for preparing the president's december 2001 report confirmed that the effort to formally change the licensing threshold and prepare the justification was prompted by the letter from industry . commerce data indicate that there are more than 700 outstanding post - shipment verifications that have not been conducted in china . when implemented , the department of commerce's effort to “red flag” persons for which it has not been able to conduct prelicense checks or post - shipment verifications may prove to be a useful first step in improving its ability to counter problems associated with conducting checks and verifications . the following are gao's comments on the letter from the department of state dated july 19 , 2002 . we are encouraged that executive branch agencies continue to explore alternatives to the current mtops metric . we believe the results of this analysis should be shared with congress . we agree that some countries subject to the existing controls may be among the most adept at developing clustering software and technology . however , this point was not included in the president's report . the report simply stated that the impact of clustering will be assessed in the course of the executive branch's review of computer export controls . while computer clustering complicates efforts to maintain effective export controls , this point was not used as the basis for raising the export control thresholds for high performance computers . also , the executive branch continues to debate the extent that clustering has rendered the current export control system ineffective . an october 2001 defense study found that clustered systems do not match the overall performance capabilities of the stand - alone systems supplied by u.s. vendors . this study concluded that foreign country's use of clustered systems should not be used as a justification for decontrolling all classes of high performance computers . in addition to the individual named above , david m. bruno , claude t. adrien , and lynn cothern made key contributions to this report . the general accounting office , the investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions .