title 32 . when performing duty under the authority of title 32 of the united states code ( title 32 status ) , national guard members are under the command and control of the governors , but are federally funded . for example , past missions have included providing security at the nation's airports in the immediate aftermath of the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks and assisting the gulf coast in the aftermath of hurricane katrina . while operating in title 32 status , national guard members are not subject to the uniform code of military justice , but , according to oci officials , may be subject to a state code of military justice enacted by the state legislature . state active duty . when performing duty in state active duty status , national guard members are under command and control of the governors and are state funded . when operating in state active duty status , national guard members are not subject to the uniform code of military justice . when performing their state - level mission , national guard units within a state , territory , or the district of columbia report to a state - level senior officer known as the adjutant general , who in turn reports to either a state or territorial governor , or for the district of columbia , the president ( as commander - in - chief ) . the adjutant general coordinates with the ngb's army or air national guard , as appropriate , on such matters as staffing and unit readiness . the army and air national guard in turn coordinate with army and air force staff , respectively . oci was established in 2012 by the chief of the ngb to perform complex administrative investigations at the request of the adjutants general of the 50 states , the three territories , and the district of columbia , or at the direction of the chief of the ngb . oci's primary purpose is to provide the state national guards with the capability to administratively investigate reports of sexual assault having a national guard nexus when the reports fall outside the jurisdiction of military criminal investigative organizations and are not sufficiently investigated by civilian law enforcement . oci's secondary purpose is to administratively investigate other complex matters as assigned , one of which is a state assessment . the types of investigations conducted by oci are further described later in this report . congress designated the chief of the ngb as ( 1 ) the senior military officer responsible for the organization and operations of the ngb and ( 2 ) the principal advisor on national guard matters to the secretary of defense through the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , as well as to the secretary and chief of staff of the army , and secretary and chief of staff of the air force . further , a dod directive states that one function of the ngb is to monitor and assist states in the organization , maintenance , and operation of national guard units so as to provide well - trained and well - equipped units capable of augmenting the active forces .