these are positive steps . it is important for dol to follow through with its plans to ensure that clear and uniform guidance is available to all involved in processing userra complaints . mr. chairman , senator enzi , and members of the committee , this concludes our remarks . we will be pleased to take questions at this time . for further information regarding this statement , please contact brenda farrell at 202-512-3604 or farrellb@gao.gov or george stalcup at 202-512- 9490 or stalcupg@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . individuals making contributions to this testimony include laura durland , assistant director ; belva martin , assistant director ; james ashley ; karin fangman ; k. nicole harms ; kenya jones ; mae jones ; ronald la due lake ; joseph rutecki ; tamara f. stenzel ; and kiki theodoropoulos . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . agency databases and reporting requirement . each of the four federal agencies responsible for assisting servicemembers under userra maintains an automated database with complaint information . both dod and dol have electronic complaint files that are stored in automated systems with query capabilities . the secretary of labor in consultation with the u.s. attorney general and the special counsel prepares and transmits a userra annual report to congress on , among other matters , the number of userra claims reviewed by dol , and during the current demonstration project by osc , along with the number of claims referred to doj or osc . the annual report is also to address the nature and status of each claim , state whether there are any apparent patterns of violation of the userra provisions , and include any recommendations for administrative or legislative action that the secretary of labor , the u.s. attorney general , or the special counsel consider necessary to effectively implement userra . although userra defines individual agency roles and responsibilities , it does not make any single individual or office accountable for maintaining visibility over the entire complaint resolution process . we noted in our february 2007 report that the percentage of servicemembers reporting employer information to dod had increased , but most reserve components had still not reached their compliance goals . in addition , we found that employment data were not necessarily current because some reservists were not aware of requirements to update their employer information and the services had not established a formal mechanism to remind reservists to update this personnel information as necessary to reflect changes in their current employment .