medicaid . medicaid is a joint federal - state program that provides health care coverage for certain low - income individuals . under federal law , states historically have been required to cover certain categories of individuals under medicaid ( mandatory populations ) with the flexibility to extend coverage to other defined groups ( optional populations ) . ppaca provides for states to expand medicaid coverage to most nonpregnant , nonelderly individuals with income that does not exceed 133 percent of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) beginning no later than january 1 , 2014 . the federal government will pay the full cost of covering newly eligible enrollees until 2017 at which point the federal share will begin to gradually decline to 90 percent by 2020 . american health benefit exchanges . these are marketplaces to be established by january 2014 to facilitate the purchase of private insurance coverage . individuals obtaining insurance through the exchanges may qualify for federal subsidies ( hereafter referred to as exchange subsidies ) in the form of premium tax credits and cost sharing reductions . in order to qualify for the premium tax credit , individuals or families must meet certain criteria including income levels between 100 and 400 percent of the fpl and failing to qualify for other health care coverage , such as medicare or medicaid , or having access to affordable insurance of minimum value from an employer . medicare spending is slightly higher in our most recent baseline extended simulation due to technical refinements the medicare trustees made in response to recommendations by the 2010-2011 technical review panel on the medicare trustees report ; they were not directly related to ppaca . in our most recent alternative simulation , medicare spending is slightly lower than it was in our fall 2010 alternative simulation due to a change in the oact's assumption for physician payment updates in their alternative projections ; this change was also unrelated to ppaca . the key budget assumptions in our fall 2012 simulations are shown in table 4 . the key economic assumptions in our fall 2012 simulations are shown in table 5 . in addition to the contacts named above , melissa wolf ( assistant director ) , andrew johnson , richard krashevski , thomas mccabe , thomas mccool , michael o'neill , albert sim , and phyllis thorburn made key contributions to this report . robert robinson assisted with the graphics . our fall 2010 simulations also reflect changes in the level of medicare spending resulting from other provisions of ppaca , such as reductions to payment rates for medicare advantage organizations . medicaid , children's health insurance program ( chip ) , and exchange subsidies . in both the january 2010 and fall 2010 baseline extended simulations , spending for medicaid and exchange subsidies follows cbo's baseline projections for the first 10 years and is then based on growth in spending for these programs consistent with cbo's long - term assumptions for the number and age composition of enrollees and the medicare trustees' intermediate assumptions for excess cost growth . prior to fall 2010 , federal spending for chip was included in our simulations under other mandatory spending .