the gsa inspector general completed 40 of these audits . in our most recent review , we also found that gsa has not conducted postaward audits of pre - award information since 1997 — when gsa revised its policy on the use of such audits . the revised policy had the effect of eliminating the use of postaward audits . with the dramatic increase in sales and the continuing decline in pre - award audits , the potential for significant recoveries of vendor overcharges could be substantial . in our february 2005 report , we made three recommendations aimed at helping gsa ensure that prices are effectively negotiated for schedules contracts . we recommended that the gsa administrator ( 1 ) ensure that pre - award audits are conducted when the threshold is met for both new contract offers and contract extensions , ( 2 ) develop guidance to help contracting officers determine when postaward audits are needed , and ( 3 ) direct gsa program management to revise its quality control program to ( a ) determine the underlying causes for contract pricing deficiencies and ( b ) develop appropriate plans to implement corrective actions . gsa management officials agreed with our recommendations , and stated that gsa would continue to work with the inspector general to increase and improve the number of pre - award audits , publish an advance notice of proposed rulemaking in the federal register to request comments on the role of postaward audit reviews in the acquisition process , and evaluate the results of the fiscal year 2004 contract file review and that this evaluation would involve a discussion and identification of the underlying reasons for any weaknesses . we believe that gsa's actions are a good first step toward addressing its long - standing pricing problems with multiple award schedules contracts . however , unless these actions are effectively implemented the risk of pricing problems will continue . in conclusion , while gsa's schedules program has provided the government with a more flexible and cost - effective approach to buying commercial items , our work has shown that the program has long been fraught with problems of contract overpricing — resulting in millions of taxpayer dollars being wasted . historically , pre - award and postaward audits have proven their value in deterring overpricing and recovering vendor overcharges . until gsa takes steps to ensure the appropriate use of available pricing and negotiation tools , it will continue to miss opportunities to save the government hundreds of millions of dollars in the procurement of goods and services . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . federal agencies order products and services directly from the vendors that best meet their needs . vendors receive wider exposure of their commercial products and services and expend less effort to sell them . in administering the multiple award schedules program , gsa is responsible for ensuring that negotiated prices reflect the government's aggregate buying power . gsa contracting officials seek discounts from a vendor's price list that are equal to or greater than the vendor's most favored customer's discounts .