we did not assess the reliability of this 2008 data . however , the 2008 data were generally consistent with the data we analyzed in 2007 . to assess the extent to which the army has tested and evaluated the design of the modular force , we examined tradoc's modular force assessment process and plans to evaluate modular combat and combat support unit designs . although we did not independently test the reliability of army data electronically , we determined the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report based on discussions with army officials about the data quality control procedures used to ensure the reliability of the relevant equipment and personnel databases . we conducted this performance audit from april 2007 to september 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . to meet staffing goals , the army offers several incentives to captains , such as choice of occupational branch , duty station , civilian graduate education , military school or cash bonuses in exchange for 3 additional years of obligated service . the army also offers similar options to pre - commissioned cadets in exchange for extending their initial service obligations and bonuses to recruit active duty air force and navy officers to transfer to the army . explosive ordnance disposal specialist ( enlisted ) explosive ordnance disposal specialists locate , identify , render safe , and dispose of conventional , biological , chemical or nuclear ordnance or improvised explosive devices , weapons of mass destruction , and large vehicle bombs . they also conduct intelligence gathering operations of foreign ordnance . explosive ordnance specialists are assigned to modular units such as the headquarters units within a combat support brigade ( maneuver enhancement ) . decision makers may not be fully informed of the army's equipment status because the army has not developed a comprehensive equipment and personnel plan that details the equipment the army has in its inventories as compared with the equipment required for units to operate effectively in their modular designs and that sets milestones against which to measure the army's progress equipping and staffing the modular force with key enablers . the army uses a variety of approaches in testing unit designs and capabilities , but these efforts have not yielded a comprehensive evaluation of modular forces . testing the modular force is intended to determine whether modular units are capable of performing potential missions across the full spectrum of conflict — and therefore needs to be as realistic as possible . gaps in the army's testing of the modular support forces and lack of a focal point for ensuring thorough testing of these forces could result in less capable support forces than planned . first , the army has not fully assessed the effectiveness of its support units because it has not completed the doctrine that would define how modular support units will train , be sustained , and support the fight . without this underpinning doctrine , the army does not have a basic framework upon which to develop measures to assess the effectiveness of support units .