process delays . in interviews , functional office personnel at hanscom air force base , system program managers , and two contractors stated that some processes have become more time consuming with senior functional managers at wright - patterson air force base approving actions previously approved by esc leadership at hanscom air force base . for example , a financial management official at hanscom air force base said due to the reorganization her office experienced delays in the flow of funds from headquarters at wright - patterson air force base , which created concerns about meeting fielding timelines . similarly , contracting and personnel officials at hanscom air force base said some processes , such as obtaining waivers from certain standard requirements or filling positions , take longer since they have to wait for approval by aflcmc headquarters at wright - patterson air force base . in the past , officials said these actions could be expeditiously approved by the esc leadership at hanscom air force base . a former esc command staff member stated that these process delays could lead to program decision delays , which could affect the peos' acquisition mission . with regard to centralization of approval authority , afmc and aflcmc officials said any delays in approval authority have not adversely affected the customers . moreover , they said standardizing processes will help reduce duplication and is expected to generate greater efficiencies for the customer in the long term . lack of full understanding of hanscom's programs . in interviews , functional office personnel at hanscom air force base , members of the former esc leadership team , and two of the seven contractors expressed concerns that aflcmc personnel at wright - patterson air force base , who provide support to all aflcmc locations , may not have a full understanding of hanscom's programs . for example , a former esc command staff member and an engineering official at hanscom air force base stated that the type of engineering support required for electronic systems is different from the type of support required for other systems that fall under aflcmc . the engineering official said information technology requirements for airplanes differ from those for electronic systems , and personnel at wright - patterson air force base may not have a full understanding of the technical requirements needed to support hanscom's programs . similarly , a financial management official at hanscom air force base said the process of estimating the cost of software applicable to hanscom's electronic systems is different than the cost - estimating procedures for other types of products such as aircraft engines . while esc's former commander credited aflcmc's leadership with trying to increase the capacity of wright - patterson air force base personnel to support hanscom's electronic systems , a former esc command staff member stated it may be more difficult to locate the needed engineering and information technology expertise at wright - patterson air force base , which may not have as strong of a relationship with academia in the dayton , ohio , area as hanscom air force base does in the boston , massachusetts , region .