category management . implement best practices for purchasing goods and services , such as consolidating separate requirements into single contracts , allowing dod to achieve savings from volume discounts and develop tools aimed at focusing spending on contracts that meet certain best practices for management . several of these initiatives address aspects of our prior recommendations related to the objectives of the initiatives . how findings and recommendations from gao and agency inspectors general have been addressed in proposed reforms is among the key questions gao has previously identified for assessing agency reform efforts . we found that dod's initiatives address aspects of our findings and recommendations , but in some cases do not fully address them . for example: in september 2018 , we reported that at least six organizations within dod , including three defense agencies and field activities and the three military departments , provide human resources services to other defense agencies or organizations . all perform the same types of human resources services , such as those related to civilian workforce hiring across dod . munitions readiness . produce an integrated tool capable of providing senior leaders with an effective assessment of all the variables associated with the health and readiness of the munitions inventory and the ability to assess options for correcting negative trends . service requirements review boards . expand the use of service requirement review boards — which review , validate , prioritize , and approve contracted services requirements to accurately inform the budget and acquisition process . we also reported that there is fragmentation and overlap within the defense agencies and field activities that provide human resources services to other defense agencies or organizations within dod . this fragmentation and overlap has resulted in negative effects , such as inconsistent performance information regarding hiring , fragmented information technology systems , and inefficiencies associated with overhead costs . we recommended , and dod concurred , that dod collect consistent performance information and comprehensive overhead cost information as well as establish time frames and deliverables for key reform efforts . dod's human resource service delivery initiative is intended , in part , to address our recommendations . this initiative , however , is focused only on the defense agencies and field activities responsible for human resources service delivery , and does not include all human resources service providers we highlighted in our september 2018 report . in june 2016 , we reported that the defense logistics agency and the military services have some internal efficiency measures for supply and depot operations ; however , they generally have not adopted metrics that measure the accuracy of planning factors that are necessary to plan efficient and effective support of depot maintenance . additionally , the defense logistics agency and the services do not track the potentially significant costs to supply and depot maintenance operations that are created by backorders . further , we reported that without relevant metrics on cost and planning factors , dod , the defense logistics agency , and the services are unable to optimize supply and maintenance operations and may miss opportunities to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of depot maintenance .