gsa . the act designates the administrator of general services with responsibility for administering the fund . a cost estimate is considered reliable if the overall assessment for each of the four characteristics are met or substantially met . we presented the results of our initial analysis of each tmf project cost estimate to its respective agency in july 2019 . we asked the agencies to verify the information presented in the analysis and provide any updates or additional supporting documentation , as appropriate . each of the agencies provided updated information , which we incorporated into this analysis , as appropriate . in addition , we interviewed staff in the office of e - government and information technology , as well as officials from the tmf program management office , about the process for the review and approval of tmf - funded project cost savings estimates and cost estimate documentation . because the technology modernization board required agency project teams to use a template to submit the project cost savings estimates and because we learned from project officials at each of the five agencies that they did not rely on data from agency financial systems when completing the template , we took additional steps to assess the reliability of the data in the completed templates . first , we interviewed officials in the tmf program management office responsible for developing the template in order to understand the purpose of each template data field and what information was required to be completed . we took this step because there were no written instructions for the template regarding the data elements or the fields required to be completed . we also interviewed officials in the office of the cio and other appropriate offices at each agency , who were in charge of completing the tmf cost estimate template . we discussed with these officials how the template was filled out and what sources of data were used . because project teams did not rely on data from agency financial systems when completing the spreadsheet template , we reviewed agency responses and other supporting documentation to determine how the estimated costs and savings were derived and whether there were any qualifications of the provided data . this included whether certain costs were excluded from the program cost estimate , how up - to - date the data were , or whether there were other qualifications of the provided data . we followed up with agency officials regarding these qualifications as appropriate . further , we reviewed the completed templates to identify missing data , or other errors , and consulted with our cost estimation specialists about these issues , as appropriate . based on our assessment of each project's cost estimate ( used to derive the cost savings estimate ) and the other measures we took to assess the reliability of the data included in the completed templates , we determined that the cost savings data for all seven tmf projects were not sufficiently reliable ; thus , we did not include the estimated savings amounts in our report . in addition , we discuss the data's shortcomings in the report . to accomplish the third objective , we obtained and analyzed contract documentation for each of the seven awarded projects .