( the process is summarized in fig . through discussions with fincen officials and fincen technical comments , fincen provided us with additional information showing that it had begun developing a strategy that incorporated certain gao - identified practices to enhance and sustain collaboration , but that it was not yet complete . as a result , we modified the recommendation language in our draft report to reflect the work that fincen already had done . in written comments on this report the fincen director said he generally agreed with our recommendation and that fincen recognized the need to work with a diverse range of stakeholders to revise bsa forms , including regulatory , law enforcement , and intelligence agencies , as well as financial industries responsible for filing bsa reports . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the report date . at that time we will send copies to interested congressional parties , treasury , fincen , fdic , the federal reserve , occ , ots , ncua , irs , doj , and the department of homeland security . the report also will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . additionally , fincen representatives regularly participated in conferences and outreach events for bsa / aml issues , including events focused on sars . fincen also chairs a group of federal agency and financial industry representatives that discusses bsa administration , including sar - related issues . federal law enforcement representatives said they conduct outreach events and work with depository institutions to improve sar narratives . since 2000 , fincen regularly has provided tips about sar preparation in publications for all financial institutions , including depository institutions . in october 2000 , fincen first published the sar activity review: trends , tips and issues , which addresses topics related to suspicious activity reporting , trends and analyses regarding bsa data , law enforcement cases assisted by bsa data , and other issues . fincen describes this typically semiannual publication as the product of continuing dialogue and close collaboration among the nation's financial institutions , law enforcement officials , and financial regulators . its goal is to provide meaningful information about the preparation , use , and value of sars and other bsa reports filed by financial institutions . most recently , the publication addressed issues such as how to determine when the 30- day deadline to report suspicious activity begins . we then combined that information with another set of information ( such as amount of assets ) for specific institutions that we obtained from the federal reserve and the national credit union administration . we took multiple steps to assess the reliability of the data . we asked bank regulators' information technology staff to answer a data reliability questionnaire ( for example , about data cleaning and maintenance procedures ) . we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report .