( see fig . 3 for an example of this linkage. ) the plan also shows how expected increases in annual funding will be used by program line . network 13 senior managers told us about annual 2-day tactical planning meetings that were designed to provide an outlet for stakeholders to plan and share information on performance and strategic planning , cost information , performance measures , successful practices , and lessons learned . participants include psl ceos , a psl coo , psl managers under coo control , union representatives , and congressional stakeholders . a network official stated the purpose of including managers with resource allocation authority in tactical planning meetings was to strengthen the link between the processes of resource allocation decisions and planning . integrating performance information into resource allocation decisions is apparent at the network level during budget execution . at the two networks we visited , managers told us that they use an internal data system that compares cost and performance data across facilities as a tool to make resource allocation decisions . network performance is monitored by vha , and networks establish their own processes to monitor their performance . network managers also use various communication methods , both within their networks and across other networks , to share information on performance measures and ways to meet those measures . managers reported that they were accountable for performance and provided examples where they used performance information to make resource allocation decisions . network managers told us that they use data from the decision support system ( dss ) to make resource allocation decisions to their facilities and programs . dss is an executive information system designed to provide vha managers and clinicians with data on patterns of patient care and patient health outcomes . this submission is sent to omb in september . decisions made by omb are incorporated into the president's budget presented to the congress . following congressional action and enactment of the appropriations bill , omb apportions and va allots the funding provided in the vha appropriations , thus beginning the execution phase of vha's budget cycle . while the vha - related information in va's annual performance plan describes goals , strategies , and performance measures , the relationship to the budget formulation process is unclear . vha officials told us that they use strategic planning information as source material for departmental reports ( eg , the accountability report and va's annual performance plan ) , to review networks' policies for consistency , and generally to have the information on hand in an organized format . va's annual performance plan outlines resource requirements by strategic goal , and each strategic goal is accompanied by performance goals and measures . however , a vha official told us that planning documents are typically finalized after vha's budget is formulated . about 90 percent of vha's medical care appropriation , which is approximately 86 percent of vha's total budgetary resources , is allocated to networks through the veterans equitable resource allocation system ( vera ) , which uses a formula that calculates resource allocation based on workload .