their surviving dependents may also receive assistance . table 1 shows the bankrupt operators ; the amount of collateral each operator had at the time of bankruptcy ; estimated benefit liability at the time of bankruptcy ; and estimated benefit liability and number of beneficiaries that transferred to the trust fund , if applicable . overall , three of these bankruptcies affected the trust fund , and two did not according to dol . dol officials told us that the bankruptcies of arch coal and peabody energy did not affect the trust fund because their benefit liabilities were assumed by the reorganized companies after emerging from bankruptcy . as of june 2019 , there are 22 operators that are self - insured and actively mining coal , according to dol officials . to ensure that the collateral they required from these operators was adequate to protect the trust fund , dol officials said that they periodically reauthorized them which entailed , among other things , reviewing their most recent audited financial statements and claims information . dol officials said that they prepared memos documenting these reviews and communicated with coal operators about whether their financial circumstances warranted increasing or decreasing their collateral . table 2 provides information on the 22 self - insured operators including the date of each operator's most recent dol reauthorization ; the amount of dol required collateral ; and the operator's most recent estimated black lung benefit liability . should any of these operators file for bankruptcy , they could also affect the trust fund because the amount of an operators' benefit liability that is not covered by collateral could also become the responsibility of the trust fund . preliminary analysis from our ongoing work indicates that dol did not regularly monitor self - insured operators . agency regulations state that dol may adjust the amount of collateral required from self - insured operators when experience or changed conditions warrant . we reviewed dol's most recent reauthorization memos for each of the 22 operators . while some of these operators had been reauthorized more recently , we found that others had not been reauthorized by dol in decades . one operator in particular had not been reauthorized by dol since 1988 . additionally , for most of these operators , dol either did not have estimates of their benefit liabilities , or the estimates were out of date ( see table 2 ) . beginning in summer 2015 , dol officials said that they stopped permitting any new coal mine operators to self - insure as the agency worked with auditors , economists , and actuaries to develop new procedures for self - insurance . our preliminary observations regarding dol's oversight of coal mine operator insurance given recent operator bankruptcies are based on ongoing work for this committee . in conducting this work , we obtained dol documentation and data on black lung beneficiaries and coal mine operators . we also reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , policies , and guidance and interviewed dol officials , insurance carriers and associations , and coal mine operators , among others . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .