the park service agreed with these recommendations . you asked us to review the park service concessions program since the passage of the 1998 concessions act . this report examines ( 1 ) how the concessions program has changed since our 2000 report and ( 2 ) any ongoing challenges in the concessions program . to address these objectives , we examined park service policy and guidance documents and relevant laws and regulations . we reviewed some of our prior reports on the concessions program . in particular , we reviewed our 2000 report on the concessions program , which identified management challenges facing the concessions program prior to the implementation of the 1998 concessions act . in addition , we analyzed park service data on concessions contracts . , scenic versus historical ) . we used a standard set of questions to obtain information from staff on qualifications , training , the concessions program , and any challenges in the program . we also interviewed 21 concessioners , including at least one concessioner that operated in each of the 20 parks units we contacted . in selecting concessioners , we included a range of concessioners that varied by the gross revenues they generated and the types of services they provided . we used a standard set of questions to obtain concessioners' views on the concessions process and any challenges they face . we analyzed the responses from our interviews with the park service and concessioners to identify the most common challenges that were identified . we also interviewed stakeholders who were familiar with the concessions program , including consultants who help the park service implement the program and academics in the hospitality field . the views from our interviews are not generalizable to all parks or concessioners , but they were used to provide a range of perspectives on the concessions program . appendix i contains a more detailed description of our objectives , scope , and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from january 2016 to february 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the park service is composed of headquarters , seven regional offices , and 417 park units that cover 84 million acres across all 50 states . park units include national parks , national battlefields , national recreation areas , and national lakeshores . the park service has long worked with concessioners who provide visitor services , such as lodging and recreational opportunities in national park units , and some concessions operations are nearly as old as the parks in which they operate . for example , the many glacier hotel in glacier national park opened for business in 1915 , 5 years after the park was established in montana , and is currently operated by a concessioner .