we disagree . this simple presentation can be a powerful tool to generate discussion among ip policymakers and port management and staff about ip seizure patterns , risks , and outcomes . cbp has not yet attempted to complete even this basic analysis or initiate such discussions . doing so would invariably lead to potential refinements of the analysis ; we suggest a number of these in the report , some of which cbp identifies in its comments . we encourage cbp to refine this analysis and develop and use other types of analysis to ensure that ports are helping the agency achieve its ip enforcement objectives . cbp made certain additional comments about the draft law enforcement sensitive report . for example , cbp said that our report focused on transaction - level seizures and penalties , while not fully recognizing the importance of additional elements of its ip enforcement approach . we focused on seizures and penalties because they are the core ip enforcement activities for which cbp is responsible , and we found that cbp had not systematically analyzed its own performance of these activities . however , we also discuss the risk model , the audits , and the new penalty guidance ; and these elements are reasonable components of a broader approach , but we believe their effect on overall ip enforcement has been limited . moreover , we believe that cbp needs to continue to ensure the robustness of its core enforcement activities . cbp also stated that our report failed to note that the formation of ot in october 2006 was designed in part to address the lack of integration between ot and ofo . we disagree that the formation of this office has , in itself , addressed the lack of integration that we identify in the report regarding ip enforcement . although ot consolidates cbp's trade policy and program development functions , including those related to ip enforcement , front - line implementation of policies and programs continue to be carried out at the ports under the leadership of ofo . ot and ofo will need to work closely together to overcome the historic lack of integration regarding ip policy and program development and execution . according to the u.s . intellectual property rights coordinator , industries that relied on ip protection were estimated to account for over half of all u.s. exports , represented 40 percent of u.s. economic growth , and employed about 18 million americans in 2006 , making ip protection important to protecting our nation's economy . it is difficult to reliably measure criminal activity , but industry groups suggest that counterfeiting and piracy are on the rise and that a broader range of products , from auto parts to razor blades , and from medicines to infant formula , are subject to counterfeit production . the threat to america's health and safety from the theft of ip and counterfeiting of products is an increasing concern for many reasons — counterfeit batteries can explode , counterfeit car parts can fail to perform , and counterfeit pharmaceuticals can lack the ingredients necessary to cure deadly diseases . in addition to public health and safety concerns , the annual losses that companies face from ip violations are substantial .