we disagree with this assertion . the development of significant manual workarounds in these areas masks the fact that nasa's core financial module is not designed to , and cannot , produce timely and reliable pp&e and budgetary data with traceability to transaction - based support . the ability to produce reliable numbers once a year for financial reporting purposes does not by itself constitute ffmia compliance . in its written comments , nasa indicated that it has made changes to the module since june and that the core financial module as implemented in october 2003 has many of the capabilities that were lacking in the june 2003 module . although we requested status updates between june and october to track nasa's progress , we did not reassess the module's capabilities as of october 2003 . however , with the possible exception of full - cost accounting , which was planned for october 1 , 2003 , the changes nasa has cited still involve manual workarounds for producing year - end numbers . ffmia goes beyond producing auditable financial statements once a year and requires financial systems that ensure accountability on an ongoing basis throughout the year . in response to our april 2003 recommendation , which we have restated in this report , to reengineer its acquisition management processes , particularly with respect to the consistency and detail of budgeted and actual cost and schedule data provided by contractors , nasa indicated that it is in the process of addressing a number of our concerns . specifically , nasa stated that it ( 1 ) has extended the data structure embedded in the core financial module to capture more detailed cost data , ( 2 ) is currently assessing its contractor reporting requirements , and ( 3 ) is evaluating the possibility of accommodating contract cost and schedule data in an integrated environment . while it is too early to assess the significance or impact of nasa's current effort , we are encouraged that nasa is considering the possibility of reengineering its acquisition management processes . this would be an important first step toward ensuring that nasa's contractors provide the appropriate level and type of cost data needed for both internal management and external reporting purposes and that the core financial module is properly configured to support the agency's information needs . however , we continue to believe it would have been more effective and efficient if nasa had conducted its assessment of contractor reporting requirements as part of a larger reengineering effort prior to configuration of the core financial module . further , any effort that falls short of end - to - end business process reengineering will likely not result in a system that substantially improves the data available for contract oversight or ensures consistency between costs reported in general purpose financial reports and costs reported to program mangers . in its written comments , nasa also emphasized that the core financial module alone cannot meet all of the functional requirements needed to manage a program or to prepare cost estimates and asserts that applications such as erasmus , an executive - level program performance reporting tool , will enable nasa to meet the full depth and breadth of user requirements .