( recommendation 1 ) . we discussed challenges they experienced using the system . based on these discussions , we performed additional work to identify the steps that ngb was taking to address these challenges . this work included reviewing documents associated with the reserve component manpower system and its associated modules , such as the guard incentive management system ; interviewing vendors that were awarded the contracts to manage the reserve component manpower system ; and interviewing ngb officials to discuss their roles in managing contracts associated with the reserve component manpower system and the arng incentive support team . we compared our observations against federal internal control standards related to risk assessment . for objective two , we reviewed applicable dod guidance on the roles and responsibilities of the organizations that participate in the process — the defense finance and accounting service and the defense office of hearings and appeals . we interviewed officials at these organizations to better understand the source of delays in adjudicating waivers , which they identified as a lack of documentation . based on these interviews , we collected and examined arng selected reserve incentive program recoupment waiver cases that were adjudicated by the defense office of hearings and appeals in calendar years 2014 through 2016 to identify the frequency with which documentation was missing . during site visits to our selected states , we also interviewed arng officials to determine the processes designated for generating and maintaining documentation . we conducted this performance audit from january 2017 to february 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . first , arng has implemented the guard incentive management system and expanded its use over time to oversee its incentive contracts through automation . in 2012 , arng began using the guard incentive management system to manage the life cycles of contracts between arng and soldiers for incentives and education entitlements , including those for the selected reserve incentive program . when a soldier signs a contract with a recruiter or retention officer , the guard incentive management system alerts the state incentive manager that an incentive is ready for review . arng has also implemented automated rules in the guard incentive management system — known as monitor rules — that continuously monitor a soldier's eligibility for an incentive . the system does this by comparing the data it receives from multiple personnel systems against the soldier's contract . if any issues are found , the guard incentive management system will flag the incentive case for review by the state incentive manager and will stop future payments until the issue is resolved . in california , for example , we observed an incentive manager reviewing a case that had been flagged for violating a monitor rule because the soldier was no longer in the unit stipulated in the incentive contract . the incentive manager told us that the soldier was informed of the situation and that corrective action would be required before any additional payments could be made . if a soldier is deemed ineligible or loses eligibility at any time during this process , the state incentive manager will stop payments and review the case to determine whether the contract needs to be terminated .