( see app . i for details about our scope and methodology. ) dhs and justice reviewed a draft of this report and had no comments on the substance of the draft . technical comments were incorporated as appropriate . tobacco grows in many countries , but the united states has been the major source of the product for hundreds of years . currently , atf must obtain consent to enter a person's property and conduct an inspection . if denied entry , atf must obtain a search warrant by demonstrating probable cause to a u.s. district court judge to enter a person's property . under the bill , if atf is denied entry , its right of inspection could be enforced by a district court order with the submission of an affidavit or other evidence that entry was denied . as of april 2004 , the pact act had passed the senate and was referred to the house , where action was pending . fctc seeks to address the rise and spread of tobacco consumption around the world through global solutions to a problem that cuts across national boundaries , cultures , societies and socioeconomic strata . fctc , if ratified , would be an additional legal instrument addressing issues as diverse as tobacco advertising and promotion , agricultural diversification , smuggling , taxes , and subsidies . fctc was adopted at the world health assembly on may 21 , 2003 , and is open to all members of the who or the united nations from june 2003 to june 2004 for ratification . at least 40 countries must ratify fctc for it to become law . if fctc is ratified , those ratifying nations would develop protocols , which are separate agreements containing specific measures designed to implement the broad goals called for by the fctc . as of april 2004 , the united states had not ratified fctc . the state department , with interagency and white house input , was reviewing fctc , including determining whether joining the convention would require any new legislation . according to the director of health programs , state department , that deliberative review process was moving forward . there is no set time frame for the review process to be completed . as part of its objective , fctc states that cooperative action is necessary to eliminate all forms of illicit trade in cigarettes and other tobacco products , including smuggling , illicit manufacturing and counterfeiting . article 15 of fctc ( see app . ii ) is the only one of 38 articles that addresses the illicit trade in tobacco products , including cigarette smuggling . the first of seven measures in article 15 states that the elimination of all forms of illicit trade in tobacco products , including smuggling , illicit manufacturing and counterfeiting , and the development and implementation of related national law , in addition to subregional , regional and global agreements , are essential components of tobacco control . the other measures require each ratifying country to , among other things , mark packages of tobacco products to control their movement , cooperate in investigations and prosecutions , periodically report progress made , and adopt other measures as appropriate to prevent illicit trade .