for those entities that did not take any action , we asked them to explain the reason why . for our work on law enforcement efforts and grants to combat human trafficking , we reviewed trafficking data and agency documents , and conducted 32 interviews with federal , state and local law enforcement officials and prosecutors in four jurisdictions . we selected those jurisdictions based on the number of human trafficking tips they received , receipt of human trafficking task force funding and geographic variation . these officials' perspectives cannot be generalized to all jurisdictions but they provide insights into anti - trafficking efforts . for our work on grant programs , we reviewed grant documentation and interviewed federal officials responsible for administering human trafficking - related grant programs and grantees . the provisions cover various types of activities to address human trafficking and related issues , including: grants ( 33 ) , coordination and information sharing ( 29 ) , victim services ( 28 ) , reporting requirements ( 26 ) , training and technical assistance ( 25 ) , research ( 24 ) , criminal justice ( 20 ) , public awareness ( 14 ) , and penalties and sanctions ( 7 ) . agency officials provided various explanations for why they had not taken any actions to implement certain provisions for which they were designated as the lead or co - lead . for example , in three cases , officials cited that funding was not appropriated for the activity . in june 2016 , we reported that federal , state and local law enforcement officials and prosecutors identified several challenges with investigating and prosecuting human trafficking , including a lack of victim cooperation , limited availability of services for victims , and difficulty identifying human trafficking . the officials told us that obtaining the victim's cooperation is important because the victim is generally the primary witness and source of evidence . however , the officials said that obtaining and securing victims' cooperation is difficult , as victims may be unable or unwilling to testify due to distrust of law enforcement or fear of retaliation by the trafficker , among other reasons . according to these officials , victim service programs , such as those that provide mental health and substance abuse services have helped improve victim cooperation ; however , the availability of services is limited . further , the officials reported that identifying and distinguishing human trafficking from other crimes such as prostitution can be challenging . federal , state , and local agencies have taken or are taking actions to address these challenges , such as increasing the availability of victim services through grants and implementing training and public awareness initiatives . with respect to training , we reported that federal agencies have implemented several initiatives to train judges , prosecutors , investigators and others on human trafficking . for example , in accordance with the jvta , the federal judicial center provided training to federal judges and judicial branch attorneys , including judicial law clerks , on human trafficking through a webinar in august 2015 . hhs established the “look beneath the surface” public awareness campaign through its rescue and restore victims of human trafficking program .