we provided a draft of this report to ssa and dol for comment . ui benefits vary substantially during a business cycle . as shown in figure 1 , ui benefits varied substantially from 2005 to 2011 , while di benefits steadily increased during those years . in fiscal year 2010 , 117,000 individuals received concurrent cash benefit payments of more than $850 million . as shown in figure 2 , these individuals represented less than 1 percent of the total beneficiaries of both programs . however , estimated overlapping cash benefits paid to these individuals totaled over $281 million from the di program and more than $575 million from the ui program . for individuals receiving overlapping benefits in fiscal year 2010 , we estimate the average quarterly amount of overlapping cash benefit payments to be $1,093 in di and $2,231 in ui , for a quarterly average of $3,324 in overlapping benefits . differences in program rules and definitions allow individuals in certain circumstances to receive overlapping di and ui benefits without violating eligibility requirements . the amount of earnings that generally demonstrates sga can vary from year to year . for example , the sga amount for individuals with disabilities , other than blindness , was $980 in 2009 . individuals with disabilities must also have a specified number of recent work credits under the social security program at the onset of medical impairment . an individual may qualify on the basis of the work record of a deceased spouse or the work record of a parent who is deceased , retired , or considered eligible for disability benefits , meaning one disability beneficiary can generate multiple monthly disability payments . di benefits are financed by payroll taxes paid into the federal disability insurance trust fund by covered workers and their employers , on the basis of each worker's earnings history . cash benefits are payable monthly , as long as the worker remains eligible for benefits , until the worker reaches full retirement age or dies . in fiscal year 2010 , more than 10 million beneficiaries received di benefits totaling $121.6 billion , and the program's average monthly benefit was about $922 . as directed by federal law , ssa must reduce di benefits for individuals receiving certain other government disability benefits , such as worker's compensation . however , ssa may not reduce di benefits for individuals receiving ui or for individuals earning less than sga . as mentioned , the social security board of trustees projects that the di trust fund will be exhausted in 2016 and noted that changes designed to improve the financial status of the di program are needed soon . established by the social security act of 1935 , the federal - state ui program temporarily and partially replaces the lost earnings of those who become unemployed through no fault of their own . to be eligible for ui benefits , unemployed workers must meet eligibility requirements established by state laws that conform to federal law , including that they have worked recently , be involuntarily unemployed , and be able and available for work . whereas federal statutes and regulations provide broad guidelines on ui eligibility , the specifics of ui eligibility are determined by each state .