va did not comment on this report . they acknowledged that more work is needed to do this . following a review and analysis of the combat casualty care research portfolio in september 2012 , health affairs and army mrmc officials reported to us that they intended to complete an overarching strategic roadmap for the portfolio by march 2013 . they told us that they expect the roadmap could include specific project timelines and goals , among other things . however , on the basis of the information provided by dod officials , we were unable to determine if the plan will clearly delineate how health affairs and army mrmc will assess the extent to which results from combat casualty care projects fill capability gaps and achieve other goals . until health affairs and army mrmc assess the results of dod's research against revised capability gaps and other goals , dod will not have reasonable assurance that the research it is conducting meets its needs . coordination among the various organizations that plan and conduct combat casualty care research and development is important to effectively produce medical solutions to save or improve the lives of injured servicemembers . dod has taken important steps to agree on roles and responsibilities and to establish the means for coordination and collaboration across organizational boundaries . however , dod's research organizations can only coordinate with each other when they become aware of relevant research . without communicating to nonmedical research organizations about the importance of coordinating with the jpc - 6 chair early in the research process , dod research organizations may have to redo some steps of their research to address medical research requirements that they may not fully understand . moreover , while dod assesses the progress of combat casualty care research projects , it is also important that dod monitor and assess the extent to which the results of its combat casualty care research fill the gaps in dod's capability to provide combat casualty care and achieve other goals that it established for the research . however , without a plan for monitoring and assessment , dod runs the risk that it may not be producing results that most effectively improve combat casualty care to save lives on the battlefield . to ensure that nonmedical dod research organizations coordinate with the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs early in the research process to understand medical research requirements and avoid inefficiencies that may lead to duplicative work , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics to communicate to dod's nonmedical research organizations the importance of coordination with the jpc - 6 chair on combat casualty care issues , and require this coordination early in the research process when these organizations conduct research with implications for combat casualty care .