listserv . the hiv / aids principal consultant operates an hiv listserv , which e - mails information of general interest to those working with american indians and alaska natives with hiv / aids , such as hiv / aids - related news , recent research , and funding opportunities . an ihs official reported that the listserv included about 650 individuals , including american indian and alaska native community members and officials from ihs , tribes , and american indian and alaska native advocacy groups . hiv / aids administrative work plan . according to ihs , as of september 2007 , a national ihs hiv / aids administrative work plan was nearing completion . the plan is intended to integrate multiple activities to help improve ihs surveillance , information sharing , and data collection . the plan will determine hiv / aids intervention priority areas , describe the activities to be conducted within each priority area , and identify key personnel and organizations with responsibility for each activity . the plan is also intended to be a 3-year administrative blueprint for further development and progression of the hiv / aids program . as of september 2007 , the plan was in draft form and being circulated both within and outside of ihs for comment . the hiv / aids principal consultant said that the work plan would be finalized and issued in the fall of 2007 . collaboration with other organizations . ihs had signed or was developing memoranda of understanding with other organizations , including hrsa and the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) , on various hiv / aids activities . ihs and hrsa have signed a 3-year memorandum of understanding to collaborate on multiple hiv / aids initiatives in an effort to decrease duplication of services , increase awareness of common resources , and improve coordination and quality of services to american indians and alaska natives . ihs and samhsa were developing a memorandum of understanding to train ihs staff to conduct hiv / aids rapid testing . the memorandum was expected to be implemented in early 2008 . in addition , six areas reported working with local organizations on hiv / aids initiatives . for example , an official in the aberdeen area reported that the area has an hiv / aids task force consisting of clinical providers , community health representatives , and hiv coordinators from state health departments in the aberdeen area . the taskforce is initiating an hiv strategic plan for the area . ihs also has carried out several initiatives aimed at building the capacity of providers to offer hiv / aids - related prevention and treatment services . hiv / aids collaborative training . ihs provides hiv / aids training for ihs - funded staff in 2-and - 1 / 2-day sessions funded by hhs's minority aids initiative . since fiscal year 2005 , the sessions have focused on hiv / aids behavioral health issues , capacity and partnership building , and related intervention strategies . topics for training to be conducted during 2007 and 2008 include: reporting , data collection , best practice models , clinical practice issues , prevention policies and procedures , and culturally appropriate pre - and posttest counseling interview techniques .