vba is in the process of implementing these recommendations . you asked that we assist the committee in its oversight of vba's efforts to improve its compensation and pension claims processing . as part of this request , you asked that we examine vba's timeliness performance measures . specifically , we assessed ( 1 ) whether vba's key timeliness measure clearly reflects its performance and ( 2 ) whether vba has adequate data to measure the timeliness of its newly created specialized claims processing teams . we analyzed vba's claims processing timeliness data . we reviewed va's strategic plan , most recent performance plan , and report and vba's implementation plan for its claims process improvement ( cpi ) initiative . we also talked with vba officials about the quality of its existing timeliness data and its efforts to improve data quality . in addition , we observed how performance data are collected and used and how the reorganization of claims processing was being implemented at the milwaukee , wisconsin , and san diego , california , regional offices . these were two of the four pilot sites for vba's cpi initiative , which is implementing task force recommendations to organize claims processing around specialized teams to handle specific stages of the claims process at all 57 regional offices . we focused our work on vba's compensation and pension programs , since they account for most vba benefit claims and were the subject of the task force's report . we conducted our review from august through november 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . despite these differences , vba sets an annual performance goal that is an average of all three programs . for the purposes of reporting its performance to the congress and other stakeholders , vba adopted one key timeliness measure — the average time to complete decisions on rating - related cases . this measure includes original and reopened disability compensation , pension , and dependency and indemnity compensation claims — in other words , claims for three vba compensation and pension programs . vba sets an annual goal for average days to complete rating - related cases in va's annual performance plans and subsequently reports its actual timeliness — and whether it met its goal — in va's annual performance reports to the congress . this one measure does not reflect the differences in the timeliness for the three programs . in general , the disability compensation program requires the most evidence and thus these claims generally take longer to complete , as shown in figure 1 . while vba's average fiscal year 2002 timeliness was 223 days , disability compensation decisions ( which represented about 83 percent of total decisions ) took almost twice as long to complete as pension decisions . vba's key timeliness measure does not clearly reflect its timeliness in completing claims because it fails to distinguish among its three disability programs — disability compensation , pension , and dependence and indemnity compensation . the programs' processing times differ , in part because they have different purposes , beneficiaries , eligibility criteria , and evidence requirements to decide each type of claim .