, on a continuous basis ) . we provided a draft of this report to hhs for review and comment . the fraud risk assessment template will consider the fraud risk framework as well as guidance contained in omb circular a - 123 , management's responsibility for enterprise risk management and internal control , according to occ officials . these officials also stated that acf will leverage its previously developed and implemented risk assessments , including the program risk assessment that was completed for the ccdf between fiscal years 2011 and 2016 as part of the hhs program integrity initiative . however , according to acf , the development of a fraud risk assessment template is currently on hold due to competing priorities . the acf stated the agency expects to resume the process by december 2019 , and occ expects that the draft template will be completed by the end of the first quarter of fiscal year 2020 . because the ccdf is serving as the pilot for the new template , occ expects that the initial assessment of the program will be complete by the end of the third quarter of fiscal year 2020 . until acf finalizes its template and conducts a risk assessment for the ccdf , acf will not be able to develop a fraud risk profile for the ccdf . the fraud risk profile is an essential piece of the antifraud strategy and informs the specific control activities managers design and implement . although there is currently a process in place for acf to develop a fraud risk assessment template , until acf carries out the assessment of the ccdf and develops an associated fraud risk strategy , it will lack assurance that occ's program - integrity activities are suitable and targeted at prioritized fraud risks . both state lead agencies and occ play an important role in overseeing and protecting the integrity of the ccdf program . however , occ has not finalized written policies that describes how staff should implement or document the state plan review and approval process , which is an important part of occ's oversight of the ccdf program . occ's lack of established written policies limits its ability to ensure that staff follow appropriate protocols when implementing the state plan review and approval process , and limits its ability to retain organizational knowledge in the event of staff turnover , which occ noted as occurring during each review period . in addition , most of the state plans submitted to occ for the fiscal years 2019 – 2021 grant period did not contain information on the results of their states' program - integrity activities . occ also has not defined or communicated what it considers to be the “results” of program - integrity activities for states , which are requested to include this information in state plans , or for its staff who will be responsible for analyzing this information . until occ defines its informational needs regarding program - integrity activity results and communicates this information to the states and its own staff , occ may continue to lack quality information to help ensure states' accountability of their program - integrity activities . we did not visit or interview staff from the regional offices .