we were accepted into all three campaigns . opm does not screen charities for tax debts prior to granting cfc eligibility and , ultimately , charities with unpaid federal taxes are eligible to receive donations from federal civilian employees and military personnel . federal law implemented in the code of federal regulations does not require opm to screen charities for federal tax delinquency nor does it explicitly authorize cfc to reject charity applicants that have delinquent tax debt from participation in the cfc . consequently , cfc's processes for determining eligibility are based on and limited to what is required of the cfc in part 950 of title 5 , c.f.r . federal law does not permit the irs to disclose taxpayer information , including tax debts . thus , unless the taxpayer provides consent , certain tax debt information can only be discovered from public records when the irs files a federal tax lien against the property of a tax debtor . one of these executives has already been assessed a tfrp . see appendix iii for the details on the other 10 cfc charities reviewed in detail . we referred all 15 cases discussed in our report to the irs so that it can determine whether additional collection action or criminal investigation is warranted . opm does not screen charities for federal tax debt prior to granting cfc eligibility , thereby making charities with unpaid federal taxes eligible to receive donations from federal civilian employees and military personnel . opm policies do not specifically require cfc charities to be screened for these problems . additionally , federal law generally prohibits the disclosure of taxpayer data and , consequently , even if opm had specific policies to check for unpaid taxes , it has no access to a specific charity's tax data . opm determines the completeness of a charity applicants' paperwork , but it does not perform third - party verification of documents as part of that process . for example , opm does not verify with the irs the tax - exempt status of cfc applicants and relies solely on each applicant's submission of irs documentation that it is a bona fide charity . to demonstrate the vulnerability of opm's lack of validation of tax - exempt status , we applied to three of cfc's largest local 2006 campaigns using a fictitious charity with entirely false documents and an erroneous irs taxpayer identification number . however , public record information is limited because the irs does not file tax liens on all tax debtors , and , while the irs has a central repository of tax liens , opm officials do not have access to that information . further , the listing of a federal tax lien in the credit reports of an entity or its key officials may not be a reliable indicator of a charity's tax indebtedness because of deficiencies in the irs's internal controls that have resulted in the irs not always releasing tax liens from property when the tax debt has been satisfied .