law no . jpac's capability and capacity to support an increased number of operations in pacom's geographic area of responsibility . the second proposed plan , developed by jpac and pacom , called for jpac to increase its capability and capacity and have responsibility for worldwide investigations and recoveries — that is , both inside and outside of pacom's geographic area of responsibility ; and also called for the creation of a satellite remains identification laboratory in the continental united states , under jpac's control . the other accounting community members and their resource needs were not mentioned in either proposed plan . according to dpmo officials , in may 2010 usd policy intended to recommend the dpmo proposed plan as the better approach for dod to select . jpac disputed usd policy's proposal to recommend the dpmo plan and , according to jpac officials , expressed the view that a better solution which focused on would be to continue to pursue its proposed plan,what jpac alone would need to reach the accounting - for goal . jpac refined its proposed plan , with the approval and support of pacom , and submitted a request to pacom and then the joint staff through the program budget review process asking for an additional $216 million over fiscal years 2012 through 2016 , and an additional 251 personnel . according to dpmo officials , neither the joint staff nor usd policy provided oversight or intervention in the disagreement at that time . these officials stated that such oversight and intervention could have helped jpac and dpmo to resolve their impasse by improving communication , interaction , and cooperation . the dispute concerning the two competing proposed plans was resolved through dod's program budget review process , after being assessed by a dod - wide team led by dod's office of cost assessment and program evaluation ( cape ) . cape officials stated that a senior - level panel composed of three - star level military officers and civilian counterparts ultimately supported jpac's proposed plan . these officials said that the recommendation was presented to a four - star level panel of military officers and civilian counterparts chaired by the deputy secretary of defense . in a dod resource management decision issued in january 2011,resources for jpac over fiscal years 2012 through 2016 , including an additional 253 personnel ( a more than 60 percent increase over jpac's 2011 level ) . although dod programmed increases in funding and personnel for jpac , key parts of jpac's plan are not being realized . the plan requires an initial surge in investigative missions , to be followed by increased efforts for recovery missions and then identifications in subsequent years . while jpac initially began hiring additional personnel and conducting additional operations as called for by its plan , jpac officials told us that the planned rates for increasing investigation and recovery missions were not feasible , in part because jpac was unable to include the planned number of investigation and recovery missions for fiscal year 2013 and beyond when developing its operational plans . in addition , jpac's plan called for 114 sites to be added to the master excavation list in fiscal year 2012 , but only 56 sites were added in that year .