dot provided no further information on its exclusion . hhs met its overall agency spending requirement even with the improper exclusions , according to the data in hhs' annual reports to sba . in addition to identifying improper exclusions , we found that , when appropriations were received late in the year , agencies used differing methodologies to calculate their spending requirements , making it difficult to determine whether agencies' calculations were correct . for example , some agency program managers told us that , when appropriations were received late in the year , they used their prior year actual spending to calculate their current year spending requirement , while others calculated their current year spending requirement using some other methodology . specifically , program managers at the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) — a subunit of commerce — stated that program managers at nist used the past year's actual sbir spending to calculate the current year's requirement . in contrast , nasa calculated its sbir spending requirement by determining what percentage its extramural r&d spending comprised of its total r&d spending in the prior year . nasa then applied this percentage to the current year's total r&d budget to calculate the current year's extramural budget , which it then used as the basis for calculating the sbir and sttr spending requirements . although sba provided guidance in policy directives for participating agencies on calculating their spending requirements , neither sba's prior nor its current policy directives provide guidance to agencies on how to calculate such spending requirements when agency appropriations are delayed . without such guidance , agencies will likely continue to calculate spending requirements in differing ways . agencies participating in the sbir and sttr programs have not consistently complied with small business act requirements for annually reporting a description of their methodologies for calculating their extramural r&d budgets to sba . in addition , sba has not consistently complied with the act's requirements for annually reporting to congress , including reporting on sba's analysis of the agencies' methodologies for calculating their extramural r&d budgets . with the exception of nasa in certain years , agencies did not submit their methodology reports to sba within the time frame required by the small business act for fiscal years 2006 to 2011 for the sbir and sttr programs . the act requires that agencies report to sba their methodologies for calculating their extramural budgets within 4 months after the date of enactment of their respective appropriations acts . however , most participating agencies documented their methodologies for calculating their extramural r&d budgets for these fiscal years and submitted them to sba after the close of the fiscal year with their annual reports , but three agencies — usda , education , and dot — did not provide a methodology report for 1 fiscal year during this period . usda did not submit a report on its fiscal year 2007 methodology because agency officials said it was identical to prior years . officials from education and dot said they typically submitted their methodology reports with their annual reports .