timely guidance . vha has not provided timely guidance to medical centers on its new eft effort , as would be consistent with internal control standards . according to these standards , reliable and timely program information should be provided to management and others to ensure that responsibilities are being carried out and vha goals are being met . specifically , despite being aware of the march 1 , 2013 , department of the treasury deadline for implementation of eft in december 2010 , vha did not provide guidance to medical centers on how to implement the effort until february 22 , 2013 . had the guidance been provided earlier , it would have provided timely , key information to medical centers on the implementation of eft , including the process that medical centers should be using to enroll veterans ; the procedures for veterans to request a waiver from an electronic payment when they have an immediate need for a cash payment ; and vha's contingency plan for the travel reimbursement process due to its delay in providing policies for implementing eft vha - wide . by delaying the issuance of the guidance , vha failed to ensure that all medical centers were provided with consistent and timely guidance , which , according to medical center officials we spoke with , led to frustration for medical centers , as well as confusion for veterans . for example , most medical centers in our review already had developed their own local procedures for enrolling veterans into eft and processing payments before vha's eft pilot began ; officials from some of the medical centers in our review expressed frustration that they would have to revise some of these processes when the vha - wide effort was eventually implemented . effective communication . vha also did not provide a communication plan for sharing information on eft with medical centers and veterans in a timely manner , as would have been consistent with internal control standards . specifically , vha did not share information on eft with medical centers to help them inform veterans of the coming changes until february 22 , 2013 . vha officials acknowledged they failed to develop a communications plan in a timely manner , and agreed that this is something they should have done to help ensure the success of the conversion to eft . by not communicating this information in a timely manner , vha did not ensure that medical centers had consistent and accurate information for informing veterans of the change in payment options , potentially affecting veterans' enrollment in eft and their satisfaction with the new reimbursement process . although officials from some medical centers we spoke with said they have developed their own materials for communicating with veterans about eft , having communication materials come from vha headquarters would have carried more weight with veterans and provided more consistency across all medical centers for this vha - wide effort . plan for monitoring compliance . vha has not developed a plan to ensure medical centers' compliance with the efforts or its existing policies , as would be consistent with internal control standards .