postal service . the office of management and budget provided oral comments in which they concurred with our findings and recommendations . the department of defense , department of health and human services , and the general services administration provided written comments that are reproduced in appendices iii , iv , and v , respectively . omb and most of the agencies also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . the department of health and human services and the general services administration also concurred with our findings and recommendations . the department of defense did not concur with our draft report because it believes the report does not fully reflect all the metrics and practices dod and its contractor use to ensure the accuracy of information provided to tricare beneficiaries . in its comments , dod emphasizes that its approach to contracting for contact center operations relies on the contractor to use industry standards for ensuring information accuracy . dod states that standards exist in its contract related to the accuracy of information provided by telephone . dod also cites additional metrics it uses for monitoring contractor performance . in addition , dod requires the contractor to have a quality management program which must be validated by a nationally recognized third - party organization . dod points out that it receives monthly briefings on the operation of the contractor's quality management program and observes call center operations during site visits . finally , dod explained that it monitors the expertise and skills of the contractor staff that perform the knowledge management function . we recognize that dod has decided to use what it calls the “audit the auditor” approach to quality assurance . it was not our objective , however , to assess the merits of any particular approach to ensuring quality , but rather to determine the extent to which contract terms and agency oversight practices emphasize the importance of providing accurate information to the public . in this regard , while the contractor may use specific standards for accuracy in its quality management program , we found no specific metric related to accuracy in the tricare contact center contract itself or in the additional metrics cited in dod's comments . for the most part , the additional quality control activities listed by the department are those of its contractor , not oversight activities performed by the agency , which was the focus of our review . while independent validation of the contractor's quality control program helps to ensure the contractor has a quality process in place for monitoring its responses to the public , this does not substitute for dod oversight activities such as validating the contractor's reports of its monitoring efforts . in addition , while dod performs site visits to oversee the contractor's operations , it does so only on an ad hoc basis . the agencies we reviewed varied with respect to how they implemented these practices . this variance was due to a number of factors , such as differences among the agencies in staffing levels , funding , and the use of guidance specific to the agency . table 4 shows the extent to which the six agencies we reviewed employ each of the accuracy - related oversight practices .