these are the most serious recalls . class ii — use of or exposure to a device may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences , or the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote . these reviews are as follows . premarket approval ( pma ) : the manufacturer must submit evidence , typically including clinical data , providing reasonable assurance that the new device is safe and effective . the pma process is the most stringent type of premarket review . a successful submission results in fda's approval to market the device . premarket notification ( 510 ( k ) ) : premarket notification is commonly called “510 ( k ) ” in reference to section 510 ( k ) of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act where the notification requirement is listed . under this review , the manufacturer must demonstrate to fda that the new device is substantially equivalent to a device already legally on the market . for most 510 ( k ) submissions , clinical data are not required and substantial equivalence will normally be determined based on comparative descriptions of a device's intended use and technological characteristics , and may include performance data . a successful submission results in fda's clearance to market the device . most class i device types and some class ii devices are exempt from fda's premarket review . in general , those that are not exempt , but which are substantially equivalent to a legally marked class i or class ii device , are subject to premarket review through the 510 ( k ) process . class iii device types are generally required to obtain fda approval through the more stringent pma process . fda defines a recall as a firm's removal or correction of a marketed product that fda ( 1 ) considers to be in violation of the laws it administers , and ( 2 ) against which the agency would initiate legal action . nearly all medical device recalls are voluntarily initiated by a firm , usually the manufacturer of the device . the recall process generally consists of a series of steps that we have categorized into broad phases — initiating and classifying the recall , conducting and overseeing the recall , and completing and terminating the recall . while the recalling firm has primary responsibility for ensuring that the recalled devices are corrected or removed , fda and other stakeholders each have responsibilities which they are supposed to undertake in order to effectively implement the various phases of a recall . fda's role is generally to oversee a firm's management of recalls . it conducts its responsibilities as part of its postmarket surveillance . fda staff from ora — which is the lead office for all fda field activities , including the agency's district offices — and cdrh are involved in overseeing recalls . other stakeholders , including the firm's customers — such as distributors — and device users — such as hospitals or patients — are expected to correct or remove the recalled device according to the recalling firm's instructions . a given recall may require the cooperation of thousands of different stakeholders depending on how many entities received , purchased , or used the device .