research supports such an approach as well . a 2011 rand study examining the federal and state role in improving schools in 15 states found that although some states assumed primary responsibility for assisting low - performing schools , others relied on regional organizations , area education agencies , or intermediate school districts to fill this role.however , education officials noted that applicant eligibility is generally defined in statute . observation 4: streamlining education's grant application processes to make it easier for states and districts with less capacity to apply . education officials told us that one example of streamlining the grant process was allowing states that did not win an award in the first phase of a competition to revise the same application and resubmit for subsequent phases . education adopted this strategy in the rtt grant competition . another way to streamline the grant application process is by encouraging shorter applications . education officials said it used this approach in a grant competition for the investing in innovation program . education officials noted that , in general , one disadvantage to shorter applications is that there may not be sufficient detail in the applications to hold grantees accountable for implementing their plans . as education's technical assistance contract for rsn comes to a close , and it develops new processes for technical assistance under the new office of state support , it has an opportunity to apply the technical assistance that rtt states reported as most helpful , such as individualized technical assistance and professional development , to other grant programs that the office oversees . such technical assistance could help states implement and sustain the comprehensive education reforms which will continue to be supported by other grant programs managed by the office of state support . in addition , because rural districts face unique challenges implementing and sustaining rtt reforms , focusing efforts to enhance education's understanding of the types of additional supports they may need could help these districts successfully implement and sustain their reform efforts , and ultimately improve student achievement . however , 14 of the 17 rsn activities focused on the other two reform areas ( school turnaround and effective teachers and leaders ) . rsn's efforts to focus resources on assisting states in implementing rtt reforms are important ones , and we believe that many states and districts may have benefitted from these efforts . however , in order to best support states that are working to implement and sustain reforms in their rural districts , education should target future support in the reform areas in which rural districts most struggled: standards and assessments and data systems . accordingly , we modified our recommendation to clarify that education should take steps to provide targeted assistance to states in those reform areas that we have identified as statistically significantly more challenging for rural districts . many of the activities undertaken to support rural districts were conducted in 2012 and 2013 ( 6 of the 11 that included specific dates ) when states and districts were fully engaged in implementing rtt reforms .