second , the structure of the header itself has been simplified . the forum hosted an ipv6 summit in 2005 . for example , ip audio and video services can be enhanced by the data in the flow label because it ensures that all packets are sent to the appropriate destination without significant delay or disruption . figure 3 depicts this type of network configuration . while network address translation has enabled organizations to compensate for the limited number of globally unique ip addresses available with ipv4 , the resulting network structure has eliminated the original end - to - end communications model of the internet . network address translation complicates the delivery of real - time communications over the internet . the flow label is a new field in the ipv6 header . an ip address consists of a fixed sequence of numbers . in addition to containing the addresses of sender and receiver , the header also contains a series of fields that provide information about what is being transmitted . the fields in the header are important to the protocol's second main function: fragmentation of data . ip fragments information by breaking it into manageable parts . each part has its own header that contains the sender's address , destination address , and other information that guides it through the internet to its intended destination . when the various packets arrive at the final destination , they are put back together into their original form . several key organizations play a role in coordinating protocol development and internet management issues , including the following: the internet corporation for assigned names and numbers , ( icann ) , is a nonprofit corporation responsible for internet address space allocation and management of the internet domain name system . regional internet registries allocate internet address blocks from icann in various parts of the world and engage in joint projects , liaison activities , and policy coordination . the registries include the african network information center , asia pacific network information centre , american registry for internet numbers , latin american and caribbean internet addresses registry , and réseaux ip européens network coordination centre . competing companies known as registrars are able to assign domain names , the mnemonic devices used to represent the numerical ip addresses on the internet ( for example , www.google.com ) . more than 300 registrars have been accredited by icann and are authorized to register domain names ending in .biz , .com , .coop , .info , .name , .net , .org , or .pro . a complete listing is maintained on the internic web site . the internet society is a large , international , professional organization that provides leadership in addressing issues that may affect the future of the internet and assists the groups responsible for internet infrastructure standards . other key considerations for federal agencies to address in an ipv6 transition include significant it planning efforts and immediate actions to ensure the security of agency information and networks . important planning considerations include developing inventories and assessing risks , creating business cases for an ipv6 transition , establishing policies and enforcement mechanisms , identifying timelines and methods for the transition .