( see app . ii for additional information on use of the act. ) however , nrc did find that nasa's pay scale is competitive with industry's at the entry and middle levels . nasa centers have developed several ways to respond to this challenge . according to langley research center officials , for example , enhanced annual leave under the nasa flexibility act of 2004 is used to recruit senior executives from outside of the federal government , members of the senior executive service , and senior - level employees so that they can accrue more vacation time . the johnson center uses retention bonuses to recruit and retain personnel in hard - to - fill positions that can have undesirable hours , such as mission operations controller positions and physicians . for example , it developed the gemini flight controller initiative , which has improved retention of controllers . gemini flight controllers are certified in three systems and work nights and weekends to maintain the international space station . we have not evaluated the new metrics . nasa uses a variety of approaches to meet its long - term needs for recruiting , retraining , and sustaining its workforce . in the past 5 years , nasa hired on average about 330 scientists and engineers per year ( ranging from 199 to 571 ) , the majority of those hired were engineers , and most of the new hires were for midlevel positions . recruiting is accomplished using a multifaceted approach at universities and colleges and the private sector , that some centers have found quite successful . the agency has also been granted a number of human capital flexibilities that allow it to offer incentives to attract and retain scientist and engineers . however , the agency as a whole faces challenges in recruiting and retaining highly experienced senior - level engineers in certain specialties . nasa's principal workforce challenge will be faced in the transition to the next generation of human space flight systems . nasa uses a multifaceted approach to recruiting critically skilled workers , including targeted recruitment activities , educational outreach programs , improved compensation and benefits packages , professional development programs , and streamlined hiring authorities . despite the array of initiatives used across field centers , they used generally similar approaches for recruiting and retaining critically skilled workers . many of nasa's external hires have been entry - level positions through the cooperative education program , which provides centers with the opportunity to develop and train future employees ; discover firsthand the abilities of potential employees ; ensure they are able to meet professional , technical , and administrative requirements ; and achieve a quality workforce . another source of candidates for nasa are its education programs which help inspire students to pursue careers in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics . these programs help nasa to develop a pipeline of highly trained scientists and engineers in aeronautics and space - related disciplines . nasa believes its reputation also helps centers recruit by attracting a pool of student applicants for the cooperative education program ( co - op ) .