but - for test . this requirement ensures appropriate use of recovery act funds by requiring recipients to explain how a certain project would not have been implemented during the grant period without the federal grant . this requirement is described as the “but - for test” because , but for the funds , the project would not be supported . requirements for the programs that are subject to recovery act provisions designed to guard against the substitution of federal funds for state funds vary by responsible agency . in general , the supplement - not - supplant requirements for hud and the “but - for test” for the department of commerce are different from the maintenance of effort requirements for the departments of education and transportation . however , only recipients of funds administered by the department of education can seek a waiver from the maintenance of effort requirements . ( see table 2. ) the federal agencies responsible for these programs have issued guidance to recipients on how to implement the maintenance of effort or similar provision requirements . in addition , the department of transportation ( dot ) continues to issue further guidance to clarify some requirements . to determine whether recipients comply with maintenance of effort and similar provisions , agencies are finalizing state certifications , reviewing applications , and developing plans to review recipients' compliance with the provisions . however , some agencies and states face challenges in implementing these provisions . for example , the department of commerce's review of applications to ensure that proposed projects would not be feasible without federal funding has been delayed by scheduling and staffing challenges . in addition , officials from several state departments of transportation told us that while they plan to meet their maintenance of effort requirements , decreasing state revenues and budgets pose a challenge to doing so . dot maintenance of effort provision: the recovery act provided about $43.9 billion for highway , transit , and rail projects . this funding is administered through dot's operating administrations — the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) , federal transit administration ( fta ) , and federal railroad administration ( fra ) . to be eligible for these funds , the recovery act specifies that the governor of each state must certify that the state will maintain its current level of highway , transit , and rail spending , among other things . the certification must include a statement of the amount of funds the state plans to spend from state sources from the date of enactment — february 17 , 2009 — through september 30 , 2010 , for the types of projects that are funded by that appropriation . the recovery act required that the governor of each state submit this certification no later than 30 days after enactment , or march 19 , 2009 . the recovery act does not provide any waivers or exemptions for the states — for changes in economic conditions , for example — from the maintenance of effort provision . the consequence for a state of not maintaining the certified level of effort is that the state will be prohibited from participating in the redistribution of federal - aid highway obligation authority that will occur after august 1 , 2011 .