gao - 11-770 . gao has long supported the creation of independent ig offices in appropriate federal departments , agencies , and entities , and we continue to believe that significant federal programs and entities should be subject to oversight by independent igs . if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2623 or davisbh@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony are jackson hufnagle ( assistant director ) , lauren s. fassler , gregory marchand , taya tasse , and clarence whitt . we found that the export - import bank obtained an annual financial audit from an independent public accountant and received additional audits of administrative operations from its internal audit group . we also found that the export - import bank had the largest budget of all other federal entities on omb's list at the time , and that it was comparable in size to both departments and agencies with igs appointed by the president and with dfes with igs appointed by the head of the dfe . the alternatives we provided for ig oversight of the export - import bank included ( 1 ) establishing a new ig office through an amendment to the ig act with an ig appointed by either the president or by the export - import bank chairman of the board of directors ; ( 2 ) designating through legislation an existing ig office to provide oversight , such as the agency for international development ig ; and ( 3 ) implementing a memorandum of understanding , which acts like a contract for outside ig services and would not require an amendment to the ig act or other legislation . subsequently , the congress amended the ig act in 2002 to establish a statutory ig for the export - import bank , appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate . chemical safety and hazard investigation board ( csb ) . the act further provides the igs with the duty to inform the attorney general of suspected violations of federal criminal law . with the growing complexity of the federal government , the severity of the problems it faces , and the fiscal constraints under which it operates , it is important that an independent , objective , and reliable ig structure be in place where appropriate in the federal government to ensure adequate audit and investigative coverage . the ig act provides each ig with the ability to exercise judgment in the use of independence protections specified in the act ; therefore , the ultimate success or failure of an ig office is largely determined by the individual ig placed in that office and that person's ability to maintain independence both in fact and appearance . the congress passed the ig reform act of 2008 ( reform act ) to further enhance ig independence and accountability .