( see app . iii for a detailed summary of performance targets. ) coast guard officials acknowledged the apparent disconnect between resource hours expended and performance results achieved and offered two explanations for it . the first involved operational efficiencies — coast guard - driven strategies that essentially allowed the agency to accomplish the same or greater results with fewer resources . these efficiencies were of four main types — improved technology , improved tactics , stronger partnerships , and improved intelligence . table 3 contains an example of each type . the coast guard's second explanation involved external events or developments that were largely beyond the coast guard's control but had an influence on the amount of work the coast guard had to confront . in fiscal year 2003 , these events and developments included such things as “surge” demands related to the iraq war , a large increase in the number of undocumented migrants attempting to enter the united states by maritime routes , and poor weather conditions that , for example , increased icebreaking needs . according to coast guard officials , these externalities had a negative effect on performance results — that is , they made it more difficult for the coast guard to meet its goals , even when more resources were added . for example , according to coast guard officials , while the percentage of migrants interdicted showed an overall increase from fiscal years 2002 to 2003 , a large increase in illegal immigrants seeking to enter the united states by sea during fiscal year 2003 reduced the performance results percentage from fiscal year 2002 levels . while the factors cited by the coast guard likely have an effect on mission performance , the extent of that effect is largely unknown . the coast guard does not have a mechanism in place to systematically determine the extent to which these factors affect performance . for instance , the coast guard does not have data on search and rescue cases handled by local responders ; as a result , it cannot determine the extent to which this assistance has reduced the coast guard's own search and rescue workload . coast guard officials agree on the value of taking a more systematic approach to assessing performance , including better understanding of the effects of internal and external factors that affect their performance , and they have begun a number of steps directed at improving various aspects of performance assessment . for example , they are developing a procedure for capturing operating costs on a program - by - program basis , as well as a system for assessing the agency's ability to respond to mission requirements . these steps are still in their early stages , and while they represent a good beginning , it is not yet clear when they will be completed and whether they will tie together to address the weaknesses we have identified . without a clear understanding of this linkage or a timeframe to ensure that it gets completed , the agency is at risk of misdirecting resources and missing further opportunities to increase productivity and efficiency to ensure the best use of its funds .