until the 20th century . the international whaling commission banned commercial whaling of north atlantic humpback whales in 1955 . commercial whaling of the fin whale was banned in the north atlantic in 1987 . both humpback and fin whales have been listed as endangered under the esa since its passage in 1973 . atlantic large whales are at risk for entanglement in commercial fishing gear when they are traveling , feeding , and breeding . for example , right whales feed with their mouths open for extended periods of time using their baleen — a substance that grows in comb - like rows from the upper jaws of toothless whales — to filter plankton from seawater . much about the movements and habitats of right whales remains unknown . however , it is generally thought that some right whales winter in the lower latitudes — off the southeast u.s. atlantic coast , where calving takes place — then migrate to higher latitudes , near massachusetts and maine for the summer , following concentrations of copepods , their principal food source . right whales primarily use the mid - atlantic region to migrate to and from the calving grounds in the south . like right whales , humpback whales also feed off the coasts of massachusetts and maine , however , they winter farther south . humpback whales employ a variety of feeding techniques that differ from right whale feeding techniques . for example , one way that humpback whales feed is by lunging into a patch of small fish with their mouth wide - open for a short period of time . like right and humpback whales , scientists believe that fin whales use northern waters primarily for feeding and southern waters primarily for calving . fin whales also engage in lunge feeding . under the mmpa , nmfs must develop a plan to protect atlantic large whales from entanglements that cause serious injury or mortality . the mmpa was enacted in 1972 to provide protection for all marine mammals . section 118 , enacted in the 1994 amendments to the mmpa , specifically outlines a process for reducing serious injury and mortality incidental to commercial fishing operations . under that process , if nmfs determines that a species' ability to recover has become diminished by commercial fishing activities , the agency must develop and implement a plan — known as a take reduction plan — to reduce serious injury and mortality to the species . the mmpa requires a take reduction team to be involved in developing a take reduction plan . members of the team are required to have either biological / conservation expertise relevant to the marine mammal species addressed in the take reduction plan or the fishing practices that result in the incidental mortality and serious injury of the species . team members must include representatives of federal agencies , state agencies , regional fishery management councils , interstate fishery commissions , academic and scientific organizations , environmental groups , and fishery groups that use gear that could harm the species .