parm . in the most recent quarterly program accountability report issued in early july 2013 , parm rated programs both as high value with low risk . however , cbp's low - risk rating is based in part on the program's master schedule and acquisition program baseline ; however , as we stated earlier , problems with the agency's schedule raise questions about the validity and quality of those milestones . further , the low - risk rating it issued for ice is based , in part , on parm's quarterly program accountability report for april through september 2012 , which rated the program's cost performance with the lowest possible risk score . yet , during that same time period , program documents show that cost and schedule performance was declining and varied significantly from its baseline . according to program documents , as of june 2012 , tecs mod had variances of 20 percent from its cost baseline and 13 percent from its schedule baseline . moreover , both the cost and schedule estimates underlying the baseline were outdated . further , the quarterly program accountability report is not issued by parm in a timely basis , and as such , it is not an effective tool for decision - makers . for example , the most recent report was published on july 7 , 2013 , over 9 months after the reporting period ended . since then , ice has experienced the issues with its technical solution described earlier in this report ; and , as discussed , these issues have caused the program to halt development and replan its entire acquisition . as a result , the newly - issued issued report is not reflective of ice's current status , and thus is not an effective tool for management's use . until these governance bodies base their reviews of performance on timely , complete , and accurate data , they will be limited in their ability to effectively provide oversight and to make timely decisions . after spending millions of dollars and over 4 years on tecs modernization , it is unclear when it will be delivered and at what cost . while cbp's program has partially delivered one of the five major projects that comprise the program , program commitments are currently being revised , project milestones have changed over time , and the master schedule used by the program to manage its work activities and monitor progress has not been fully developed . these limitations raise doubts about the validity of the program's schedule commitments and greatly impact the program's ability to monitor and effectively manage its progress . a complete and integrated schedule provides the basis for valid schedule commitments ; therefore it is important that as cbp revises its commitments , it ensure that its master schedule accurately reflects the work to be done , as well as the timing , sequencing , and dependencies between them . moreover , ice's program has made little progress in deploying its modernized case management system , and is now completely overhauling its original design and program commitments , placing the program in serious jeopardy of both not meeting the 2015 deadline and delaying the deployment of needed functionality .