gao - 08-429t . washington , d.c.: january 22 , 2008 . ( see app . i for more information about these key wtc health programs. ) hhs funded the wtc health programs to serve different categories of responders ( eg , firefighters , federal responders , and other workers and volunteers ) . the programs also varied in their geographic coverage . for example , the fdny wtc program and the ny / nj wtc consortium primarily serve , respectively , firefighters and other workers and volunteers who reside in the nyc area or travel to that area for services . hhs's wtc federal responder screening program provides screening services to federal responders nationwide through its network of foh clinics . in addition , beginning in late 2002 , niosh funded services for nonfederal responders residing outside the nyc metropolitan area . table 1 provides information on the numbers of responders who have received various health services . niosh is the hhs administering agency for all the wtc health programs , except the wtc health registry , and in february 2006 the secretary of hhs designated the director of niosh to take the lead in ensuring that the wtc health programs are well coordinated . information collected by the wtc health programs and other researchers has helped to identify the physical and mental health effects of the wtc disaster . physical health effects included injuries and respiratory conditions , such as sinusitis , asthma , and a new syndrome called wtc cough , which consists of persistent coughing accompanied by severe respiratory symptoms . almost all firefighters who responded to the attack experienced respiratory effects , including wtc cough . one study conducted by researchers affiliated with the fdny wtc program found that exposed firefighters on average experienced a decline in lung function equivalent to that which would be produced by 12 years of aging . a study conducted by wtc health registry researchers found that responders' risk of newly diagnosed asthma increased with greater exposure to the wtc disaster site , as indicated by arriving at the site at an earlier date or working there for a longer duration . the mount sinai school of medicine clinical center of the ny / nj wtc consortium found that about half of the participants in its screening program met the threshold criteria for being referred for a clinical mental health evaluation . commonly reported mental health effects among responders and other affected individuals included symptoms associated with post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) , depression , and anxiety . behavioral health effects such as increased alcohol and tobacco use were also reported . in previous reports we noted limitations of the wtc health programs and problems with their implementation . for example , we reported that federal responders were eligible only for screening services and did not receive monitoring services as other responders did . we also reported on the service interruptions in the wtc federal responder screening program . hhs established the program in june 2003 , suspended it in march 2004 , resumed it in december 2005 , suspended it again in january 2007 , and resumed it in may 2007 .