colorado . states receive an enhanced federal matching assistance percentage , which is the amount the federal government reimburses states for expenditures incurred in providing services to women enrolled in medicaid under the treatment act . in 2006 , these percentages , for expenditures for women enrolled in medicaid under the treatment act , ranged from 65 percent to 83 percent . some of the variation in average total spending per treatment act enrollee may be accounted for by differences in state medicaid reimbursement rates and variation in states' medicaid benefit packages . it may also be affected by the relative proportion of breast and cervical cancer patients . for example , a 2007 study using state medicaid claims data from 2003 in georgia found that spending for breast cancer patients averaged more than twice that for cervical cancer patients . in 2003 , annual medicaid spending was $20,285 for each woman with breast cancer , but $9,845 for each woman with cervical cancer . state eligibility policies and practices can also affect average spending . for example , oklahoma , the state with the lowest monthly per person spending under the treatment act , enrolls women in medicaid based on the results of an abnormal screening test alone . thus , according to an oklahoma official , many women in oklahoma are enrolled in medicaid only for diagnostic services and do not subsequently incur costs for cancer treatment . at $584 per month in 2006 , average medicaid spending per treatment act enrollee in oklahoma is the lowest of the 39 states for which we have data . west virginia has reduced its overall enrollment from 709 in 2004 to 247 in 2006 by taking a proactive approach to disenrolling women if they have completed their cancer treatment , and cannot otherwise qualify for medicaid . the state requires more than just a woman's self - certification of her continued need for treatment ; case managers actively follow women receiving treatment , and a registered nurse evaluation is required to certify their continued need for treatment and medicaid eligibility . while total spending in west virginia declined 50 percent in 2006 , average monthly per enrollee spending increased by 19 percent , from $894 to $1,064 . among states that limit medicaid eligibility under the treatment act to women screened with cdc funds or that extend medicaid eligibility to women screened by a cdc - funded provider , few statewide alternatives to medicaid coverage for treatment are available to low - income , uninsured women who are screened and diagnosed outside of the early detection program . early detection program directors in four states reported having state - funded programs as an alternative to medicaid . these programs pay specifically for breast or cervical cancer treatment or more broadly provide health insurance coverage or free or reduced - fee health care . the maryland breast and cervical cancer diagnosis and treatment program pays specifically for breast and cervical cancer diagnosis and treatment services , according to our survey . maryland residents who are within 250 percent of the fpl , are uninsured or meet other health insurance criteria , and were screened for breast or cervical cancer by any medical provider , may be eligible for this program .