manager accountability . a description of the steps ( including timeline ) the agency has taken and plans to take to ensure that agency managers ( including the agency head ) are held accountable for reducing and recovering erroneous payments . statutory barriers . a description of any statutory or regulatory barriers that may limit the agency's corrective actions in reducing erroneous payments . the total improper payment estimate of about $38 billion represents almost a $7 billion , or 16 percent , decrease from the $45 billion of improper payments reported by agencies in fiscal year 2004 . on the surface , this would suggest that significant progress has been made . however , this is not the case because the reported $7 billion reduction in the total improper payments estimate may not reflect improved accountability or strengthened internal controls . as we previously reported in march and april 2006 , this estimate reduction is primarily attributable to a decrease in hhs's medicare program improper payment estimate . this decrease mainly resulted from a change to medicare's estimating methodology rather than from improved payment controls . regardless of whether prior year estimates were reliable , the reported reduction is unlikely to represent a measurable improvement in internal control and accountability given that hhs's oig continued to cite the integrity of medicare payments as a top management challenge in hhs's fiscal year 2005 par . as discussed previously , other agency auditors have reported major management challenges that highlight internal control weaknesses that continue to plague programs susceptible to significant improper payments . in some cases , agencies reported that their programs were not susceptible to significant improper payments , despite the fact that the auditor's reports in the same pars identified major management challenges , including significant internal control weaknesses , for some of the agencies' programs . in addition , we found six agencies that did not use statistical sampling for 9 programs to estimate improper payment amounts . because nonstatistical sampling methods were used , such as results from single audit act reports and internal performance reviews , the $389 million reported represents only the known improper payment amounts reported by agencies . given that total outlays for these 9 programs exceeded $58.2 billion in fiscal year 2005 , the improper payment estimate for these programs would likely have been much greater had statistically valid methods been used . we also found instances where agencies estimated improper payments for only one component of the risk - susceptible program . using these types of methodologies results in estimates that may be significantly understated . the fiscal year 2005 governmentwide improper payments estimate of $38 billion did not include any amounts for 10 programs , with fiscal year 2005 outlays totaling over $234 billion . omb had specifically required 7 of these programs to report selected improper payment information for several years before ipia reporting requirements became effective . after passage of ipia , omb's implementing guidance required that these programs continue to report improper payment information under ipia . the remaining 3 risk - susceptible programs , with no previous reporting requirement , provided target dates for estimating improper payments .