kids . however , implementation priority to date has focused on rolling out the system within cfsa . in addition to requirements that address human resources and caseloads , the mfo imposed program requirements on cfsa in a number of areas , ranging from intake and assessment to efforts to provide children with permanent placements . despite progress in some areas , cfsa still faces challenges in meeting the terms of the court order . in particular , the agency has not met certain mfo time periods for initiating and completing investigations . while the agency has begun to address its need for additional homes and facilities , it continues to place children in settings prohibited by the mfo , such as homes without current licenses and homes with more children in their care than their licenses permit . additionally , cfsa has not consistently met mfo requirements regarding the provision of ongoing support services to children once they are placed , and its oversight of contractors' service delivery is limited . moreover , while the agency has added staff to process the cases of children placed outside the district without proper documentation , a large backlog of these cases remains . finally , despite mfo requirements to expedite the process by which children move into permanent , stable care arrangements , children still spend an average of 3.7 years in the system . the court order mandated certain time periods to expedite the process by which children enter the child welfare system . for example , it required that investigations be initiated within 48 hours of the receipt of the abuse or neglect report and completed within 30 days of the report . district law exceeds the mfo requirement and requires that the initial investigation be initiated within 24 hours of the report.as shown in table 3 , cfsa has had great difficulty meeting these requirements . for example , roughly one - third of all cases referred for investigation since october 1999 were not initiated within 24 hours of the report and cfsa failed to complete investigations within 30 days on about half of them . cfsa has made some progress in reducing the backlog of cases for which investigations had not been completed within 30 days . an intake official recently reported that the backlog of incomplete neglect investigations had been significantly reduced and that only 30 incomplete investigations remained as of august 2000 . beginning in june 2000 , cfsa set a unit of recently hired intake workers to helping the mpd reduce its own backlog that had not met the 30-day time period from 177 cases to 64 cases . however , intake officials acknowledged continuing difficulties in meeting both the 24-hour and the 30-day time periods . intake officials cited staff turnover as one explanation . cfsa lost about 26 percent of its intake workers in 1999 . intake officials believe they will be able to comply with both time periods if the agency is fully staffed , and they cited the succes that new intake workers had in reducing the backlogs in july 2000 as one example of their ability to comply , given additional staff .