its written comments are presented in appendix i . the department stated that it strongly disagreed with our draft report and two of our report's recommendations . dndo conducted the tests at nts in two phases . dndo stated that the phase 1 tests , performed in february - march 2007 , attempted to estimate the performance capabilities of the asps with a high degree of statistical confidence . dndo intended these tests to support the secretary's decision on whether to certify the asps for the purposes of a full - scale production decision , while the phase 3 tests were intended to help improve the computer algorithms that the asps use to identify the specific radiological or nuclear source inside a container . on september 18 , 2007 , we testified that dndo's phase 1 tests did not constitute an objective and rigorous assessment of the asps' capabilities because , among other things , dndo conducted preliminary test runs on source materials to be used in the tests , and then allowed the vendors to adjust their asps to specifically identify the source materials to be tested . we testified that in our view , dndo's approach biased the tests in ways that enhanced the apparent performance of the asps . we also noted that the tests did not attempt to estimate the limits of asps' detection abilities — an important concern to those who will use them such as cbp officers . during that hearing , dndo's director stated that , contrary to statements dndo made in its final phase 3 test plan , dndo would use the phase 3 test results to help support the secretary's decision on whether to certify the asps for full - scale production . subsequently , dndo delayed its anticipated date for secretarial certification to the fall of 2008 in order to conduct additional performance tests and field tests during fiscal year 2008 . in the department's view , noting this limitation throughout the phase 3 report would have been unwieldy . we did not expect dndo to repeat this limitation throughout the report . however , as suggested in our report , the phase 3 report should accurately reflect the test results without portraying the results as being more precise than they really are . using an example from the phase 3 report , if dndo notes that an asp successfully identified a specific source material 34 percent of the time during the tests , it should also indicate that , given the small number of test runs , dndo can only estimate that the asp would be able to correctly identify the specific source material between 10 and 65 percent of the time . however , no such discussion of the wide range of potential results is included in the report's narrative . in our view , presenting the test results without sufficient narrative about the tests' limitations is potentially misleading . third , the department stated that although the phase 3 tests were not intended to support the dhs secretary's certification decision , dhs decided that it needed to consider all available test results in making this decision . dhs further commented that not doing so would subject it to criticism of “cherry - picking” the results .