size . one brokerage firm with which we spoke noted that some institutional investors and asset managers may have the misconception that smaller broker dealers cannot execute trades as effectively as large brokerage firms , and that using mwo brokers will cost more . another brokerage firm told us that net capital thresholds were too high for newer , smaller mwo brokers to meet . as a result , mwo brokers may have greater difficulty competing for opportunities . track record . shorter track records are also a hindrance , according to brokerage firms we interviewed . for example , one brokerage firm noted that although most brokers may have worked with large corporations before starting their own companies , they may not get the credit for the experience they have because they are a new firm . as a result , they may be overlooked when investors search for brokerage firms . some state , local , and private plans have taken actions to address these challenges and increase opportunities for mwo brokerage firms . communicate expectations . two nonfederal plans and one foundation we interviewed directed their asset managers to use more inclusive practices for sourcing and hiring qualified mwo brokerage firms . conduct outreach . a state plan also directly communicated with mwo brokerage firms at networking events , and directed its asset managers to do so as well . report usage of mwo brokers . some state and local retirement plans have legislative mandates to promote the use of mwo firms , including brokers , and require that their asset managers report on their use of mwo brokerage firms . for example , a local plan in illinois sets mwo broker - dealer utilization percentage goals across asset classes for its asset managers , and requires that asset managers report monthly on mwo broker utilization . in addition to the contacts named above , kay kuhlman ( assistant director ) , kimberley granger ( assistant director ) , erika navarro ( analyst in charge ) , farah angersola , bethany benitez , raheem hanifa , john karikari , risto laboski , jill lacey , marc molino , tom moscovitch , barbara roesmann , adam wendel , and amber yancey - carroll made key contributions to this report . smithsonian institution . the smithsonian institution has demonstrated top leadership commitment by revising its investment guidelines and asset manager questionnaire to reflect its commitment to diversity . specifically , in march 2017 the smithsonian institution revised its investment guidelines by adding “environmental , social , and corporate governance considerations in the investment process” as one of its selection criteria . according to smithsonian institution representatives , this change allows the smithsonian institution to incorporate diversity as additional criteria for asset manager selection . the smithsonian institution also included a statement in its annual asset manager questionnaire stating that its office of investments strives to promote diversity and inclusion among its manager hires . furthermore , representatives stated that the board of regents and investment committee encourage them to look broadly at portfolio diversification not only in terms of asset classes and investment strategies , but also of the racial and gender diversity of asset managers .