gao - 08-181r . washington , d.c.: january 25 , 2008 . ( see app . ii for va's symptom checklist. ) for each symptom on the checklist the oef / oif veteran reports experiencing , va's protocol provides recommendations on additional physical examinations and tests that should be conducted and guidance on creating an individualized treatment plan for the veteran . if the veteran's symptoms persist , the protocol includes guidance on when the veteran should be referred to other va medical facilities for more intensive evaluation or treatment . as allowed by va's evaluation and treatment protocol , medical facilities we reviewed varied in how they used the symptom checklist , including which type of provider administered the symptom checklist , when the symptom checklist was administered , and how the symptom checklist results were utilized . some facilities reported that specialty providers administered the symptom checklist during the course of their evaluation . another facility reported that a nonspecialist provider , such as a nurse or social worker , administered the symptom checklist prior to the specialty provider meeting with the veteran . afterwards , the specialty provider used the responses to guide the follow - up evaluation or treatment plan . still other facilities reported that a multidisciplinary team used the symptom checklist as a tool to help determine which specialty provider in the facility would be best to conduct the follow - up evaluation of the veteran . to help va monitor the extent to which its medical facilities are following the evaluation and treatment protocol , va has implemented for fiscal year 2008 two tbi performance measures related to the follow - up evaluation . one of the two va performance measures is designed to track whether facility staff contacted veterans who screened positive on the tbi screening tool within 1 week of screening to schedule the follow - up evaluation and , if unsuccessful , made subsequent attempts to contact the veteran . the other tbi performance measure is designed to track whether specialty providers completed the follow - up evaluation for veterans who screened positive on va's tbi screening tool within 30 days of va's initial contact with the veterans . in addition , va implemented in november 2007 a computer - based template intended to help ensure providers follow the protocol when conducting a follow - up evaluation . the template will also provide a standardized method to document the results of this evaluation . va has established nationwide training to help enhance its providers' use of the evaluation and treatment protocol and thereby help ensure veterans are evaluated and treated for mild tbi . under va policy , va providers conducting the follow - up evaluations are required to complete training va developed on its protocol for evaluating and treating veterans with mild tbi . the training consists of va's online tbi training module , which is also required of providers conducting va's tbi screening , and three satellite broadcasts providing information on the tbi screening tool and on the evaluation and treatment protocol .