see app . i for a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology for this report . we conducted this performance audit from november 2017 to february 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . information on consumers is exchanged through a consumer reporting process that includes consumers , cras , furnishers , and users of that information ( see fig.1 ) . consumers are individuals whose information is collected and shared to make eligibility decisions , such as for credit , insurance , or employment . cras are companies that assemble or evaluate consumer information for the purpose of furnishing consumer reports to third parties who use the reports to determine consumer eligibility for employment , or products and services such as credit and insurance . furnishers are entities such as banks or credit card companies that provide cras with consumer information , such as account openings , bill payments , or delinquency information . cras use this information , along with other information , including from public records such as bankruptcies , to compile consumer reports . users are banks , credit card companies , employers , or other entities that use consumer reports to make eligibility decisions for individual consumers . users vary in the specific information they request from cras and how they interpret the data . some institutions , such as banks , may act as both furnishers and users . during the consumer reporting process , a consumer would not necessarily interact with the cra ; however , if the consumer discovered inaccurate information on their credit report as a result of , for example , being denied credit , the consumer could file a dispute with the cra or the furnisher . consumers may also request copies of their consumer reports from cras directly , and cras may provide consumers with disclosures about how their information is being shared . ftc and , most recently , cfpb , are the federal agencies primarily responsible for overseeing cras . ftc has authority to investigate most organizations that maintain consumer data and to bring enforcement actions for violations of statutes and regulations that concern the security of data and consumer information . cfpb , created in 2010 by the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ) , has enforcement authority over all cras for violations of certain consumer financial protection laws . in general , it also has the authority to issue regulations and guidance for those laws . cfpb has supervisory authority over larger market participants in the consumer reporting market . in 2012 , cfpb defined larger market participant cras as those with more than $7 million in annual receipts from consumer reporting . cfpb's supervision of these companies includes monitoring , inspecting , and examining them for compliance with the requirements of certain federal consumer financial laws and regulations .