( app . v contains the full text of cms's comments. ) cms suggested that an expanded analysis of the differences between m+c and fehbp programs , and a more detailed discussion of m+c's legislative history , could help readers understand why m+c's hmo requirements may be more stringent . we recognize that there are fundamental differences between medicare — a large public entitlement program — and fehbp — an employer - sponsored health insurance program — and that an hmo requirement that is appropriate in one program may not be appropriate in the other . in this report , we provide background information on m+c , fehbp , and the other entities to help provide context for their hmo requirements . we also understand that behind m+c's current set of requirements lies a complex legislative history and a series of administrative decisions . the report highlights important medicare hmo requirement changes introduced by bba and subsequent actions taken by cms and the congress to improve m+c for beneficiaries and encourage participation by hmos . however , the report's focus is on the requirements that m+c hmos face today . by displaying these requirements with the hmo requirements established by other entities , the summary tables may facilitate comparisons and inform discussions about particular m+c requirements and how they contribute to the program's objectives . we also provided a draft of the report to opm , naic , jcaho , and ncqa and incorporated the technical comments we received from those organizations and from cms as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from the date of this report . we will then send copies of this report to the administrator of cms , the director of opm , naic , jcaho , ncqa , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7119 or james cosgrove at ( 202 ) 512-7029 . other contributors to this report include jennifer podulka , lisa rogers , and yorick f. uzes . m+c and fehbp have hmo requirements that pertain to benefit package proposals . our summary of those requirements is organized as follows . we obtained additional information from cms officials . we gathered and summarized fehbp requirements in federal statutes and regulations and fehbp operational guidance to hmos , various naic model requirements , and relevant standards from the current jcaho and ncqa accreditation manuals . we also interviewed officials from the office of personnel management ( opm ) , the agency that administers fehbp , and representatives of naic , jcaho , and ncqa . because m+c requirements are broadly similar to the requirements set by other entities , but may be different in specific details , we compiled our work into summary tables that provide information on the key details of each entity's requirements ( see appendixes i through iv ) .