consolidation . building fastc at fort pickett would enable ds to consolidate at one location 10 of the 12 widely scattered hard - skills training venues it is currently using . fletc can accommodate many of these venues on its glynco campus but would have to conduct some exercises , such as training in long - range weapons and heavy explosives , as well as some nighttime exercises , at the townsend bombing range , a marine corps training facility about 30 miles from glynco . fletc did not include costs for using this facility in its 2013 proposal . proximity to washington , d.c . the independent panel on best practices , established as a result of the benghazi arb , recommended a consolidated training center , located in proximity to state's washington , d.c. , headquarters , given state's reliance on military units and other government agencies located nearby . fort pickett is located about 160 miles from washington , d.c. , or nearly 3 hours by car one way , compared to fletc , which is approximately 640 miles from washington , d.c. , or 5 to 6 hours by airplane one way . over 90 partner organizations conduct training at fletc ; however , ds's primary training partners , including the marine corps' security augmentation unit and its fleet antiterrorism security team , are based in virginia , and an official responsible for marine security guard training told us that the cost of transporting personnel and equipment to and from fletc would be prohibitive . exclusivity of use . the independent panel on best practices “strongly endorsed” state's efforts to develop a training facility that it could control , noting that agencies such as the federal bureau of investigation , the u.s. secret service , and the drug enforcement administration have adopted such a policy as a best practice . at fort pickett , ds would control its training venues and have the flexibility to implement scheduling changes to respond to rapidly evolving security situations overseas . fletc stated that ds would be assured of priority scheduling , but not exclusive use , for those facilities that would be built for ds and provided a detailed plan showing the facilities currently available and those that would be constructed for ds . fletc officials stated that when ds was not using facilities prioritized for its use , other federal , state , and local agencies would be allowed to train at and benefit from the facilities . 24 / 7 availability . ds conducts training during hours of darkness on about 190 days per year , including 140 nights that involve loud noises such as gunfire and small explosions . we found that fort pickett , which covers about 42,000 acres and is set in a rural area , is available for nighttime training . fletc , which is adjacent to the town of brunswick , georgia , does not conduct certain types of training at night , and fletc officials told us that exercises there currently end by 10:00 p.m . according to fletc officials , ds could conduct such nighttime exercises at the townsend bombing range .