as appropriate . under the new policy for meeting attendance , committee or subcommittee chairs could invite guests to closed meetings when there was a specifically identifiable need for input in order to provide additional perspective or input into matters being developed at the committee / subcommittee levels and help ensure that all relevant substantive views are being considered . while not enough time has passed to assess the effects of changes to iais policies for stakeholder consultation and meeting attendance , iais , u.s. iais members , and u.s. industry stakeholders we interviewed had mixed views on the changes . iais said that these changes would make the process of obtaining stakeholder input more effective , efficient , consistent , transparent , and predictable . the federal reserve said that the new policies would make the iais rulemaking process more transparent and help iais be fully independent of the entities it regulates . fio said that the new policies would promote iais efficiency , independence , and transparency . naic voted against the new policies , and said that they would decrease iais transparency and make it more difficult for iais to achieve optimum regulatory outcomes or reach broad consensus on the standards . naic noted that those most affected by the standards — the industry and consumers — would not be able to provide as much input as before . u.s. industry stakeholders we interviewed generally expressed negative opinions on the new policies . specifically , they were often concerned that the new policies could decrease the transparency of the iais capital standard development process and that by the time iais allowed them to provide input , it would be too late to make a difference because the decisions would have effectively been made . however , one g - sii said that the new policy for stakeholder engagement was appropriate , reflected key alterations sought by both u.s. industry stakeholders and u.s. iais members , and encouraged significant interaction with regulatory standard setters . u.s. industry stakeholders have also been involved in the u.s. collaborative efforts , providing input that informs u.s. iais members' efforts related to the development of international capital standards for insurers in iais . for example , agency officials told us the following: u.s. iais members worked with eight u.s. insurers who were iais field testers . specifically , they communicated with the field testers and their primary regulators on their experience testing the proposed international capital standards and reviewed the data the field testers planned to submit to iais . officials said that this effort helped them verify that the data were of good quality and understand u.s. data before holding related discussions with foreign regulators in iais committees . u.s. iais members have involved industry stakeholders with technical expertise in the four work streams mentioned earlier , and incorporated some of the industry stakeholder feedback in their work . u.s. iais members held four meetings to discuss the results of field testing and technical issues related to the ics consultation draft with iais field testers and other insurers in august 2014 , october 2014 , january 2015 , and february 2015 .