fsa has begun proceedings to collect the improper payments . usda recognizes that its farm programs have management control weaknesses , making them vulnerable to significant improper payments . in its fy 2006 performance and accountability report to the office of management and budget , usda reported that poor management controls led to improper payments to some farmers , in part because of incorrect or missing paperwork . in addition , as part of its reporting of improper payments information , usda identified six fsa programs susceptible to significant risk of improper payments with estimated improper payments totaling over $2.8 billion in fiscal year 2006 , as shown in table 1 . farm program payments made to deceased individuals indirectly — that is , as members of farming entities — represent a disproportionately high share of post - death payments . specifically , payments to deceased individuals through entities accounted for $648 million — or 58 percent of the $1.1 billion in payments made to all deceased individuals from 1999 through 2005 . in contrast , payments to all individuals through entities accounted for $35.6 billion — or 27 percent of the $130 billion in farm program payments fsa provided from 1999 through 2005 . the complex nature of some types of farming entities , in particular , corporations and general partnerships , increases the potential for improper payments . for example , a significant portion of farm program payments went to deceased individuals who were members of corporations and general partnerships . eligibility determinations could also uncover other problems . according to fsa field officials , a lack of sufficient personnel and time , and competing priorities for carrying out farm programs explain , in part , why many determinations were either not conducted or not conducted thoroughly . nevertheless , officials told us that they would investigate these cases for potential receipt of improper payments and would start collection proceedings if they found improper payments . fsa cannot be assured that millions of dollars in farm program payments it made to thousands of deceased individuals from fiscal years 1999 through 2005 were proper because it does not have appropriate management controls , such as computer matching , to verify that it is not making payments to deceased individuals . in particular , fsa is not matching recipients listed in its payment databases with individuals listed as deceased in the social security administration's death master file . under the three - entity rule , individuals receiving program payments may not hold a substantial beneficial interest in more than two entities also receiving payments . fsa paid $1.1 billion in farm program payments in the names of 172,801 deceased individuals — either as individuals or as members of entities , from fiscal years 1999 through 2005 , according to our matching of fsa's payment databases with the social security administration's death master file . however , because a beneficiary of an arkansas estate we reviewed received farm program payments through the estate in 2005 , as well as through three other entities , the beneficiary was able to receive payments beyond what the three - entity rule would have allowed .