burundi . centre seruka , a clinic for rape victims , reported receiving an average of 120 new rape cases per month until april 2015 , after which insecurity made obtaining case numbers impossible . the clinic treated 545 new cases of sexual assault , of which , reporting indicated men in uniform committed 14 and armed men committed 24 . in addition , the government - operated center humura in gitega received 545 cases of sexual and gender - based violence between january and september 2015 . uganda . rape remained a serious problem throughout the country , and the government did not consistently enforce the law , according to state's report . furthermore , although the government arrested , prosecuted , and convicted persons for rape , state's report found that the crime was seriously underreported , and that authorities did not investigate most cases . additionally , the report stated that police lacked the criminal forensic capacity to collect evidence , which hampered prosecution and conviction and that the 2015 police crime report through june registered 10,163 reported sexual offenses , of which 787 were rapes . in addition , one un entity reported case file information on sexual violence in the drc , as described below: the un organization stabilization mission in the democratic republic of the congo ( monusco ) recorded 65 victims of sexual violence in conflict in eastern drc between march 10 , 2015 and june 26 , 2015 . fifty victims were allegedly raped by elements of armed groups , with the patriotic force of resistance in ituri responsible for sexual violence against 33 victims , most of them gang - raped in several incidents in the drc's irumu territory in january 2015 , monusco recorded 15 cases of sexual violence in conflict in eastern drc , including 8 cases in nord - kivu alone . the main perpetrators were elements of armed groups , who were reportedly responsible for sexual violence against 10 of the 15 women victims . as we previously reported , several factors make case file data unsuitable for estimating rates of sexual violence . first , because case file data are not aggregated across various sources , and because the extent to which various reports overlap is unclear , it is difficult to obtain complete data or a sense of magnitude . second , in case file data as well as in surveys , time frames , locales , and definitions of sexual violence may be inconsistent across data collection operations . third , case file data are not based on a random sample , and the results of analyzing these data are not generalizable . to examine the second annual company disclosures filed with the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) in 2015 in response to the sec conflict minerals disclosure rule , we downloaded the specialized disclosure reports ( form sd ) and conflict minerals reports ( cmr ) from sec's publically available electronic data gathering , analysis , and retrieval ( edgar ) database on september 15 , 2015 . we downloaded 1,281 filings identified as form sds in edgar .