dhs concurred with our recommendation . since that time , dhs has continued to make progress in completing some identified activities but has yet to do so for others . because the threats to federal information systems and critical infrastructure have persisted and grown , efforts have recently been undertaken by the executive branch to review the nation's cybersecurity strategy . in february 2009 , president obama directed the national security council and homeland security council to conduct a comprehensive review to assess the united states' cybersecurity - related policies and structures . the resulting report , cyberspace policy review: assuring a trusted and resilient information and communications infrastructure , recommended , among other things , appointing an official in the white house to coordinate the nation's cybersecurity policies and activities , creating a new national cybersecurity strategy , and developing a framework for cyber research and development . in response to one of these actions , the president appointed a cybersecurity coordinator in december 2009 . we recently initiated a review to assess the progress made by the executive branch in implementing the report's recommendations . we also testified in march 2009 on needed improvements to the nation's cybersecurity strategy . in preparation for that testimony , we obtained the views of experts ( by means of panel discussions ) on critical aspects of the strategy , including areas for improvement . attackers can easily remain anonymous . the connectivity between information systems , the internet , and other infrastructures creates opportunities for attackers to disrupt telecommunications , electrical power , and other critical services . as government , private sector , and personal activities continue to move to networked operations , the threat will continue to grow . consistent with the evolving and growing nature of the threats to federal systems , agencies are reporting an increasing number of security incidents . in summary , the threats to federal information systems are evolving and growing , and federal systems are not sufficiently protected to consistently thwart the threats . unintended incidents and attacks from individuals and groups with malicious intent have the potential to cause significant damage to the ability of agencies to effectively perform their missions , deliver services to constituents , and account for their resources . to help in meeting these threats , opportunities exist to improve information security throughout the federal government . the prompt and effective implementation of the hundreds of recommendations by us and by agency inspectors general to mitigate information security control deficiencies and fully implement agencywide security programs would strengthen the protection of federal information systems , as would efforts by dhs to develop better capabilities to meets its responsibilities , and the implementation of recommended improvements to the national cybersecurity strategy . until agencies fully and effectively implement these recommendations , federal information and systems will remain vulnerable . mr. chairman , this completes my prepared statement . these incidents put sensitive information at risk . personally identifiable information about u.s. citizens has been lost , stolen , or improperly disclosed , thereby potentially exposing those individuals to loss of privacy , identity theft , and financial crimes . reported attacks and unintentional incidents involving critical infrastructure systems demonstrate that a serious attack could be devastating .