this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that your or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information about this statement , please contact william o. jenkins jr. , director , homeland security and justice issues , on ( 202 ) 512- 8777 or jenkinswo@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above the following individuals from gao's homeland security and justice team also made major contributors to this testimony: chris keisling , assistant director ; john vocino , analyst - in - charge , and adam vogt , communications analyst . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . fema agreed with our recommendation . the importance of involving stakeholders , both federal and non - federal , was underscored in our review of the national strategy for pandemic influenza ( national pandemic strategy ) and the implementation plan for the national strategy for pandemic influenza ( national pandemic implementation plan ) which were issued in november 2005 and may 2006 respectively , by the president and his homeland security council . key non - federal stakeholders , such as state and local governments , were not directly involved in developing the national pandemic strategy and implementation plan , even though these stakeholders are expected to be the primary responders to an influenza pandemic . while dhs collaborated with the department of health and human services ( hhs ) and other federal agencies in developing the national pandemic strategy and implementation plan , we found that there are numerous shared leadership roles and responsibilities , leaving uncertainty about how the federal government would lead preparations for and response to a pandemic . although the dhs secretary is to lead overall non - medical support and response actions and the hhs secretary is to lead the public health and medical response , the plan does not clearly address these simultaneous responsibilities or how these roles are to work together , particularly over an extended period and at multiple locations across the country . in addition to the two secretaries , we observed that the fema administrator is now the principal domestic emergency management advisor to the president , the homeland security council , and the dhs secretary , pursuant to the post - katrina act , adding further complexity to the leadership structure in the case of an influenza pandemic . most of these leadership roles and responsibilities have not been tested under pandemic scenarios , leaving it unclear how they will work . we therefore recommended that dhs and hhs work together to develop and conduct rigorous testing , training , and exercises for pandemic influenza to ensure that federal leadership roles are clearly defined and understood and that leaders are able to effectively execute shared responsibilities to address emerging challenges , and ensure these roles are clearly understood by all key stakeholders . we also recommended that , in updating the national pandemic implementation plan , the process should involve key non - federal stakeholders . dhs and hhs agreed with our recommendations , and said that they were taking or planned to take actions to implement our recommendations .