however , ssa did not demonstrate any actions on two of the recommendations . as we previously noted , ssa did not take steps to resolve all of the critical problems that had been identified during pilot testing of the document management architecture or to conduct end - to - end testing of the interrelated electronic disability system components before continuing with the national rollout of this system . the paper folders will continue to serve as the official records for these cases . even as the agency proceeds in certifying states' electronic capabilities , however , operational concerns associated with the electronic disability system could undermine its reliability and use . officials in seven of the nine dds offices that we contacted ( california , delaware , florida , illinois , mississippi , north carolina , and south carolina ) stated that operational problems they had encountered while using the electronic disability system had affected its performance and raised doubts about its reliability in supporting their processing needs . dds officials stated , for example , that as ssa had brought the system online at the different dds offices and / or added new software to enhance functionality , their staffs had encountered various operating problems that affected the performance of the system . they stated that their offices had experienced problems such as computer screen freezes , system slowdowns , and system access issues — all of which had disrupted the offices' processing of claims . they described these problems as unpredictable and random because they did not always occur consistently among all of the offices using the same claims processing software or even among examiners in a particular office . the officials added that although ssa has been able to resolve many of the problems that affected their ability to process claims , additional instances of screen freezes , system slowdowns , and access issues have continued to occur throughout the system's implementation . according to the manager of the south carolina dds , which implemented the electronic disability system in march 2004 , that office's productivity had been adversely affected by system slowdowns that resulted from having inadequate network bandwidth to support its disability claims processing operations . in july 2005 , the manager stated that ssa had recently made modifications to the office's network architecture and had increased its bandwidth by installing two additional communications lines ; at that time , the office was in the process of testing these enhancements . the manager said that all of the office's disability claims examiners had begun processing all initial disability claims electronically and that , as a result of the enhancements , they expected the office's claims processing efficiency and productivity to increase . in addition , we interviewed the president of the national council of disability determination directors , an organization that represents the ddss . our selection of the nine states was based on the following criteria: the mississippi dds was the first state to which the electronic disability system was rolled out , as well as the first state to achieve total electronic processing of initial disability cases .