contract all services . vacate campus and make available for reuse . replace facility with new inpatient care and outpatient care facilities on campus or in tri - city area . renovate the current outpatient medical and mental health facilities for ambulatory care and outpatient mental health care . access issues . experiences in walla walla , big spring , and orlando illustrate how access issues influenced the alternatives considered and recommended . va facilities in walla walla and big spring are located in rural areas , and are at least 4 hours drive time from other va facilities , including facilities with mental health services . the cares commission noted these missing data in the dncp and when developing its recommendations . va has over 100 performance measures that it uses to centrally monitor agency programs and activities . examples of these measures include the percentage of used space compared to owned and leased overall space , the ratio of operating costs per gross square foot , and the percentage of patients waiting within 20 minutes to be seen . many of these existing measures are related to the goals of cares . however , va does not use these existing measures to monitor the implementation and impact of cares decisions . thus , va cannot readily determine whether the implementation of certain cares decisions are achieving the intended results . to address how the cares process contributed to va's capital asset management efforts , we reviewed cares documents , including the draft national cares plan ( dncp ) , february 2004 cares commission report , and the may 2004 secretary's cares decision document . we also reviewed and analyzed va's asset management plan , five - year capital plan ( fiscal year 2007-2011 ) , and strategic plan to determine the extent to which cares is integrated into va's capital planning efforts . we also reviewed gao's past work on va's management of its capital assets and leading practices for realigning federal agency infrastructure and capital decisions . we interviewed va officials to discuss how the cares process was incorporated into va's capital planning efforts . we also reviewed and analyzed information from va's budget documents to determine how cares decisions are integrated . to determine what cares capital asset alignment alternatives were considered in the cares process , we developed a spreadsheet to record all the capital asset alternatives that were considered in the dncp , the february 2004 cares commission report , and the may 2004 secretary's cares decision document for each va facility . we identified the capital asset alternatives considered by reviewing dncp proposals , cares commission analysis and findings , cares commission recommendations , and the secretary's cares decisions . in addition to tracking the number of times different capital asset alternatives were considered , we developed a coding system that allowed us to determine the extent of the secretary's concurrence with alternatives proposed in the dncp and recommended by the cares commission . we also coded any additional alternatives proposed by the secretary . we also developed a spreadsheet to track the extent of agreements or disagreements on the cares proposals during the different levels of the cares process .