staffing capacity . type of work experience . planned work sites for the recovery act - funded summer youth activities varied widely across the local areas we visited and included public sector , private sector , and nonprofit organizations . most local areas expected at least some public sector jobs , and in some areas the majority of the work sites are expected to be in the public sector . these sites often included local government offices ; public parks , recreation centers , and camps ; and public schools and community colleges , public libraries , and animal shelters . local areas in several states were planning to place youth in private sector work sites , as well , including supermarkets , pharmacies , health care institutions , and private learning centers . officials in two local areas we visited expected the majority of their work sites to be in the private sector . in addition , at least one local area in nearly all of the states we visited expects to make use of nonprofit work sites , including community action agencies , boys and girls clubs , and the ymca . across the different types of work sites , the specific work activities planned for the youth ranged from clerical work , grounds keeping , animal care , and kitchen support to customer service and serving as camp counselors or radiology technicians' assistants . labor encouraged states to develop work experiences in “green” jobs , and officials reported that green jobs were available in nearly all local areas we visited . the jobs they cited included landscape maintenance , recycling , and green construction , and an automotive fuel technology project at a university , as well as jobs in energy efficiency and weatherization . however , officials told us they were not always clear what constituted a green job . for example , officials in pennsylvania's south central local area questioned whether a youth working in a plastics factory that makes parts for a windmill is working in a “green” job . labor has provided some discussion of green jobs in its guidance letters to states on recovery act funds . for example , labor's march 18 , 2009 , guidance letter highlights areas within the energy efficiency and renewable energy industries that will receive large recovery act investments , such as energy - efficiency home retrofitting and biofuel development , and also provides examples of occupations that could be impacted by “green” technologies , including power plant operators , electrical engineers , and roofers and construction managers . labor officials told us that their reporting requirements for recovery act funds do not include any tracking of green jobs . role of academic and occupational skills training . while not all local areas had completed their plans for the summer activities at the time of our review , in about half of the states at least some local areas were planning to provide academic or occupational skills training along with work experience . for example , buffalo , new york , plans several projects that will combine green jobs with academic training , as well as weatherization and construction skills .