gao - 11-318sp . out the companies' strategic approach.and practices . for example , the air force noted that they instituted training related to strategic sourcing because it is necessary to have people who are very strong analytically to do the front end work for strategic sourcing , and these are the hardest to find . the training course gives acquisition personnel strong analytical skills to perform steps like market evaluation . va has also begun to develop training to address this challenge . agency officials listed several challenges that they commonly face in developing the sourcing strategy for a product or service . as with the opportunity analysis stage , imperfect data and a lack of expertise also pose challenges to agencies when developing a sourcing strategy . this phase requires study of various types of information ; for example , data on the agency's requirements and historical and projected demand for the product or service . some agencies have found additional information on existing suppliers and contracts to also be important in identifying commodities to target for strategic sourcing . for example , the air force also considers data on the number of contracts , the number of purchasing locations , the number of transactions , the number of suppliers , and estimated total cost savings for each potential commodity , among other factors . several agencies have historically turned to contractors to perform this step ; however some have recently decided to increase internal expertise in this area . for example , the fssi program management office reported hiring two new staff with relevant expertise to help with this process . a few agencies also reported challenges specifically with meeting requirements unique to government procurements . government procurements must meet specified socioeconomic goals ; for example , agencies are expected to award a certain portion of their contracts to small businesses . organizations representing small businesses have expressed concern that federal strategic sourcing reduces contracting opportunities for small businesses . however , while acknowledging that reducing the number of vendors providing a product or service means that some vendors will be unable to participate , agency officials reported finding ways to conduct strategic sourcing efforts that allow for maximum feasible small business participation . for example , dhs , va , and air force officials told us they collaborated with small business advocates early in the acquisition planning stage to ensure they conducted market research that would help determine how to maximize small business participation . in addition , federal strategic sourcing initiatives to date have generally awarded a number of contracts to small businesses . for example , of 15 contracts awarded for an initiative focusing on office supplies , 13 were awarded to small businesses , and these businesses received over 70 percent of office supplies spending through that initiative in fiscal year 2011 . another initiative targeting print management services awarded 5 of 11 contracts to small businesses . several agency small business utilization officials with whom we spoke were generally satisfied with fssi and agency efforts to involve small businesses in strategic sourcing . officials at all of our four selected agencies discussed challenges in getting buy - in among those who would be using the strategic sourcing contracts to purchase products or services .