urban . adjoining census tracts in built - up areas , with total population of 50,000 or more . these areas correspond to the u.s. census bureau's urbanized areas . suburban . areas with high commuting flow to urban areas and all areas where 30-49 percent of the population commute to urban areas for work . large rural town . towns with populations between 10,000 and 49,000 and surrounding rural areas where 10 percent or more of the population commutes to the town and 10 percent or more of the population commutes to an urban area for work . small town and isolated rural area . towns with populations of less than 10,000 and their surrounding commuter areas and other isolated rural areas that are more than 1 hour driving distance to the nearest city . rhs - eligible areas encompass rural areas ( that is , large rural towns and small town and isolated rural areas ) as well as areas that are more urban and suburban . as shown in figure 2 , in 2015 , rhs - eligible areas constituted 97 percent of the land area of the united states . eligible areas also contained 37 percent of the nation's population . using the rural - urban commuting area codes described earlier , rural areas constituted 67 percent of the land area of the united states in 2015 . these rural areas contained 12 percent of the population . several categories are used to describe the payment status of mortgages: current . the borrower is meeting scheduled payments . delinquent . the borrower is behind by 30 or more days on scheduled payments . in the foreclosure process . the borrower generally has been delinquent for more than 90 days ( commonly referred to as in default ) and the lender has elected to initiate a legal process against the borrower that generally results in the borrower losing the property . the loan is considered active during the foreclosure process . terminated with a claim . the borrower is delinquent , unable to pay off the loan balance , and loses title to the property . the government pays a claim ( provides reimbursement ) to a lender that incurs a loss on a guaranteed loan . in past reports , including in our 2012 report , we have suggested that agencies could increase their efficiency and effectiveness by consolidating their management functions , such as information - technology or administrative - support services . consolidation is beneficial in some situations and not in others . as a result , a case - by - case analysis is needed to evaluate the goals of the consolidation against realistic expectations of how they can be achieved . the mortgages rhs and fha guaranteed in rhs - eligible areas in 2010 – 2014 generally had similar property , borrower , and loan characteristics , underscoring the overlap between the two guarantee programs . but key differences existed in certain characteristics , primarily due to statutory program requirements . both programs served more than 600,000 borrowers in rhs - eligible areas , although rhs served more borrowers in more rural parts of these areas .