the task order was not within the scope of that contract . this task order , issued in november 2002 , required the contractor to develop a plan to repair and restore iraq's oil infrastructure should iraqi forces damage or destroy it . we observed that personnel generally worked 12 to 15 hour days and often shared cramped living and working quarters . in al hillah , for example , five usaid personnel shared two small offices with their security team . to better coordinate and manage the $18.4 billion in reconstruction funding provided for fiscal year 2004 , the cpa established a program management office that is responsible for infrastructure - related programs . the office , which includes representatives from usaid and the army corps of engineers , is responsible for coordinating the efforts of the cpa , the iraqi ministries , and other coalition partners . the office's acquisition strategy reflects a plan to award 1 program management support contract to support the program management office and to oversee reconstruction efforts of specific sectors — electricity , oil , public works and water , security and justice , transportation and communications , and buildings and health ; 6 program management contracts to coordinate reconstruction efforts specific to each sector ; and 15 to 20 design - build contracts to execute specific tasks . in march 2004 , various dod components , on behalf of the cpa , awarded 17 contracts — the program management support contract , the 6 sector - specific program management and the 10 design - build contracts . these contracts were awarded pursuant to a dod decision to limit competition to firms from the united states , iraq , coalition partners , and force contributing nations . in addition to these contracts , other agencies will continue to award and manage contracts for areas within their assigned area of responsibility . for example , in january 2004 , usaid competitively awarded a $1.8 billion contract to enable further reconstruction efforts , while the army corps of engineers competitively awarded two contracts with a combined value of $2.0 billion to further repair and rehabilitate iraq's oil infrastructure . usaid announced its intent to solicit bids on at least seven new contracts . one of these contracts is intended to provide usaid with an enhanced capability to carry out data collection , performance monitoring , and evaluation of usaid's ongoing work in iraq . the united states , along with its coalition partners and various international organizations and donors , has undertaken an enormously complex , costly , and challenging effort to rebuild iraq . at the early stages of these efforts , agency procurement officials were confronted with little advance warning on which to plan and execute competitive procurement actions , an urgent need to begin reconstruction efforts quickly , and uncertainty as to the magnitude of work required . their actions , in large part , reflected proper use of the flexibilities provided under procurement laws and regulations to award new contracts using other than full and open competitive procedures . with respect to several task orders issued under existing contracts , however , some agency officials overstepped the latitude provided by competition laws by ordering work outside the scope of the underlying contracts .