on specific access issues . an official from one state told us that the process of identifying a widespread access issue ( eg , a shortage of dental providers ) can be subjective due to the variety of ways complaints are classified . under cms's rule , states must have ongoing mechanisms for beneficiary and provider input on access to care ( through hotlines , surveys , ombudsman , review of grievance and appeals data , or other equivalent mechanism ) . states are required to maintain a record of the input they receive and how they responded . they must also provide this information to cms upon request . the most recent cms data available show that 41 percent of about 71 million beneficiaries nationwide were served through ffs arrangements as of july 1 , 2014 . about 21 million of the almost 29 million beneficiaries in these arrangements were served through traditional ffs , while another 7 million were enrolled in pccm . among states , the percentage of beneficiaries in ffs arrangements varied widely , ranging from 0 to 100 percent ( fig.1 ) . in 22 states , the majority of medicaid beneficiaries were served through ffs arrangements . together , these states accounted for 55 percent , or almost 16 million , of all beneficiaries in ffs nationwide . several states have initiated efforts to address these challenges , including the following examples: in oklahoma , medicaid officials have started using telemedicine to help address the shortage of child and adolescent psychiatrists in the state . consistent with our prior work , which noted that over two - thirds of states reported challenges to ensuring enough medicaid providers to serve beneficiaries , state medicaid officials and beneficiary advocacy groups we interviewed identified specific state actions that attempt to address certain access challenges . several state medicaid officials and advocacy groups noted that provider shortages , proximity to participating providers , and transportation , among other things , were more directly related to access challenges than resources for finding a provider . in connecticut , medicaid officials require the administrative service organizations to perform and present annual geo - access analyses . a geo - access analysis is a visual mapping of provider locations to help identify potential access issues due to remoteness of beneficiaries . utah's state legislature passed a law in 2016 to create state income tax credits for psychiatrists and psychiatric mental health nurse practitioners , under certain circumstances , to help recruit those providers to the state . while some states are addressing access challenges with statewide efforts , several state medicaid officials and advocates in the 6 states we interviewed commented that challenges locating a provider can be community - specific at the county or city level and noted that federally qualified health centers , local health departments , or community health workers are points for both disseminating information about resources and for identifying and mitigating local access challenges . additionally , some communities are developing resources to tackle specific access challenges in their area .