the second key area is communication . it is important for ssa's top leadership to support open lines of communication throughout implementation if the agency is to facilitate a successful transition . failure to , for example , provide useful feedback to staff — many of whom will be new to the agency or at least to the new tools — could significantly jeopardize opportunities for improvement . just as important , ssa's top management needs to ensure that the concerns and questions of stakeholders affected by the new process are heard , and that concerned parties are kept apprised of how ssa intends to respond . the eventual elimination of the appeals council and its replacement with the decision review board with a very different purpose has been a great cause of concern for a number of stakeholders . ssa appropriately has plans to assess its impact by tracking decisions resulting from each stage of the new process , as well as the effect of the process on the federal courts' caseloads and claimants at large . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . to its credit , ssa plans to reduce any immediate impact on the courts by requiring that the board initially review all alj decisions in the boston region . however , given that the agency plans to rely heavily on new positions , such as the federal reviewing official , and on new technology , ssa will need to ensure that staff are well trained , and that each adjudicator has the support staff needed to work effectively . focusing on one small region will , it is hoped , allow the agency to ensure that training , technology , and other resources are well developed to achieve expected goals before dsi is expanded to other parts of the country . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared remarks . the tools are intended to promote quality in two ways . first , the tools will require decision makers to document the rationale behind decisions in a consistent manner while specifically addressing areas that have contributed to errors in the past , such as failing to list a medical expert's credentials or inaccurately characterizing medical evidence . second , the tools will help provide a feedback loop , by which adjudicators and decision writers can learn why and under what circumstances their decisions were remanded or reversed . ssa officials told us that once the tools are in full use , the office of quality performance will collect and analyze their content to identify errors or areas lacking clarity . they also plan to provide monthly reports to regional managers in order to help them better guide staff on how to improve the soundness of their decisions and the quality of their writing . the establishment of the decision review board , with responsibility for reviewing alj decisions , is intended to promote quality and consistency of decisions in two ways .