( recommendation 1 ) . actual development progress has been mixed . while the pace of software development has improved , implementing the new software development approach has been slower than expected . as a result , raytheon has used the majority of its schedule reserve and delayed planned staff reductions , indicating that work is not being completed as quickly as planned . raytheon's estimate that ocx will be accepted by the end of june 2021 is further challenged because of significant identified risks that remain in the schedule and changeover in those risks in 2018 . as of january 2019 , raytheon was tracking 48 risks it has identified with cost effects — 26 with a moderate likelihood of occurring . for example , a moderate risk includes the possibility of finding more defects than planned , which could have both cost and schedule consequences . other moderate risks include the possibility of software development taking longer to complete or needing to create more software code than planned . if realized , both of these risks have cost effects to pay for additional work and schedule effects to allow additional time to complete work . as of january 2019 , raytheon has no high risks that it tracks . there was also a significant amount of change in the risks themselves in 2018 , as raytheon added 27 new risks while closing 30 . the majority of the risks that are currently tracked will not be realized or retired until late 2019 , with at least one key risk of concern to the air force not realized or retired until 2020 . as the program progresses , risks can ( 1 ) according to ocx program officials , approval to transition ocx to operations assumes a 7-month developmental test schedule after acceptance . as currently formulated , this period will be used to prepare for the transition from ocs to ocx via ( 1 ) transition exercises to train operators , ( 2 ) transition rehearsals to practice the actual handover from ocs to ocx , and ( 3 ) a 156-day integrated system test to verify ocx's requirements , operational suitability , and readiness to enter operational testing . however , that 7-month duration may not be sufficient to conduct all of the activities that are necessary to verify ocx is ready to transition to operations . first , the head of the gps directorate's lead development test organization , which plans and executes the 7-month developmental testing , said that there is some schedule risk because of concurrent activities that need to be accomplished , including crew rehearsals and other test events . second , the content of the test period has not yet been finalized . what is a critical nunn - mccurdy unit cost breach ? for major defense acquisition programs , a critical nunn - mccurdy unit cost breach of a unit cost threshold is triggered by cost increases of at least 25 percent or more of a program's current cost baseline or at least 50 percent or more of a program's original cost baseline . as an acquisition program works to achieve its objective and threshold values , the original baseline goals may become unachievable .