medicare covers over 80 percent of all individuals with esrd . for these individuals , medicare covers the cost of lifetime dialysis treatments , or for individuals who receive kidney transplants , the cost of the transplants and 3 years of follow - up care — including immunosuppressive medications needed to sustain the transplants . medicare also covers hospital inpatient services and outpatient services , such as physician visits and laboratory tests , as well as medical evaluations provided to living donors and recipients in anticipation of transplants . in addition to medicare , individuals with esrd may be covered by other public or private health insurance , such as medicaid or an employer - sponsored health plan . for individuals who are eligible for medicare on the basis of esrd , medicare is the secondary payer if the individuals have employer - sponsored group health insurance coverage during the first 30 months of medicare coverage . after the first 30 months , medicare becomes the primary payer for these beneficiaries until they are no longer entitled to medicare . for an individual who is eligible for medicare solely because of esrd and who has a kidney transplant , medicare coverage ends on the last day of the 36th month after the individual receives the transplant unless the individual is entitled to medicare other than because of esrd . however , after 36 months , a transplant recipient can become eligible for medicare again after a transplant failure and subsequently receive a retransplant or dialysis . following termination of medicare coverage , individuals who are unable to pay for immunosuppressive medications and other transplant - related follow - up care must rely on other public or private health insurance or charity care . pediatric recipients have several potential sources of coverage when their medicare coverage ends: private health insurance — generally , a parent's employer - sponsored coverage ; medicaid ; the state children's health insurance program ( schip ) ; and charity care . however , once individuals turn 19 , they may lose access to their parents' private insurance coverage as well as coverage under schip and medicaid . individuals who receive kidney transplants require immunosuppressive therapy — usually a combination of at least two different immunosuppressive medications — as well as regular laboratory tests to monitor and maintain their transplants . although the frequency of laboratory tests decreases over time , the need for immunosuppressive medications continues for the life of the transplant . recipients who do not take their immunosuppressive medications according to the prescribed regimens are more likely to have their transplanted kidneys fail . in addition , the largest increase in transplant failure among the three age groups occurred in the first 3 years posttransplant — before termination of medicare coverage — and the increase was substantially higher for transitional recipients than for pediatric and adult recipients . after experiencing a transplant failure , a higher percentage of transitional recipients received dialysis , a higher percentage of pediatric recipients received retransplants after the first year posttransplant , and a higher percentage of adult recipients died .