we examined 1 . medicare and medicaid spending patterns for high - expenditure 2. service use and health status of high - medicare - expenditure and high - medicaid - expenditure disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries ; 3. the extent to which integrated d - snps have provided high quality of care for disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries while controlling medicare spending ; and 4 . d - snps' and traditional ma plans' performance in serving disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries based on quality and resource use measures . to examine spending patterns for high - expenditure disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries , we analyzed 2009 data , the most recent available , from the medicare - medicaid linked enrollee analytic data source ( mmleads ) to determine which beneficiaries had the highest medicare , highest medicaid , and highest combined program spending . we excluded from our analysis disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries who were not eligible for full medicaid benefits ; were under age 21 ; qualified for medicare due to end - stage renal disease ( esrd ) ; lived outside the 50 united states and washington , d.c. ; did not have full medicare coverage ( parts a and b ) for all eligible months ; or were enrolled in ma for any part of the year . we also excluded individuals who lived in maine or arizona because we did not have complete data for these states . we defined high - expenditure beneficiaries as those in the top quintile ( top 20 percent ) of total program spending in their state . we used spending by state because of the variation in states' medicaid benefits . we analyzed mmleads and 2009 medicare master beneficiary summary file ( mbsf ) data to examine the distribution of medicare and medicaid spending for high - expenditure beneficiaries compared with other beneficiaries . we examined the distribution of medicare spending for all covered services ( eg , inpatient hospital stays , outpatient hospital services , physician and other related services , prescription drugs , post - acute care , and durable medical equipment ) and the distribution of medicaid spending for users of different types of long - term services and supports ( ltss ) ( eg , services provided in nursing facilities , intermediate care facilities , or in the community ) . we also analyzed the patterns of program spending across states for high - expenditure beneficiaries . to examine service use and health status of high - medicare - expenditure and high - medicaid - expenditure disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries , we used 2009 data from mmleads and medicare carrier claims to determine the proportion of high - expenditure beneficiaries in each program who used certain services . we excluded from this analysis the same beneficiaries we excluded from our analysis of spending patterns . for medicaid services , we focused on the use of different types of ltss . for medicare services , we focused on the use of three costly acute services — inpatient stays , readmissions , and emergency room visits — and two other categories of services — primary care and mental health .