gao - 12-1026t . washington , d.c.: september 12 , 2012 . these efforts are described in figure 2 . osd and the joint staff have issued several new or revised policies on planning for operational contract support . in january 2011 , the secretary of defense issued a memorandum to address the risks introduced by dod's level of dependency on contractors , its future total force mix , and the need to better plan for operational contract support in the future . the memorandum required , among other things , that the under secretary of defense for policy integrate operational contract support considerations into strategic planning documents and provide policy guidance on planning for contracted support in force planning scenario development . also , the memorandum required that the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff collaboratively develop procedures to support operational contract support planning in the joint operation planning and execution system , including contractor support estimates and visibility of contractors accompanying the force . a memorandum issued by the director of the joint staff in june 2011 further assigned joint staff directors to either lead or support specific tasks to implement the secretary of defense's direction . working with the joint staff , the under secretary of defense for policy completed revisions in april 2011 to the guidance for the employment of the force requiring that the combatant commands , together with their service components and relevant combat support agencies , plan for the integration of contracted support and contractor management in all phases of military operations . additionally , the joint staff completed revisions in april 2011 to the joint strategic capabilities plan . the revisions included the requirement that operational contract support planning must occur at all plan levels and that , at a minimum , plans will identify anticipated contract support requirements by joint capability area , phase of operation , and area of need . in addition to policy revisions , osd and the joint staff have undertaken additional actions to ensure that planners better integrate operational contract support into the planning process . for example , at the request of the combatant commands , the joint staff has conducted operational contract support training that explains changes to the planning requirements for the integration of operational contract support . specifically , the joint staff held training seminars for operational contract support planners at central command and southern command in november 2011 , at pacific command in january 2012 , and at africa and european commands in may 2012 to highlight recent changes in guidance and processes . in addition , the functional capabilities integration board , which was created in 2010 , is actively monitoring ongoing operational contract support – related efforts across dod and the progress toward timely completion of the direction in the secretary's january 2011 memorandum . chaired by the deputy assistant secretary of defense for program support and the vice director for logistics of the joint staff , the functional capabilities integration board is a senior executive – level body that includes officials from osd , the military services , defense agencies , and the joint staff .