this is not our intention . our conclusions and recommendations are directed toward streamlining and consolidating the information - gathering process , with the analytic and reporting functions remaining separate as they currently are in each agency . both eeoc and opm stated that they are limited in the steps that they could take to consolidate or streamline agency reporting requirements because regulations , executive orders , or statutes give eeoc or opm sole responsibility for each program . if you have any additional comments on the impacts of these federal requirements helping to ensure eeo in the workplace and achieving affirmative employment or workforce diversity objectives and influencing your department / agency's formulation of human capital policy and its human capital strategic plan , please write them below . if you have any additional comments on any previous question or any other comments about eeo in the workplace and achieving affirmative employment or workforce diversity objectives , please make them below . thank you for completing this survey . please save this file now and send gao a return e - mail , with your file as an attachment . the honorable david m. walker comptroller general of the united states united states government accountability office washington , d.c. 20548 thank you for the opportunity to review the report entitled equal employment opportunity , improved coordination needed between eeoc and opm in leading federal workplace eeo . gao - 06-214 . first , we wish to make clear that it is eeoc's view that the multiple areas of information collection which gao has described as redundant in the gao report are not in fact unnecessary . several federal agencies have information collection requirements which overlap but serve different purposes . by analogy , eeoc and the office of federal contract compliance programs serve different legislative mandates but often collect similar information . also , the wage and hour division of the united states department of labor collects payroll information that eeoc seeks in equal pay act cases . likewise , opm's feorp looks only at recruiting activities and outcomes as well as human capital practices used to recruit and develop the federal workforce . in contrast , reports submitted pursuant to eeoc's management directive 715 look at wide - ranging employment activities to ensure that equal employment opportunity is being embraced and implemented by all federal agencies . in conclusion , let me assure you that the commission will continue to work closely with the office of personnel management to eliminate reporting inefficiencies while adhering to our respective statutory constraints . attached to this letter are several more detailed observations we have regarding this report . again , thank you for the opportunity to review this report . use of survey results and overall thrust of report is misleading the gao draft report at several points suggests that various agency officials perceive the requirements of opm's feorp program and eeoc's md - 715 as ‘very similar” or “redundant.” the use of the word redundancy in both the survey responses and in the draft implies or creates the impression that certain eeoc and opm programs coverage and / or reporting requirements are congruent , or similar in most or all respects .