see appendix i for our analysis . we performed our work from october 2000 through may 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are providing copies of this report to other interested congressional committees and the secretary of defense . we will make copies available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4128 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . key contributors to this assignment were f. james shafer , hynek kalkus , beth hoffman león , martin dealteriis , and lynn cothern . as required by section 1206 of public law 104-106 , we reviewed the department of defense's ( dod ) 1999 accounting report to determine if it ( 1 ) contained current and complete data on the cooperative threat reduction ( ctr ) assistance provided ( both equipment and services ) , ( 2 ) described how ctr - provided assistance was accounted for and used , ( 3 ) provided a description of how dod plans to account for the assistance during the following year , and ( 4 ) listed specific information on russia's arsenal of tactical nuclear warheads . on the basis of our review , dod's 1999 accounting report covered the legislatively mandated information , yet it did not always convey the information completely and consistently . specifically: dod's 1999 accounting report contained current and complete data on a little over two - thirds of all ctr assistance provided to the recipient countries through september 1999 . according to dod officials , the monies not accounted for in the report were spent on equipment purchased in country ; equipment purchased in the united states but not yet shipped ; and “other” ctr program costs , such as travel , shipment of equipment , military - to - military contacts , and defense threat reduction agency contractors . the report lists equipment totaling $314 million , services totaling $1.1 billion , and miscellaneous items totaling almost $16 million , for a combined total of nearly $1.5 billion worth of assistance . by the end of fiscal year 1999 , however , the ctr program had provided over $2.1 billion of assistance to the recipient countries . the report lists some of the equipment that was purchased in recipient ctr countries , but it does not distinguish between that equipment and equipment shipped from the united states . according to ctr officials , the draft 2000 accounting report will provide more information about equipment purchased in recipient countries for that year . the 1999 report also included a listing of about $27 million in ctr equipment that dod provided to recipient states during a 3- month period in 1997 that the 1998 accounting report excluded . in its 1999 accounting report , dod described how ctr - provided assistance was accounted for and used . specifically , dod explained the methods it used to account for ctr - provided equipment — audits and examinations , program management trips , and intelligence obtained through national technical means . the 1999 accounting report listed where the equipment was located at the time of the report and described the value of contractor services provided for each project .