i for the results of our data analysis .  cms has data on complaint validation surveys conducted in ltchs that could provide information on how effectively states triage and conduct complaint surveys at tjc - surveyed ltchs . for example , our analysis found that a small proportion of state complaint validation surveys cited deficiencies . see app . specifically , we found that about 6 percent of the 1,224 complaint validation surveys conducted at tjc - surveyed ltchs between 2006 and 2010 had one or more cop - level deficiencies and about 66 percent did not cite any deficiencies . we also found that two state agencies conducted nearly half ( 40 percent ) of the complaint validation surveys , but cited almost no cop - level deficiencies . cms and tjc officials told us that the small proportion of state complaint validation surveys that cite cop - level deficiencies indicated that state survey agencies may not be adequately triaging complaints , that is , some of these complaints may not have warranted on - site surveys . in addition , cms officials suggested that states may have cited deficiencies at the standard level to avoid conducting a full survey and may not have reviewed all standards related to the cop alleged by the complainant to have been out of compliance .  cms has data to compare the results from routine and complaint surveys that could provide information on the thoroughness of routine surveys at ltchs that also had complaint validation surveys . cms has not compared routine survey data for tjc - surveyed ltchs it has in assure with complaint validation survey data it has in oscar . we compared these two databases to determine if routine surveys by tjc had missed cop - level deficiencies identified by state complaint validation surveys . we identified 32 complaint validation surveys that were conducted within 2 to 60 days of a tjc routine survey reported in assure . four of the 32 surveys identified cop - level deficiencies that were not identified on the ltchs most recent survey by tjc . while there may be reasonable explanations , further information could improve cms oversight of survey activities .  cms has data on the survey resources used during routine surveys by state survey agencies and tjc that could provide information on the efficiency and effectiveness of survey activities . we compared the survey resources — number of surveyors and amount of time devoted to conducting a survey — used by state surveyors and tjc for the health portion of routine surveys at similar sized ltchs between 2006 and 2010 . we found that state surveyors spent about two times as many hours per survey and utilized about two times more surveyors per survey than tjc . the appropriate level of resources for an ltch survey is unclear and cms , state survey agencies , and tjc may not be in agreement . cms officials told us that they are not using all available assure and oscar survey data because they are currently focusing on obtaining complete and accurate information from tjc and other aos .