such findings are not new . we noted , for example , in our 2004 and 2005 reviews of afghanistan reconstruction efforts , when usaid developed its interim development assistance strategy , it did not incorporate information on the contractor and grantee resources required to implement the strategy . we determined that this hindered usaid's ability to make informed decisions on resource allocations for the strategy . further , as mentioned earlier , such findings have not been unique to usaid . for example , in our april 2010 report , we noted that the department of state's workforce plan generally does not address the extent to which contractors should be used to perform specific functions , such as contract and grant administration . in the absence of strategic planning for its use of contractors , we found that it was often individual offices within usaid that made case - by - case decisions on the use of contractors to support contract or grant administration functions . in our april 2010 report , we noted that usaid used contractors to help administer its contracts and grants in afghanistan , in part to address frequent rotations of government personnel , as well as security and logistical concerns . functions performed by these contractors included on - site monitoring of other contractors' activities and awarding and administering grants . the departments of defense and state have also relied on contractors to perform similar functions in both afghanistan and iraq . while relying on contractors to perform such functions can provide benefits , we found that usaid did not always fully address related risks . for example , usaid did not always include a contract clause required by agency policy to address potential conflicts of interest , and usaid contracting officials generally did not ensure enhanced oversight in accordance with federal regulations for situations in which contractors provided services that closely supported inherently governmental functions . over the last four years , we have reported on limitations in usaid's visibility into the number and value of contracts and assistance instruments with performance in afghanistan , as well as the number of personnel working under those contracts and assistance instruments . having reliable , meaningful data on contractors and assistance recipients is a starting point for informing agency decisions and ensuring proper management and oversight . in 2008 , in response to congressional direction , usaid along with the departments of defense and state designated the synchronized predeployment and operational tracker ( spot ) database as their system of record to track statutorily required information on contracts and contractor personnel working in either iraq or afghanistan , a designation which the agencies reaffirmed when the requirement was expanded to include assistance instruments and associated personnel . however , we found that as of september 2011 , spot still did not reliably track this information . as a result , usaid relied on other data sources , which had their own limitations , to prepare a 2011 report to congress . specifically , we found usaid's reporting to be incomplete , particularly in the case of personnel numbers that were based on unreliable data .