congress consented to the compact in 1996 . emac is a mutual aid agreement among member states and is not a government agency . overall governance is provided by the emac committee , whose chair is selected annually by the president of the national emergency management association ( nema ) . day - to - day work of the emac committee is carried out by an emac executive task force whose members are elected by the emac membership . the chair of the emac committee works with the executive task force to develop policies and issue guidance . nema provides administrative oversight for the emac network . since 2003 , nema has assigned one person to serve as the emac coordinator — the only paid employee dedicated full time to emac — as well as a part - time consultant who serves in the position of emac senior advisor . both of these positions have been funded through a cooperative agreement between fema and nema to provide administrative and management support for emac . emac operating protocols outline one process for member states to request and provide assistance , whether these resources are civilian or national guard . the process describes how to request , provide , receive , and reimburse assistance from other member states in response to a disaster . before resources can be deployed under emac , the governor of an impacted state must first declare an emergency . representatives from the impacted state then contact emac leadership to inform them that interstate assistance may be needed . if desired , the impacted — or requesting — state can ask the emac leadership to send a team of emergency management personnel to the state's emergency operations center to assist with subsequent resource requests under emac . the requesting state can then request additional resources through the emac network from other member states . these states — often referred to as assisting states — work with the requesting state to identify resources required and other details . once both the requesting and assisting states approve the final details , resources are deployed to the area of need . once the missions have been completed and resources have returned home , the assisting states prepare formal requests for reimbursement , which are then sent to , and processed by , the requesting state . figure 1 provides a summary of this process . in cases when a disaster strikes multiple states , fema has a standing agreement with nema to request a team of emergency managers to deploy to its national or regional coordination centers to help coordinate emac network and federal activities , as appropriate . although emac is an agreement between states , catastrophic disasters can overwhelm the resources of an impacted state , requiring it to seek assistance from the federal government . in the case of a presidentially declared disaster , impacted states can work with fema to seek federal financial assistance to cover costs associated with emergency response efforts that may include eligible missions conducted under emac . in such cases , the impacted state prepares project worksheets — a form used to collect and document information on the scope and estimated cost for public assistance projects — and submits them to fema for review .