however , ftc is not a supervisory agency . ftc uses a variety of information sources in the enforcement process , including ftc investigations , consumer complaints , and state and federal agencies . state banking and financial regulators are responsible for overseeing independent lenders and mortgage brokers and generally do so through licensing that mandates certain experience , education , and operations requirements to engage in mortgage activities . states also may examine independent lenders and mortgage brokers to ensure compliance with licensing requirements , review their lending and brokerage functions , and look for unfair or unethical business practices . borrowers obtain residential mortgages through either mortgage lenders or brokers . mortgage lenders can be federally or state - chartered banks or mortgage lending subsidiaries of these banks or of bank holding companies . independent lenders , which are neither banks nor affiliates of banks , also may fund home loans to borrowers . mortgage brokers act as intermediaries between lenders and borrowers , and for a fee , help connect borrowers with various lenders that may provide a wider selection of mortgage products . federal banking regulators — office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve ) , federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , national credit union administration ( ncua ) , and office of thrift supervision ( ots ) — have , among other things , responsibility for ensuring the safety and soundness of the institutions they oversee . to pursue this goal , regulators establish capital requirements for banks ; conduct on - site examinations and off - site monitoring to assess their financial conditions ; and monitor their compliance with applicable banking laws , regulations , and agency guidance . as part of their examinations , for example , regulators review mortgage lending practices , including underwriting , risk - management , and portfolio management practices , and try to determine the amount of risk lenders have assumed . in addition , they said that they are currently revising their consumer handbook on arm loans , known as the charm booklet , to include information about amps . finally , in may 2006 , ftc officials said that they sponsored a public workshop that explored consumer protection issues as a result of amp growth in the mortgage marketplace and worked with federal banking regulators and other federal departments to create a brochure to assist consumers with mortgage information . state banking and financial regulatory officials from the eight states in our sample expressed concerns about amp lending in their states ; however , most relied on their existing regulatory system of licensing and examining mortgage lenders and brokers to stay abreast of and react to amp issues . most of the officials in our sample expressed concern about amp lending and the negative effects it could have on consumers , including how well consumers understood complex amp loans and the potential impact of payment shock , financial difficulties , or default and foreclosure . other officials expressed concern about whether consumers received complete information about amps , saying that federal disclosures were complicated , difficult to comprehend , and often were not very useful to consumers .