we reviewed these estimates for reasonableness . we conducted this performance audit from may 2011 to july 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . see appendixes i and ii for more details on our objectives , scope , and methodology . congress and the president first enacted a statutory limit on federal debt during world war i to eliminate the need for congress to approve each new debt issuance and provide treasury with greater discretion over how it finances the government's day - to - day borrowing needs . with the public debt act of 1941 , congress and the president set an overall limit of $65 billion on treasury debt obligations that could be outstanding at any one time and since then have enacted a number of debt limit increases . applying the relevant increase or decrease in the yield spread shown in figure 2 to all treasury bills , notes , bonds , cm bills , and tips issued during the 2011 debt limit event period , we estimated that borrowing costs increased by many of the treasury securities about $1.3 billion in fiscal year 2011.issued during the 2011 debt limit event period will remain outstanding for years to come . accordingly , the multiyear increase in borrowing costs arising from the event is greater than the additional borrowing costs during fiscal year 2011 alone . there are limitations to using a multivariate regression to measure changes in treasury's borrowing costs attributable to delays in raising the debt limit . most important , many economic and financial developments besides the uncertainty in the treasury market arising from delays in raising the debt limit likely affected yield spreads during this period . while we controlled for changes in federal reserve holdings of treasury securities , stock market uncertainty , and economic activity , we cannot capture every development affecting yield spreads , such as other policy changes not easily quantifiable that might affect yield spreads . debt and cash management required more time and treasury resources as delays in raising the debt limit occurred in 2011 and january 2012 . for example , treasury staff ( 1 ) forecasted and monitored with increasing frequency and in increasing detail cash and borrowing needs and ( 2 ) developed , reviewed , and tested contingency plans and alternative scenarios for the possible implementation of extraordinary actions . according to treasury officials , these activities diverted time and treasury resources from other cash and debt management responsibilities . we reviewed estimates provided by the office of fiscal projections ( ofp ) and the bureau of the public debt ( bpd ) , the entities primarily affected by the delays , which indicated that these entities' personnel devoted as much as several hundred hours per week to managing federal debt when delays in raising the debt limit occurred in 2011 and january 2012 .