state . state maintains an economic and environment section at the u.s. embassy in jakarta that is organized into three focus areas: environment , science , technology , and health ; trade and investment ; and macroeconomics and finance . according to state officials , improving economic relations with indonesia to facilitate greater u.s. trade and investment is a key priority of the section . commerce . according to a senior commerce official in indonesia , commerce personnel based in indonesia work to help u.s. firms find local partners , obtain the appropriate licenses and registrations for conducting business in indonesia , and interpret existing or new laws and regulations , among other duties . the officials said that they also advocate for u.s. firms and lead or support trade missions . for example , commerce officials led a trade mission focused on clean energy business practices in 2010 and led a trade mission focused on education in 2011 . exports . indonesia imported $9 billion in goods from the united states , its sixth - largest import market , and $30 billion in goods from china , its second - largest import market , in 2013 . other asean countries , japan , the eu , and south korea represented indonesia's first - , third - , fourth - , and fifth - largest goods import markets , respectively . the united states' share of total indonesian goods imports decreased from 8.3 percent in 2003 to 4.9 percent in 2013 . china's share of total indonesian goods exports increased from 9.1 percent in 2003 to 16 percent in 2013 . figure 3 shows indonesia's exports and imports in 2003 , 2008 , and 2013 , by trading partner . indonesia ranks higher as an export and import partner of china than of the united states . indonesia is china's 15th - largest export market and the united states' 34th - largest by value . in 2014 , china exported $39.1 billion in goods to indonesia , or 1.7 percent of global chinese goods exports . in the same year , the united states exported $8.3 billion in goods to indonesia — 0.5 percent of global u.s. goods exports . indonesia is china's 20th - largest source of imported goods and the united states' 24th - largest by value . in 2014 , china imported $24.5 billion in goods from indonesia , or 1 percent of global chinese goods imports . in the same year , the united states imported $19.4 billion in goods from indonesia — 0.8 percent of global u.s. goods imports . the united states' role relative to china's in indonesia's trade of goods as well as services may be greater when the amount of intermediate u.s. inputs to the traded goods and services is taken into account . because of the nature of global supply chains , for example , a consumer phone from a u.s. company might be assembled in china but includes components manufactured by germany , japan , south korea , and other countries .