according to u.s . citizenship and immigration services officials , the agency does not maintain aggregated data on the number of times the initial screening has failed to identify individuals who are subjects of watch list records or the specific causes . the officials noted , however , that for certain applicants — including individuals seeking long - term benefits such as permanent citizenship , lawful permanent residence , or asylum — additional screening against watch list records is conducted . this additional screening has generated some positive matches to watch list records , whereas these matches were not detected during the initial checks . according to u.s . citizenship and immigration services , each instance of individuals on the watch list getting through agency screening is reviewed on a case - by - case basis to determine the cause , with appropriate follow - up and corrective action taken , if needed . as a prospective enhancement , in april 2007 , u.s . citizenship and immigration services entered into a memorandum of understanding with tsc . we chose these locations on the basis of geographic variation and other factors . more details about the scope and methodology of our work regarding each of the objectives are presented in the following sections , respectively . to ascertain the general standards used in determining which individuals are appropriate for inclusion on tsc's consolidated watch list , we reviewed available documentation . in particular , we reviewed homeland security presidential directive 6 , which specifies that tsc's consolidated watch list is to contain information about individuals “known or appropriately suspected to be or have been engaged in conduct constituting , in preparation for , in aid of , or related to terrorism ; ” an nctc document on building a single database of known and suspected terrorists for the u.s. government , which provides nctc's standards for including individuals on the watch list ; the attorney general's guidelines for fbi national security investigations and foreign intelligence collection , which provide standards for opening fbi international terrorism investigations ; and the attorney general's guidelines on general crimes , racketeering enterprise and terrorist enterprise investigations , which provide standards for opening fbi domestic terrorism investigations . we discussed implementation of applicable guidance with responsible nctc and fbi counterterrorism division officials . however , we did not audit or evaluate agencies' compliance with the guidance . for instance , we did not review or assess the derogatory information related to terrorist watch list records , partly because such information involved ongoing counterterrorism investigations . also , a primary agency that collects information on known or suspected terrorists — the central intelligence agency — declined to meet with us or provide us with documentation on its watch list - related activities . from tsc , we obtained statistics on the number of positive encounters , that is , the number of times that individuals have been positively matched during screening against terrorist watch list records . generally , the statistics cover the period from december 2003 ( when tsc began operations ) through may 2007 .