invention begins . once basic principles are observed , practical applications can be invented . examples are still limited to paper studies . active r&d is initiated . this includes analytical studies and laboratory studies to physically validate analytical predictions of separate elements of the technology . examples include components that are not yet integrated or representative . basic technological components are integrated to establish that they will work together . this is relatively “low fidelity” compared to the eventual system . examples include integration of “ad hoc” hardware in a laboratory . fidelity of breadboard technology increases significantly . basic technological components are integrated with reasonably realistic supporting elements so that the technology can be tested in simulated environment . examples include “high fidelity” laboratory integration of components . representative model or prototype system , which is well beyond the breadboard tested for level 5 , is tested in a relevant environment . represents a major step up in a technology's demonstrated readiness . examples include testing a prototype in a high - fidelity laboratory environment or in a simulated operational environment . prototype near , or at , planned operational system . represents a major step up from trl 6 , requiring demonstration of an actual system prototype in an operational environment such as an aircraft , vehicle , or space . technology has been proven to work in its final form and under expected conditions . in almost all cases , this trl represents the end of true system development . examples include developmental test and evaluation of the system in its intended weapon system to determine if it meets design specifications . actual application of the technology in its final form and under mission conditions , such as those encountered in operational test and evaluation . examples include using the system under operational mission conditions . the following are gao's comments on the department of defense's letter dated june 29 , 2004 . dod stated that dod does not require formal approval for the concepts of operations from the joint requirements oversight council or the mission requirements board , but noted that the joint requirements oversight council communicated agreement in a memo . as we reported , the under secretary of the air force requested that both dod and the intelligence community approve the initial capabilities document and concept of operations in light of the complexity of sbr's acquisition process , the partnership with the intelligence community , and the proposed integration with other radar platforms . dod stated that it is not engaged in a partnership with the intelligence community on sbr , as our report states . specifically , dod stated that sbr is wholly funded in the defense budget and that a programmatic commitment with the intelligence community does not exist . dod's sbr system acquisition strategy was signed by senior - level officials from dod , national reconnaissance office , and the national geospatial - intelligence agency and approved on january 14 , 2004 . this strategy states that the air force , in close partnership with the national reconnaissance office and national geospatial - intelligence agency , is responsible for leading development of an sbr capability .