size . regulators in 37 states said that the size of the population served by water systems may influence noncompliance with the lcr . regulators in 28 of the 37 states said that small systems ( serving populations of 3,300 and fewer ) are more likely to have drinking water sample results that exceed the federal action level , to be in noncompliance , or face challenges that may lead to noncompliance . most of these regulators mentioned the size of a system and the technical , managerial , or financial capacity of the system as factors that , together , may influence noncompliance . for example , regulators in 10 states said that small systems are more likely to receive a violation because they are generally less likely to have operators with the knowledge to properly collect samples ( sample collection ) or manage corrosion control treatment ( technical capacity ) or have the financial resources to pay for corrosion control treatment or to hire professional help to do so ( financial capacity ) . a regulator from 1 state provided an example of a small water system in noncompliance because it has a part - time operator with little training on the rule and with other professional responsibilities , such as snow removal and animal control , which prevent this operator from providing drinking water test results to homeowners whose water was tested within the required timeframe . technical capacity . regulators in 33 states said that the technical capacity of water systems may influence noncompliance with the lcr . regulators in 18 of the 33 states said that water systems that do not have personnel with the knowledge to adequately operate a system or who understand the lcr are less likely to have the skill set to interpret and implement the lcr appropriately . washington , d.c.: january , 27 , 2016 . environmental health: epa has made substantial progress but could improve processes for considering children's health . gao - 13-254 . washington , d.c.: august 12 , 2013 . drinking water: unreliable state data limit epa's ability to target enforcement priorities and communicate water systems' performance . gao - 11-381 . washington , d.c.: june 17 , 2011 . environmental health: high - level strategy and leadership needed to continue progress toward protecting children from environmental threats . gao - 10-205 . washington , d.c.: january 28 , 2010 . drinking water: the district of columbia and communities nationwide face serious challenges in their efforts to safeguard water supplies . gao - 08-687t . washington , d.c.: april 15 , 2008 . drinking water: epa should strengthen ongoing efforts to ensure that consumers are protected from lead contamination . gao - 06-148 . washington , d.c.: january 4 , 2006 . district of columbia's drinking water: agencies have improved coordination , but key challenges remain in protecting the public from elevated lead levels . gao - 05-344 . washington , d.c.: march 31 , 2005 . drinking water: safeguarding the district of columbia's supplies and applying lessons learned to other systems . gao - 04-974t . washington , d.c.: july 22 , 2004 . sample collection .