an apology from the manufacturer . the owner's vehicle identification number ( vin ) information . as one participant explained , including a vin in the body of the defect notification letter clarifies whether this recall applies to the owner's vehicle . readable font size . an indication of whether there is any cost involved with the recall remedy . in addition , we asked focus group participants to review three defect notification envelopes to gauge their perceptions of the envelope style and format and the likelihood that they would be willing to open each envelope . though the focus groups reached less consensus on what style and format of envelope they would be most likely to open , participants did reveal that they preferred envelopes that included the word “urgent,” and some preferred envelopes that did not have technical or confusing language . for example , one participant stated that she liked the envelope that said “urgent air bag safety” because it described the issue in concise terms . in addition , several focus group participants liked the use of color — red shadowing , for example — to indicate the envelope's importance , and were more in favor of envelopes without vin information on the envelope itself . ( 2 ) what are the benefits and challenges of the auto safety defect recall process for nhtsa and the manufacturers ? ( 3 ) what options exist for improving nhtsa's auto safety defect recall process ? to describe the extent of nhtsa's role and authorities in the auto safety defect recall process , we reviewed applicable legislation , including the national traffic and motor vehicle safety act , as amended , relevant federal regulations , and nhtsa's guidance on the safety defect recall process . in addition , we conducted interviews with nhtsa officials about the agency's role in the defect recall process and its recall authority . to compare nhtsa's authorities with those of other federal agencies , we reviewed legislation and interviewed officials at selected federal agencies that , similar to nhtsa , have product safety oversight responsibilities , including cpsc , fda , and the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , to determine what differences and similarities exist between the agencies' recall authorities and those of nhtsa . to compare nhtsa's authorities with selected foreign agencies with safety recall authority , we interviewed officials from agencies in four countries ( canada , germany , japan , and the united kingdom ) about their authorities and involvement in the auto safety recall processes of their countries . we selected these agencies based on recommendations from nhtsa and industry officials with whom we spoke and to reflect a range of safety recall processes and authorities . we also interviewed auto industry organizations in the selected countries to get their perspectives on the authorities of the selected foreign agencies , as well as officials from the european union ( eu ) to understand how eu legislation may impact two countries in our review , germany and the united kingdom ( uk ) .