all focus is now on the a models . many of the deficiencies found during testing have been corrected . other deficiencies and waivers will be addressed in the rerp program or a planned block upgrade that is slated to begin in fiscal year 2010 . when should c - 5s be retired and how many ? and how many c - 5s would need the amp modification if some of the aircraft are retired ? even larger questions exist for tactical airlift: are 213 c - 17s enough to perform both strategic and tactical missions ? what are the potential impacts on c - 17 service life , maintenance , and availability from its expected increased use in the future for the tactical airlift of heavier and bulkier army equipment ? how will the air force meet the army's time - sensitive mission - critical requirements with 40 fewer c - 27j aircraft ? will there be a fundamental shift in the air force's roles and mission that would require the air force to assume more army - specific missions ? can the department set technically realistic requirements for the jftl and follow an evolutionary acquisition strategy that includes selecting mature technologies , normally developing increments in less than 5 years and fully funding each increment ? more information is needed to help the department address these questions and avoid the unnecessary expenditure of billions of dollars on redundant capabilities or a potentially premature c - 17 production line shutdown . the airlift portfolio management team has the requisite authority to address these questions and influence budget decisions , but greater attention must be paid to all facets of the airlift life cycle — from cradle to grave . making sound modernization and retirement decisions is just as important as deciding when and what type of new programs to start . moreover , approaching these decisions from a portfolio perspective rather than on a weapon system by weapon system basis and considering new roles and missions for the air force may help the department strike the right balance for its airlift investments . we are making five recommendations to help improve dod's management of strategic and tactical airlift assets . we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the portfolio management team , consisting of u.s. transportation command and the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics , to provide more comprehensive advice to senior leaders on the full range of airlift investment decisions , including new program starts , modernization efforts , and retirement decisions .