aoc has agreed to do this update . mr. chairman , this completes our prepared statement . we would be happy to answer questions that you or other subcommittee members may have . for further information about this testimony , please contact bernard ungar at ( 202 ) 512-4232 or terrell dorn at ( 202 ) 512-6923 . other key contributors to this testimony include shirley abel , maria edelstein , elizabeth eisenstadt , brett fallavolitta , jeanette franzel , jackie hamilton , bradley james , scott riback , and kris trueblood . construction management contractor for the actual completion dates . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . developing and implementing risk mitigation plans . in the course of monitoring the cvc project , we have identified a number of risks and uncertainties that could have significant adverse effects on the project's schedule and costs . some of these risks , such as underground obstructions and unforeseen conditions , have already materialized and have had the anticipated adverse effects . we believe the project continues to face risks and uncertainties , such as unforeseen conditions associated with the project's remaining tunnels and other work , scope gaps or other problems associated with the segmentation of the project between two major contractors , and shortages in the supply of stone and skilled stone workers . although we have recommended that aoc develop and implement risk mitigation plans for these types of risks and uncertainties , aoc has not yet done so . our update will include a review of activity durations . aggressive monitoring and managing contractors' adherence to the schedule , including documenting and addressing the causes of delays , and reporting accurately to congress on the status of the project's schedule . we noted in our may 17 testimony that neither aoc nor its construction management contractor had previously ( 1 ) adhered to contract provisions calling for monthly progress review meetings and schedule updates and revisions , ( 2 ) systematically tracked and documented delays and their causes as they occurred or apportioned their time and costs to the appropriate parties on an ongoing basis , and ( 3 ) always accurately reported on the status of the project's schedule . aoc and the construction management contractor have been working with the schedule consultant to develop a new , systematic process for tracking , analyzing , and documenting schedule progress and delays , addressing schedule issues , approving proposed schedule changes , and reporting on the schedule's status . on june 7 , aoc , the construction management contractor , the sequence 2 contractor , and the schedule consultant conducted the first monthly schedule status review session using the newly developed approach . if effectively implemented and sustained , we believe that this new approach should generally resolve the schedule management concerns we previously raised , although it is not yet clear how delays will be handled on an ongoing basis .