( see fig . treasury's cash balances also fluctuate depending on the time of year , with mid - month increases that are particularly large in january , march , april , june , september , and december . treasury receives major corporate or nonwithheld individual estimated tax payments , or both , in these months , which significantly increases treasury's daily operating cash balance . increases are highest in april , when treasury receives and processes the prior year's individual income tax liability settlements and the first estimated payments of the current tax year from individuals and calendar year corporations . large payments for programs such as medicare , social security , federal retirement , and veterans' compensation frequently occur during the first 3 days of each month , significantly lowering treasury's daily operating cash balance at the beginning of each month . one quarter of fiscal year 2006 outlays were paid in the first 3 days of the month . like the tax deposit schedule , the majority of the payment dates for these large benefit programs are statutory , which limits treasury's flexibility in cash management . in fiscal year 2006 , treasury's average daily operating cash balance was $26.4 billion , an $8.5 billion increase from fiscal year 2003 . ( see table 1. ) swings in daily cash balances have also grown over time . ( see table 13. ) as discussed earlier in this report , collateral acceptable in the repo pilot program is restricted to treasury securities . table 14 shows federal reserve data on the relative use of different collateral types pledged for the tt&l and tio programs . the repo pilot only accepts treasury securities . according to the federal reserve , mortgage - backed securities make up 60 percent of the collateral depositary institutions pledged for tt&l funds . in the tio program , commercial loans make up half of the collateral depositary institutions pledged to secure treasury funds . ( see table 14. ) forty percent or less of the collateral pledged in the tt&l and tio programs is made up of acceptable collateral types other than mortgage - backed securities and commercial loans . to address capacity limits in its operating cash balance , treasury added the sdi program in 1982 . this provides treasury additional tt&l capacity when operating cash balances are unusually high . while collateral used to secure treasury's cash in regular tt&l accounts must be held by a federal reserve bank ( frb ) or a treasury - authorized frb - designated custodian , in an sdi , the depositary institution may use collateral retained on its premises in what is called an off - premises collateral arrangement . acceptable collateral in the sdi program includes student loans , commercial loans , and one - to - four family mortgages , the last of which is only accepted in the sdi program . sdi balances earn the same rate of return as tt&l balances and may be withdrawn at any time by treasury . since 2002 , the number and dollar amount of sdis have decreased , in part because of the establishment of the tio program in 2003 . ( see fig .