premiums . fha collects both an up - front premium ( paid at loan origination ) and annual premiums ( paid in monthly installments ) from all borrowers . pmis generally charge either premiums paid in monthly installments or a single premium ( one payment at loan origination that fully pays for the insurance policy ) . minimum down payment . to meet the requirements of the enterprises , pmi - insured loans generally have higher down payments than those insured by fha . one pmi representative told us that a small portion of pmis' insured loans have a down payment of less than 5 percent . in contrast , more than 70 percent of the loans fha insured in 2012 had a down payment of less than 5 percent . borrower qualifications . pmis generally require their borrowers to have higher credit scores and lower debt service - to - income ratios than does fha . recoveries . fha generally receives significant recoveries on the sale of foreclosed properties . according to officials from one pmi , it is generally not in a pmi's best interest to take possession of foreclosed properties . instead , pmis usually pay their coverage percentage multiplied by the sum of the unpaid loan balance and allowable foreclosure related expenses . fha and pmis also have different operational goals and market roles . most pmis are publicly traded companies or subsidiaries of such companies , which have a responsibility to provide a return on investment to their shareholders . fha's statutory operational goals are to minimize the default risk to the fund and homeowners and provide mortgage insurance to traditionally underserved borrowers , which fha defines as including first - time homebuyers , minorities , low - income families , and residents of underserved communities . fha traditionally has played a particularly large role among such borrowers . fha generally is thought to promote stability in the market by ensuring the availability of mortgage credit in areas that may be underserved by the private sector or experiencing economic downturns . by expanding its presence when the private market contracts , fha plays a countercyclical role in the mortgage market . fha typically does not restrict its business or change the terms under which it provides mortgage insurance in economically distressed geographic locations . fha must ensure that any changes to the terms and conditions for mortgage insurance comply with fair lending laws and its obligation to affirmatively further fair housing . however , pmis may change the conditions under which they will provide new insurance in a geographic area to reflect the increased risk of losses in an area experiencing economic hardship . for example , in previous work we found that by tightening the terms of the insurance they would provide , pmis may have decreased their share of the market in economically stressed regions of the country during regional economic downturns in the late 1980s . consistent with its countercyclical role , fha's market share expanded during the recent mortgage crisis . according to hud's u.s. housing market conditions , fha's share of the market for home purchase mortgages ( in terms of loan originations ) grew sharply , rising from approximately 4.5 percent in 2006 to approximately 26.1 percent in 2012 .