we then determined which recommendations were implemented . we also searched the gao engagement reporting system to identify our prior recommendations for executive action and open matters for congressional consideration . to identify limitations and assess data reliability , we reviewed irs data and documentation , interviewed irs officials about computer systems and data limitations , and compared those results to our data reliability standards . we interviewed treasury inspector general for tax administration staff who worked on past reports relevant to our work to identify data sources and better interpret irs's data . we consider the data presented in this report to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we conducted this performance audit from february 2014 through december 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . executive steering committee in place to comprehensively evaluate upcoming events and legislation that impacts filing season looking holistically at people , process and technology for filing season 2015 . significant external partner 3 . irs risk patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) risk register wage and investment ( w&i ) resources diverted from working paper inventories due to ppaca phone traffic if ppaca - related increase in phone traffic occurs , then w&i will have to divert resources from working paper inventories to manning the telephone lines , resulting in reduced levels of customer service decreased customer and employee satisfaction , and increased costs . research organizations to determine the optimal balance of resources to provide customer service . adjust the compliance work 4 . not specific – monitoring oversight provided by opci . irs risk description if service delivery options are not evaluated and adjusted to maximize return on diminishing resources then mission creep and scope expansion may impact ability to achieve core mission . not specific — plan to move some audit starts later in the year to reduce the impact of mail . new ppaca systems are being engineered to allow opportunities to change thresholds / work level receipts . not specific – systems 6 . w&i service delivery approach to evaluate services to ensure delivery of core service and to drive service to most efficient delivery method . evaluate trade - off analysis and what to “stop doing.” filing season 2015 approach is under development . irs risk description if late or retroactive ppaca legislation occurs and shortens the planning process and / or results in rework , or if additional presidential executive orders are issued to delay or alter original enacted legislation , then late changes to requirements and a delay to the filing season could result in decreased public confidence , decreased customer service and customer satisfaction , diminishing chances for successful implementation and introducing a reputational risk . analysis tracking and implementation services representative who attends regular meetings to determine the impact of new or expiring legislation . ppaca irs counsel resources to support decision making . staff to support future discussion 4 . a ppaca dedicated staff 4 .