( see app . ii for details on the mfo work force. ) retired military personnel are often hired for their familiarity with military weapons and organizations , while state personnel are often hired for their diplomatic skills and experience in the region . all members need to become proficient in navigation , map reading , and driving in the sinai , according to an mfo official . the mfo director general must be a u.s. citizen that is nominated by the state department and appointed by the parties for a 4-year renewable term . the director general appoints the force commander for a 3-year term that can also be renewed . the force commander cannot be of the same nationality as the director general . mfo's other civilian employees are generally hired on 2-year contracts that can be renewed at the director general's discretion . in a 1995 report , we reported that the parties to the treaty and the u.s. government viewed the mfo as effective in helping maintain peace and in reducing certain costs . however , we found that state needed to provide greater oversight due to a lack of assurance regarding the adequacy of internal controls . the report noted that , unlike other international organizations , the mfo does not have a formal board of directors or independent audit committee to oversee audits . our recommendations in 1995 included that state take steps to improve its oversight by examining mfo annual financial statements for discrepancies and having mfo's external auditor periodically perform a separate audit of mfo internal controls that state was to review . state has implemented our recommendations except for examining mfo's financial statements for discrepancies . state has developed but not completely fulfilled its operational and financial oversight responsibilities described in its guidelines for overseeing the mfo . these oversight responsibilities included evaluating mfo financial practices , conducting oversight visits of mfo operations , and recruiting staff for the civilian observers' unit . we could not determine the full extent of the department's compliance with its guidelines because it does not have sufficient documentation to describe the quality and range of its efforts . the office of regional affairs within state's bureau of near eastern affairs ( nea ) is the single u.s. focal point for all mfo - united states government interaction and oversight . nea's guidelines called for state officials to review the external auditors' reports and evaluate mfo financial practices . while reviews of the auditors' reports were performed , the staff did not possess the accounting expertise to evaluate mfo financial practices and did not do so . nea is exploring options for obtaining the necessary expertise ; however , it has not finalized its approach for redressing this issue . according to the guidelines , oversight is also informally conducted through the transfer of u.s. government personnel to key mfo positions , including a u.s. civilian observer unit . while state has successfully recruited many civilian observers , it has had difficulty in consistently recruiting candidates with strong leadership capabilities for the chief position .