ยง 3501 note . occurring between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. eastern time , monday through friday . about 90 percent of these transactions were initiated by the clearinghouses . daily reports of system performance that were generated by the system showed that the average response time for 99 percent of the transactions was less than 3 seconds during the first 6 months of 2012 . appendix ii provides our detailed analysis of the system's transaction volumes and response times from january 2010 through june 2012 . users of the system told us that since cms completed hardware and software improvements in spring 2011 , they have been satisfied with its operational status . they stated that they are not currently experiencing operational or communication issues . records of contacts with cms's help desk regarding the operational status of hets show that the number of calls by users declined from an average of 133 calls per week during the first quarter of 2011 to an average of 64 per week during the second quarter of 2012 . the users also stated that health care insurers in the commercial sector conduct electronic eligibility verifications in a manner similar to that of cms . they told us that , based on their experiences with using those insurers' systems , hets provides faster response times as well as more complete information and reliable service than the other beneficiary eligibility verification systems they use . cms's efforts to correct operational problems experienced with hets in 2010 and early 2011 led to improved performance and overall user satisfaction with the system . to ensure that the agency is able to maintain performance that satisfies users and meets goals for response and system availability times , hets program officials have taken steps to provide ongoing support for users through help desk procedures , system status notifications , and management of contractors based on incentive awards for performance that exceeds contractual requirements . additionally , these officials have begun to plan for improvements and enhancements to the system in efforts to position themselves to meet future demands on the system as they projected transaction volume to increase at a rate of about 40 percent a year . among other improvements , the officials described plans to redesign the system and upgrade hardware , and to establish service level agreements with hets users . cms has taken various steps to improve the operational status of hets and to ensure user satisfaction with its performance . with regard to ensuring the availability of the system , cms notifies users of the status of operations on a daily basis and whenever a change in status occurs . for example , cms contractors perform daily health checks each morning to determine the status of hets . if system performance or availability issues are identified , help desk contractors post messages to that effect on the system website and a trouble ticket is opened . the appropriate staff is assigned to troubleshoot and resolve the issues . additionally , when users have complaints or issues related to the system's operations , they are instructed to contact the help desk .