semiconductors . however , they also said that u.s. manufacturing in this area has declined ( although some plants are located here ) and that the united states does not have a strategy to assure u.s. leadership in the semiconductor industry . nano - based concrete: concrete is the most heavily used construction material in the world — with about 5-billion cubic yards annually produced worldwide — and demand for it is expected to increase to meet the infrastructure needs of a growing global population . nanomaterials can enhance the performance of the concrete used to construct this infrastructure . these materials might potentially result in roads , bridges , buildings , and structures that are more easily built , longer - lasting , and better - functioning than those that currently exist . experts offered differing views on u.s. global competitiveness in the commercialization and use of nanomaterials in concrete . a key forum participant said that while cement for domestic use is produced in the united states , today's dominant companies — which are spearheading development of new technologies — are headquartered elsewhere ( although this industry was previously dominated by the united states ) . additionally , some experts said that other countries are spending more resources than the united states to promote commercialization ; for example , one expert said that china established a national technology center to improve its competitiveness and domestic production of high - value , nano - based construction products . on the positive side , chemical admixtures are one means to introduce nano - materials into concrete — and the united states has a 15% market share of chemical sales , worldwide . according to forum participants and experts interviewed , challenges to u.s. competitiveness in nanomanufacturing include u.s. funding gaps , significant global competition , and lack of a u.s. vision for nanomanufacturing , among others . participants said that in the united states , government often funds research or the initial stages of development , whereas industry typically invests in the final stages . as a result , u.s. innovators may find it difficult to obtain either public funding or private investment during the middle stages of innovation . for nano - innovators , this support gap can characterize the middle stages of both ( 1 ) efforts to develop a new technology or product , and / or ( 2 ) efforts to develop a new manufacturing process . thus , u.s. innovators may encounter two support gaps , which participants termed: the valley of death ( the lack of funding or investment for the middle stages of developing a technology or product ) , and the missing middle ( a similar lack of adequate support for the middle stages of developing a process or an approach to manufacture the new product at scale ) . the valley of death begins after a new technology or product has been validated in a laboratory environment and continues through testing and demonstration as a prototype in a non - laboratory environment ( but before industry acquires it as a commercial technology or product ) . the missing middle occurs during analogous stages of the manufacturing - innovation process , as illustrated below ( fig.2 ) .