one reported that none had been tested . agencies are required to provide training on security awareness for agency personnel and on security responsibilities for information security personnel . our studies of best practices at leading organizations have shown that such organizations took steps to ensure that personnel involved in various aspects of their information security programs had the skills and knowledge they needed . they also recognized that staff expertise had to be frequently updated to keep abreast of ongoing changes in threats , vulnerabilities , software , security techniques , and security monitoring tools . however , our past information security reviews at individual agencies have shown that they have not provided adequate computer security training to their employees , including contractor staff . among the performance measures for these requirements , omb mandated that agencies report the number and percentage of employees — including contractors — who received security training during fiscal years 2001 and 2002 , and the number of employees with significant security responsibilities who received specialized training . our analyses showed that 16 agencies reported that they provided security training to 50 percent or more of their employees and contractors for fiscal year 2002 , with 9 reporting 90 percent or more . of the remaining 8 agencies , 4 reported that such training was provided for less than half of their employees / contractors , 1 reported that none were provided with this training , and 3 provided insufficient data for this measure . however , six igs specifically reported problems with the completeness of their agencies' system inventories . for specialized training for employees with significant security responsibilities , some progress was indicated , but additional training is needed . as indicated in figure 7 , our analyses showed that 12 agencies reported that 50 percent or more of their employees with significant security responsibilities had received specialized training for fiscal year 2002 , with 5 reporting 90 percent or more . of the remaining 12 agencies , 9 reported that less than half of such employees received specialized training , 1 reported that none had received such training , and 2 provided insufficient data for this measure . agencies are required to implement procedures for detecting , reporting , and responding to security incidents . although even strong controls may not block all intrusions and misuse , organizations can reduce the risks associated with such events if they promptly take steps to detect intrusions and misuse before significant damage can be done . in addition , accounting for and analyzing security problems and incidents are effective ways for an organization to gain a better understanding of threats to its information and of the cost of its security - related problems . such analyses can also pinpoint vulnerabilities that need to be addressed to help ensure that they will not be exploited again . in this regard , problem and incident reports can provide valuable input for risk assessments , help in prioritizing security improvement efforts , and be used to illustrate risks and related trends in reports to senior management . fisma also requires nist to develop , in conjunction with the department of defense , including the national security agency , guidelines for identifying an information system as a national security system .