v ) . we requested comments from the secretary of defense or his designee on a draft of this report . we received comments from the director , dod purchase card joint program management office dated september 16 , 2002 , and from the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) dated september 23 , 2002 . we reprinted those comments in appendix vi and appendix vii of this report . we conducted our audit work from november 2001 through july 2002 in accordance with u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards , and we performed our investigative work in accordance with standards prescribed by the president's council on integrity and efficiency . the navy's purchase card program is part of the governmentwide commercial purchase card program established to simplify federal agency acquisition processes by providing a low - cost , efficient vehicle for obtaining goods and services directly from vendors . dod has mandated the use of the purchase card for all purchases at or below $2,500 and has authorized the use of the card to pay for specified larger purchases . it would also serve as an important internal control feature that clearly identified the consequences associated with improper and abusive purchase card use and would serve as a deterrent to such abuse . further , the schedule of disciplinary actions could include a range of actions that would be appropriate for various types of purchase card misuse . commanders and supervisors would still maintain their discretion to select the specific disciplinary action , if any , depending on the circumstances of individual cases . dod has seen significant growth in the program since its inception and estimated that in fiscal year 2001 about 95 percent of its transactions of $2,500 or less were made by purchase card . the purpose of the program is to simplify the process of making small purchases . it allows cardholders to make micropurchases of $2,500 or less and pay for training of $25,000 or less without having to execute a contract . the government purchase card can also be used for larger transactions , but only under a contract . for larger transactions , the card is referred to as a “payment card” because it pays for an acquisition made under a legally executed contract . the navy uses a combination of governmentwide , dod , and navy guidance as the policy and procedural foundation for its purchase card program . the navy purchase card program operates under a governmentwide general services administration purchase card contract , as do the purchase card programs of all federal agencies . in addition , government acquisition laws and regulations such as the federal acquisition regulation provide overall governmentwide guidance . dod and the navy have issued clarifying guidance to these regulations . the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics — in cooperation with the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) — has overall responsibility for dod's purchase card program . the dod purchase card joint program management office , in the office of the assistant secretary of the army for acquisitions logistics and technology , is responsible for overseeing dod's program .