these issues have been resolved with both foreign governments . due to the terrorist threat level in the areas where these reactors are located , nnsa has decided to forgo making security upgrades because it would take too long to design and install new security systems . instead , nnsa is planning to remove the heu fuel that is at these two reactors and return it to its country of origin this year . nnsa coordinates with the iaea to identify research reactors in need of security upgrades that could be included in the grrs program . fourteen of the 19 research reactors that received nnsa - funded security upgrades were previously reviewed by an iaea team , which recommended security improvements . according to iaea officials , if a nation is unable to make the recommended security improvements itself , iaea will recommend that it seek assistance from the grrs program . in addition , nnsa works with iaea to ensure security upgrades are complementary when both organizations are providing assistance at the same research reactor . for example , at one reactor we visited , nnsa upgraded the reactor's central alarm station and installed new intrusion sensors and cameras . at the same facility , iaea is planning to install an x - ray machine and metal detector at the reactor's entrance to monitor personnel and packages entering and leaving the facility . in addition , nnsa officials implementing efforts to secure research reactors interact regularly with iaea officials by holding quarterly coordination meetings . furthermore , nnsa makes an annual financial pledge of between $1.6 and $1.9 million to iaea's nuclear security fund , which supports iaea's office of nuclear security activities , such as security reviews of international research reactors and other nuclear facilities . further cooperation is needed to sustain nnsa - funded upgrades and implement security procedures provided for in iaea guidelines . while nnsa is planning to complete all physical protection upgrades at grrs reactors by the end of 2010 , grrs officials are still concerned about the continued effectiveness of upgrades and any shortcomings related to security procedures and planning . consequently , nnsa has recently begun working with iaea's office of nuclear security to establish a sustainability program . the purpose of the sustainability program is to help ensure that nnsa - funded security upgrades are properly maintained and to help research reactor operators implement security procedures and planning . to date , nnsa has provided iaea with $550,000 and paid for a security expert from pacific northwest national laboratory to administer the sustainability program . according to the 2007 national intelligence estimate on the terrorist threat to u.s . homeland security , al - qaeda continues to seek materials for nuclear and radiological weapons and would not hesitate to use them . furthermore , the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) , which provides guidelines for the safety and physical security of civilian nuclear reactors including research reactors , has determined that the threat of nuclear terrorism remains undiminished and has concluded that the consequences of a malicious act involving a nuclear explosive device would be catastrophic .