lack of guidance . our august 2007 report also noted that resource managers were constrained by limited guidance about whether or how to address climate change and , therefore , were uncertain about what actions , if any , they should take . in general , resource managers from all of the agencies said that they needed specific guidance to incorporate climate change into their management actions and planning efforts . for example , officials from several federal land and water resource management agencies said that guidance would help resolve differences in their agencies about how to interpret broad resource management authorities with respect to climate change and give them an imperative to take action . while these agencies have started to issue guidance to resource managers , this example shows how a lack of guidance can limit efforts to adapt . lack of site - specific information . our report also demonstrated that resource managers did not have sufficient site - specific information to plan for and manage the effects of climate change on the federal resources they oversee . in particular , the managers lacked computational models for local projections of expected changes . for example , at that time , officials at the florida keys national marine sanctuary said that they lacked adequate modeling and scientific information to enable managers to predict change on a small scale , such as that occurring within the sanctuary . without such models , most of the managers' options for dealing with climate change were limited to reacting to already - observed effects on their units , making it difficult to plan for future changes . furthermore , these resource managers generally lacked detailed inventories and monitoring systems to provide them with an adequate baseline understanding of the plant and animal species that existed on the resources they manage . without such information , it is difficult to determine whether observed changes are within the normal range of variability . uncertainties in making decisions based on projected future conditions . a recent report by the national research council ( nrc ) shows how officials are struggling to make decisions based on future climate scenarios instead of past climate conditions . according to the report , requested by epa and noaa , government agencies , private organizations , and individuals whose futures will be affected by climate change are unprepared both conceptually and practically for meeting the challenges and opportunities it presents . many of their usual practices and decision rules ( for building bridges , implementing zoning rules , using private motor vehicles , and so on ) assume a stationary climate — a continuation of past climate conditions , including similar patterns of variation and the same probabilities of extreme events . according to the nrc , that assumption , fundamental to the ways people and organizations make their choices , is no longer valid . climate change will create a novel and dynamic decision environment .