notification of make decisions . according to the federal acquisition regulation , the prime contractor is responsible for managing contract performance , including planning , placing , and administering subcontracts as necessary to ensure the lowest overall cost and technical risk to the government . when “make - or - buy programs” are required , the government may reserve the right to review and agree on the contractor's make - or - buy program when necessary to ensure negotiation of reasonable contract prices , among other things . we recommended that the coast guard be notified of make decisions over $5 million in order to facilitate controlling costs through competition . we suggested the $5 million threshold because lockheed martin , one of the major subcontractors , considers that amount to be the threshold for considering its suppliers major . the coast guard has asked the system integrator , on a voluntary basis , to provide notification one week in advance of a make decision of $10 million or more based on the criteria in the federal acquisition regulation . according to coast guard officials , to date , no make decision has exceeded $10 million since the request was made . the details implementing this recommendation have not yet been worked out , such as specifically who in the coast guard will monitor the subcontractors' make decisions to ensure that the voluntary agreement is complied with . our work to date suggests the costly and important deepwater program will need constant monitoring and management attention to successfully accomplish its goals . in this respect , we identified three points that should be kept in mind in considering how to proceed with the program . first , the need to replace or upgrade deteriorating legacy assets is considerable . while the coast guard lacks measures that clearly demonstrate how this deterioration affects its ability to perform deepwater - related missions , it is clear that the deepwater legacy assets are insufficient for the task . second , although the need to replace and upgrade assets is strong , there still are major risks in the coast guard's acquisition approach . the cost increases and schedule slippages that have already occurred are warning signs . we will continue to work with the coast guard to determine how best to manage these risks so that the deepwater missions can be accomplished in the most cost - effective way . third , there are signs that as the deepwater program moves ahead , the coast guard will continue to report more problems with sustaining existing assets , together with the attendant need for additional infusions of funding to deal with them . some of these problems , such as those on the 378-foot cutters , are included in the compendium the coast guard uses to set sustainment priorities and plan budgets , but have not been funded because they pertain to assets that are among the first to be replaced . however , projects to address these problems are nevertheless likely to be needed . we will continue to work with the coast guard to determine if there is a more systematic and comprehensive approach to keeping the congress abreast of the potential bill for sustaining these assets .