iii ) . according to ocie officials , recommendation follow - up is primarily the responsibility of the examination team , under the supervision of the assistant director assigned to the inspection . inspection follow - up begins with evaluating written responses by sros to the inspection report and obtaining documentation of sro efforts to address the recommendations , and can continue for several years , depending on the complexity of the recommendation . ocie recommended that the sro develop such procedures . ocie also may follow up on inspection recommendations during a subsequent inspection of the sro . ocie officials said that in the event the sro does not take steps to address a recommendation that staff believe is critical , they can elevate the matter to ocie management or the commission , although they said that this happens infrequently . sros are responsible for the surveillance of the trading activity on their markets . market transactions take place on electronic or floor - based platforms . sros employ electronic surveillance systems to monitor market participants' compliance with sro rules and federal securities laws . electronic surveillance systems are programmed to review trading and other data for aberrational trading patterns or scenarios within defined parameters . also , sros review trading as a result of complaints from the public , members , and member firms and as a result of required notifications , such as those concerning offerings . one of the key surveillance systems employed by sros monitors the markets for insider trading . however , this review does not target sro enforcement - related databases , which contain investigative and disciplinary information that sros maintain and upon which other regulators rely . these officials said that an examination manual is not necessary to ensure consistency among sro inspections because the sro inspection group is a relatively small group within ocie , and all of the staff are centralized in headquarters . on the other hand , they said that because ocie's inspection program for investment companies , investment advisers , and broker - dealers has hundreds of examiners across sec headquarters and its regional offices who are responsible for examining thousands of firms , ocie has developed detailed inspection manuals to ensure consistency across examinations of these firms . similarly , ocie officials said that they have developed guidelines for sro examiners conducting oversight inspections of nasd's district offices because ocie relies on examination staff in the sec regional offices to assist them in conducting these inspections . in contrast to ocie , federal banking regulators , such as the federal reserve and occ , have developed written guidance for the examination of large banks — also highly complex and diverse institutions — that outlines the objectives of the program and describes the processes and functional approaches used to meet those objectives . by not establishing written guidance for conducting inspections of sro enforcement and other regulatory programs , ocie may be limiting its ability to ensure that its inspection processes and products are subject to basic quality controls in such areas as examination planning , data collection , and report review .