other programs are discussed in an appendix to the report . section 202 is the only federal housing program that targets all of its rental units to very low income elderly households . because these households often have difficulty affording market rents , program funding is directed to localities based in part on their proportions of elderly renter households that have a housing affordability problem . section 202 insulates tenants in housing units subsidized by the program from increases in housing costs by limiting rents to a fixed percentage of household income . the program is a significant source of new and affordable housing for very low income elderly households . even with the program's exclusive focus on the very low income elderly , section 202 has reached only a small share of eligible households . congress specifically intended the section 202 program to serve very low income elderly households and to expand the supply of affordable housing that can accommodate the special needs of this group . hud takes into account the need for the kind of housing section 202 provides when allocating program funds to the field offices . the criteria for allocating funds to the field offices include , among other things , the total number of very low income elderly renters in the area and the number in this group that pay more than 30 percent of their incomes for rent . a large majority of these elderly households were homeowners . a small share of elderly households , about 19 percent or 5 million , rented their homes ( compared to about 36 percent of nonelderly households ) , and about 3.3 million of these elderly households were renters with very low incomes — that is , 50 percent or less of area median income . the housing act of 1959 ( p.l . 86-372 ) established the section 202 program , which began as a direct loan program that provided below - market interest rate loans to private nonprofit developers , among others , to build rental housing for the elderly and people with disabilities . in 1990 , the cranston - gonzalez national affordable housing act ( p.l . 101-625 ) modified section 202 by converting it from a direct loan program to a capital advance program . in its current form , section 202 provides capital advances — effectively grants — to private nonprofit organizations ( usually referred to as sponsors or owners ) to pay for the costs of developing elderly rental housing . as long as rents on the units remain within the program's guidelines for at least 40 years , the sponsor does not have to pay back the capital advance . hud calculates capital advances in accordance with development cost limits that it determines annually , and hud's policy is that these limits should cover the reasonable and necessary costs of developing a project of modest design that complies with hud's project design and cost standards as well as meets applicable state and local housing and building codes . to be eligible to receive section 202 housing assistance , households must have very low income and one member who is at least 62 years old . section 202 tenants generally pay 30 percent of their income for rent .