opic . opic measures the number of small business projects that result from its outreach through a small business center . opic's 2003-2008 strategic goals include supporting these clients and reducing to 60 days the time it takes to process their applications for opic assistance . opic officials stated that the center targets small businesses with annual revenues of less than $35 million and that since the center's establishment in 2002 , the share of opic transactions involving such companies increased from 67 percent in 2002 to 80 percent in 2005 . department of state . state does not presently collect data on small and medium - sized businesses' involvement in trade promotion activities . however , according to a state department official who works with small businesses , the agency has recently initiated a system to track commercial “success stories.” the official said the system , which state anticipates will be operational by june 2006 , will track requests for help with commercial transactions and will also include data on the requesting companies — such as their number of employees and annual sales — that will enable state to identify small - and medium - sized businesses . finally , although 2006 tpcc agency goals include increasing the number of small and medium - sized businesses that use member agency programs , the tpcc does not collect information from member agencies on these businesses' participation in agency programs and activities , according to tpcc officials . moreover , the national export strategies provide anecdotal , rather than systematic , reporting on small and medium - sized business participation in trade promotion activities . although the national export strategies describe activities such as a cooperative agreement between sba and opic , they provide no comprehensive summary of small and medium - sized business participation in all member agency activities . further , the strategies do not assess agency reporting on small and medium - sized enterprise participation during the current year or identify trends in such participation . this makes it difficult to assess progress or trends in participation across agencies . our review of the tpcc's efforts shows it has achieved some important progress . for example , the tpcc has pursued a number of initiatives to improve agency coordination of trade promotion activities . since our most recent report in 2002 , the tpcc has completed and implemented a number of changes as a result of its private sector outreach efforts , including joint training and other activities that leverage resources of other tpcc member agencies . although coordination challenges continue , there appears to be more discussion among tpcc member agencies and a higher level of awareness of the activities of the other agencies . this is a noteworthy improvement over the situation that existed in the early 1990s , when gao began to evaluate the federal government's trade promotion efforts . despite this progress , the tpcc continues to face challenges in its ability to achieve other aspects of its mission of coordinating federal export promotion activities . for example , the tpcc's annual export strategies do not review or assess agency goals or activities .