education did not have comments . hhs concurred with our recommendations and outlined steps it is taking to implement them . hhs stated that it is committed to continuing to support states in providing high quality child welfare services and to engaging in monitoring activities that hold the states accountable both for compliance with the law and for improved outcomes for children and families . in response to our recommendation to provide guidance on how states could calculate savings from the changes to the federal adoption assistance income eligibility criteria , hhs said the department will gather examples of how savings are being calculated and documented by some states and develop a document to provide as technical assistance to other states . hhs further stated that the department's implementation of this provision to date has been driven by a desire to avoid imposing an undue administrative burden on states and the challenge of specifying a methodology for calculating savings that would work in all state settings . hhs said that state officials have signed assurances as part of their title iv - e plan submissions to calculate and reinvest these savings . hhs also stated that independent auditors are responsible for identifying an appropriate finding in single audit reports for any states that have not taken steps to calculate and account for these savings . hhs said it will work to assure that all needed corrective actions are taken to resolve any such finding in a state's single audit . the portfolio is to contain key documents such as the birth certificate , social security card , immunization records , education records , additional health records , and an “almost 18 ? ” checklist that lists the 14 required items youth should receive . texas child welfare agency policy also requires group decision - making meetings called circles of support to enable youth age 16 or older to develop a transition plan and to connect with supportive and caring adults who can help the youth after they leave foster care . hhs data show that 19 states have approved plan amendments to implement the option to extend title iv - e assistance to eligible youth ages 18 to 21 . of these states , 9 had previously extended the age for foster care with other funding sources , at least under limited circumstances . in addition to providing information on specific practices , states reported that the legislative and regulatory actions they took , if any , to implement the selected fostering connections act provisions varied . for each of the selected provisions in our review , some states reported making changes to their laws and regulations to implement the provision , while others reported that their state laws and regulations were already consistent with the act . for example , three of the four states we visited reported that they enacted or revised laws or regulations to implement some of the family connections provisions . state officials indicated that these laws or regulations largely made minor changes to existing child welfare policy in this area .