( see app . ii for agency organization charts. ) under the current organization , directors of these business units ( federal lands highway ; infrastructure ; operations ; planning and environment ; policy ; research , development , and technology ; and safety ) work collaboratively to provide leadership for the program's activities ( see table 1 ) . the plan was also to be developed with comments from external stakeholders . in response to this requirement , fhwa contributed to the development of a research , development , and technology strategic plan for all of dot . dot's plan identifies formal research , development , and technology strategies to support each of dot's strategic goals . the plan is not focused solely on surface transportation research but applies to all modes , including examples of research activities undertaken by fhwa in support of the agency's strategic goals . congress also required that a group established by the national research council review dot's plan , and this has taken place for several years . separately , in 1998 fhwa developed a 10-year strategic plan for the agency as a whole , stating that research is a strategy for achieving the plan's objectives . the research , development , and technology business unit has developed performance plans that support some of fhwa's research efforts . funding mechanisms for this program's activities have varied in recent years . prior to fiscal year 1992 , they were wholly funded from fhwa's administrative and operating funds . from fiscal years 1992 through 1997 , the program was supported by a mix of operating funds and funds made available for specific types of research . for fiscal years 1998 through 2003 , the transportation equity act for the 21st century authorized funding for the following seven research activities: surface transportation research , technology deployment , training and education , intelligent transportation systems , intelligent transportation systems deployment , university transportation centers , and the bureau of transportation statistics . since 1998 , fhwa has generally not used administrative funds for research activities . a portion of the funds for the research and technology program are designated for or directed to particular research programs and recipients , either in the authorization or appropriations legislation or in committee reports . although fhwa technical staff set priorities for the research and technology program , its activities are carried out through a combination of federal employees , private contractors and grantees , and university researchers . during the past decade , the use of contract employees instead of federal employees to conduct research has increased . because the program's authorizing legislation is scheduled to expire in fiscal year 2003 , to continue it congress will have to reauthorize the program and determine how it will be funded . since 1998 , individual business units within fhwa have directed and carried out the activities of fhwa's research and technology program that fall under the surface transportation research and technology deployment areas . the program's management is complex because these business units are individually responsible , among other things , for identifying research needs , developing strategies to address transportation problems , and managing research and technology activities that support the agency's strategic goals .