we disagree . as discussed in our draft report , adjusters selected claims to reinspect based upon judgmental criteria , not on a random sample . further , fema only required reinspection when there were more than 400 claims per flood event for a particular wyo company . because reinspections are conducted principally on open claims files to document the appropriateness of the original claims adjuster's work , the lack of a statistically representative sample not only precludes fema from projecting the results of these reinspections to determine the overall accuracy of claims , it also limits fema's ability to continuously assess the overall performance of insurance companies and adjusters in fulfilling their nfip responsibilities . fema also noted that claims operational reviews are designed to provide feedback on claims settlements and ascertain compliance by wyo companies . the claims operational reviews that fema cited , while an important oversight mechanism , do not allow for continuous feedback concerning the overall insurance company performance . we also continue to reaffirm our three recommendations for which fema disagreed in its comments on our draft report . first , with respect to our recommendations that fema develop financial reports using the transaction - level information that wyo companies currently submit for statistical purposes , fema stated that implementing our recommendation would be onerous and burdensome because of the number of transactions involved . we subsequently adjusted our recommendation to have nfip augment its policies to require the bsa to develop procedures to analyze financial reports in relation to the transaction - level information that wyo companies submit for statistical purposes . such a procedure would help compensate for the risks introduced by the current approach of entering summary - level information to its financial reporting system . because wyo companies already submit transaction - level data on claims losses paid and premiums written and fema uses this information for statistical purposes , using these transaction - level financial data to increase the reliability of fema's financial reporting should impose minimal additional burden . also , with respect to fema's nonconcurrence with our recommendation to verify and validate wyo - reported financial information , fema maintained that the form and structure of the transaction - level detail is audited at the source , including consideration of the relevance , reliability , and accuracy of the transaction - level detail . however , as discussed in our report , during the period of our review , we were not provided any evidence showing that fema obtained any assurances concerning the accuracy or validity of wyo company transaction - level financial data . specifically , fema did not demonstrate that it had mechanisms in place during fiscal years 2005 through 2007 for receiving and reviewing the results of the required biennial financial statement audits of wyo companies , or for tracking completion of these audits . fema was unable to provide evidence of whether all wyo companies had completed biennial audits and had not reviewed the results of these wyo company biennial audits . further , as discussed in our report , fema officials exempted certain wyo companies from the biennial audit requirement after the 2005 hurricane season .