( see fig . 6 for a list of selected reforms. ) among these reforms is to devise additional cost - sharing provisions to make health care costs more transparent to patients . currently , many insured individuals pay relatively little out of pocket for care at the point of delivery because of comprehensive health care coverage — precluding the opportunity to sensitize these patients to the cost of their care . develop a set of national practice standards to help avoid unnecessary care , improve outcomes , and reduce litigation . encourage case management approaches for people with expensive acute and chronic conditions to improve the quality and efficiency of care delivered and avoid inappropriate care . foster the use of information technology to increase consistency , transparency , and accountability in health care . emphasize prevention and wellness care , including nutrition . while social security in its current form will grow from 4.3 percent of gdp today to 6.4 percent in 2080 , medicare's burden on the economy will quintuple — from 2.7 percent to 13.8 percent of the economy — and these projections assume a growth rate for medicare spending that is below historical experience ! as figure 5 shows , unlike social security which grows larger as a share of the economy and then levels off , within this projection period we do not see medicare growth abating . whether or not the president's budget proposals on medicare are adopted , they should serve to raise public awareness of the importance of health care costs to both today's budget and tomorrow's . this could serve to jump start a discussion about appropriate ways to control the major driver of our long - term fiscal outlook — health care spending . as noted , unlike social security , medicare spending growth rates reflect not only a burgeoning beneficiary population , but also the escalation of health care costs at rates well exceeding general rates of inflation . the growth of medical technology has contributed to increases in the number and quality of health care services . moreover , the actual costs of health care consumption are not transparent . consumers are largely insulated by third - party payers from the cost of health care decisions . the health care spending problem is particularly vexing for the federal budget , affecting not only medicare and medicaid but also other important federal health programs , such as for our military personnel and veterans . for example , department of defense health care spending rose from about $12 billion in 1990 to about $30.4 billion in 2004 — in part , to meet additional demand resulting from program eligibility expansions for military retirees , reservists , and the dependents of those two groups and for the increased needs of active duty personnel involved in conflicts in iraq , bosnia , and afghanistan . expenditures by the department of veterans affairs have also grown — from about $12 billion in 1990 to about $26.8 billion in 2004 — as an increasing number of veterans look to federal programs to supply their health care needs .