we agree . although additional oversight of the service appears necessary , would the service have sufficient management flexibility given the fairly broad authority the commission proposes be given to the regulatory body ? how should the regulatory body be structured to preserve its independence from political control and minimize the risk of regulatory capture ? what statutory guidance and constraints should apply to regulatory actions , including due process and recourse to judicial and / or congressional review ? what transparency of financial and performance results is appropriate for the service as a federal establishment and would be necessary for oversight and accountability ? what mechanisms should be established to facilitate and ensure transparency ? should the service comply , either on a voluntary basis or through a statutory requirement , with major securities and exchange commission ( sec ) reporting requirements ? the commission noted that as a public entity , the postal service is wholly owned by the american people , who , as the service's shareholders , are due a regular and full accounting of the fiscal health and challenges facing this vital national institution . the commission stated that the service has a responsibility to the public to be transparent in its financial reporting . we believe that placing workers' compensation benefits on a par with those in the private sector merits careful consideration . as the commission pointed out , a key goal of human capital reform should be to establish an incentive - based culture of excellence . we have reported that leading organizations use their performance management systems to accelerate change , achieve desired organizational results , and facilitate communication throughout the year so that discussions about individual and organizational performance are integrated and ongoing . modern , effective , and credible performance appraisal systems are a key aspect of performance management . the commission concluded that the level of success achieved by the postal service will hinge on its ability to successfully deploy and motivate a talented , capable , nimble workforce of a size appropriate to the future postal needs of the nation and to give its employees a personal stake in the success of the institution's ambitious goals . in this regard , we have reported that the need for results - oriented pay reform is one of the most pressing human capital issues facing the federal government today . successful implementation of results - oriented pay reform , commonly referred to as “pay for performance,” requires modern , reliable , effective , and as appropriate , validated performance management systems . such systems need adequate safeguards , including reasonable transparency and appropriate accountability mechanisms . in fiscal year 1995 , the service implemented a pay - for - performance system for its executives , managers , postmasters , supervisors , and other nonbargaining employees . this system was discontinued in fiscal year 2002 , in part because of concerns that large payouts were made when the service was recording large deficits . the service revised its merit - based pay program for its executives and officers in fiscal year 2002 and revised its merit - based pay program for its postmasters , managers , and supervisors in fiscal year 2004 .