there have already been some indications of such changes . for instance , s.1499 , introduced in july 2005 , would remove any area within kentucky from coverage by the “anti - cherrypicking” provision in the epact . if the bill becomes law , tva would be required to transmit power from another supplier over its transmission lines for use inside the kentucky portion of its service area without being able to similarly expand its service area . the bill was referred to the senate energy and natural resources committee , where it remained as of august 15 , 2006 . our prior reports have indicated that tva's high debt and related interest expense could place it at a disadvantage in continuing to offer competitively priced power if it were to lose its legislative protections from competition . tva's management has also recognized the need to reduce its debt and other financing obligations to increase its flexibility to meet competitive challenges . in july 1997 , tva issued a 10-year business plan with steps necessary to improve its financial position for an era of increasing competition . two key strategic objectives of the plan were ( 1 ) to reduce the cost of power by reducing debt and the corresponding financing costs , and ( 2 ) increase financial flexibility by reducing fixed costs . to help meet these objectives , the plan called for tva to reduce its debt by half over a 10-year period to about $13.2 billion by increasing its electricity rates beginning in 1998 , reducing certain expenses , and limiting capital expenditures . tva did not meet the 1997 debt reduction goal because it used cash intended for debt reduction to cover greater than estimated annual operating costs and capital expenditures . in fiscal year 2000 , tva began entering into alternative financing in the form of lease - leaseback arrangements to obtain a lower cost of capital than it could by selling bonds . tva entered into these arrangements in fiscal years 2000 , 2002 , and 2003 to refinance 24 existing power generators that were designed for use during periods of peak power demand . tva financed and built the generating units and leased them to investors in exchange for cash . it then leased the generators back and is making payments to investors . tva also implemented other alternative financing arrangements that allowed its customers to prepay for power in exchange for discounted rates . for example , in november 2003 , tva entered into an energy prepayment agreement with its largest customer , memphis light , gas , and water division ( mlgw ) . under this agreement , mlgw prepaid tva $1.5 billion for electricity to be delivered over a 15-year period . tva also offered a discounted energy units program in fiscal years 2003 and 2004 , under which tva customers could purchase power , usually in $1 million increments , in return for a discount on a specified quantity of power over a certain period of years . tva did not offer the deu program in 2005 . during our review , tva's management told us they have no current plans to enter into additional alternative financing arrangements .