iii ) . the lack of uniform , baseline regulatory standards for the oversight of rrgs contributed to the concerns of many state regulators , who did not believe the regulatory safeguards and protections built into lrra ( such as requiring rrgs to file annual financial statements with regulators and allowing regulators to file suit if they believe the rrg is financially unsound ) were adequate . only 8 of 42 regulators who responded to our survey question about lrra's regulatory protections indicated that they thought the protections were adequate ( see fig . does your state have staff who are exclusively dedicated to overseeing matters related to captives and / or rrgs domiciled in your state ? no ( skip to q12. ) if you answered “yes” to question 10 , about how many full - time - equivalent ( fte ) staff are currently dedicated to working with captives and rrgs domiciled in your state ? part iii: your role as a host state regulator for rrgs operating in your state but domiciled in another state in part iii ( questions 13 – 24 ) , we are asking about the role of your state as a “host state” regulator . a host state is one in which rrgs operate but are not domiciled . additionally , although insurance companies generally are required to file their financial statements based on statutory accounting principles ( sap ) , captive insurance companies ( a category that in many states includes rrgs ) are generally permitted , and in some cases required , to use generally accepted accounting principles ( gaap ) , the accounting and reporting principles generally used by private - sector ( nongovernmental ) entities . thus , while some rrgs report their financial information using sap , others report using gaap or variations of gaap and sap . however , the use or modification of two different sets of accounting principles can lead to different interpretations of an rrg's financial condition . for example , differences in the gaap or sap treatment of assets and acquisition costs can significantly change the reported levels of total assets , capital , and surplus . because regulators , particularly those in nondomiciliary states , predicate their review and analysis of insurance companies' financial statements on sap reporting , the differing accounting methods that rrgs may use could complicate analyses of their financial condition . for instance , based on whatever accounting basis is filed with them , the different levels of surplus reported under gaap , or sap , or modifications of each , can change radically the ratios naic uses to analyze the financial condition of insurers — undercutting the usefulness of the analyses . similarly , the accounting differences also affect calculations for naic's risk - based capital standards and may produce significantly different results . for example , an rrg could appear to have maintained capital adequacy under gaap but would require regulatory action or control if the calculations were based on sap . differences in the two sets of accounting principles reflect the different purposes for which each was developed and may produce different financial pictures of the same entity .