some of the five countries were in the process of purchasing twvs . collectively , these officials provided information on foreign manufacturers of twvs and foreign twv requirements . because the countries provided us with information on the size and composition of their twv fleets , which some regard as sensitive , we are not identifying the countries that participated in our review by name . to determine how the u.s. arms transfer control regimes may affect such sales to foreign governments , we also reviewed the aeca , export administration act of 1979 , international traffic in arms regulations , dod's security assistance management manual , and related u.s. guidance . to determine how many u.s. twv sales to foreign governments were denied , we interviewed officials from state's directorate of defense trade controls and regional security and arms transfer offices and commerce's bureau of industry and security . we also reviewed available state export licensing data for fiscal years 2008 through 2011 and commerce's data for fiscal years 2007 through 2011 . we conducted this performance audit from october 2011 to september 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . foreign officials from one country said the maintenance of this information is an administrative burden and will be more difficult to manage as their government tries to reduce its workforce in a limited budget environment . foreign officials said that twvs purchased from manufacturers outside of the untied states are not generally encumbered with these same restrictions and administrative burdens , making maintenance of these vehicles easier and cheaper , in some cases . state officials acknowledged these concerns from foreign governments but said these restrictions play an important role in protecting u.s. national security interests . foreign officials reported , however , that the u.s. arms transfer control regimes would not adversely affect their decision to purchase a u.s. vehicle that best meets their governments' requirements in terms of capabilities and cost . foreign officials said that u.s. manufacturers make vehicles that are reliable and highly capable . when their governments have requirements that align with those associated with u.s. manufactured vehicles , foreign officials said that the u.s. arms transfer control regimes would not be a factor in their governments' decisions to purchase the vehicles . foreign officials that we interviewed also said their governments are experienced buyers of u.s. arms and are able to successfully navigate the fms and dcs processes and u.s. end - use restrictions to obtain the military equipment they require . the volume of twvs dod purchased to meet operational requirements in iraq and afghanistan was unique due to specific threats . many of these vehicles are no longer needed and dod's need for new twvs is expected to decline in coming years . further , given the current budgetary environment , dod cannot afford to support the size of its current fleet or buy as many vehicles as it once did . though u.s. manufacturers increased their production to meet those past needs , they will be challenged in responding to the sharp decline in dod's twv requirements in future years .