reporting on progress . army , navy , air force , and marine corps officials told us that they are in the process of developing one - time reports for congress on the depots' investment needs . however , these one - time reports will not provide congress and decision makers with information after their initial release . depot optimization planning will require time , along with sustained management and congressional attention to successfully implement . for example , the navy's shipyard optimization plan estimates that it will be a 20-year effort requiring around $21 billion . however , the other initial steps taken by the services to address the congressional request are not as focused on the long term . for example , army and air force officials told us that their initial plans will likely be “plans to get to a plan” rather than a decades - long proposal like the navy shipyards . our prior work has shown that reporting on progress is a leading results - oriented practice that holds the organization accountable for results and provides information to senior leaders and congress that can help keep an effort on track and responsive to changes . according to service officials , the military services' depot optimization plans will not include all the elements of a results - oriented management approach because there is no requirement that the plans do so . our prior work has found that a results - oriented management approach can help organizations remain operationally effective , efficient , and capable of meeting future requirements . specifically , our work has highlighted the importance of elements such as developing analytically - based goals ; using results - oriented metrics to monitor progress ; fully identifying required resources , risks , and stakeholders ; and regular reporting on progress to making reform efforts more efficient , effective , and accountable . congress directed the services to include some results - oriented elements in their plans , such as an identification of key steps and an initial report to congress . however , including these additional elements — establishing results - oriented metrics ; identifying all necessary resources , stakeholders , and associated risks ; and regular reporting to decision makers and congress — would further enhance the effectiveness of the plans . without a plan that includes all the key elements of a results - oriented management approach , the services risk continued deterioration of the depots and making suboptimal investments that could hinder their ability to efficiently and effectively support readiness . dod has not developed a process to oversee the implementation of the services' depot optimization plans or provide reporting on depot investment effectiveness to dod decision makers and congress . officials with the deputy assistant secretary of defense for materiel readiness stated that their role is to advocate for the service depots within dod , and not to develop depot policies or review service depot investments . specifically , they stated that they are unable to set infrastructure policy and do not have authority to alter service investment decisions . however , as part of an office reorganization during the summer of 2018 , the secretary of defense tasked the assistant secretary of defense for sustainment with developing logistics and maintenance policy .