we disagree . specifically , we note the following: the findings in our report do not rely on assumptions but , instead , are based on the evidence we collected from experts at nrc , doe , inl , snl , dhs , and other sources . this evidence demonstrates that there is uncertainty about some aspects of nrc's security assessment . however , nrc's comments suggest that no such uncertainty exists , even though in some cases nrc used assumptions in its security assessment that it had difficulty defending . for example , nrc officials did not fully consider an alternative attack scenario that could be more damaging if carried out successfully because , according to nrc officials , the supervisor of the staff doing the assessment was an engineer who instructed the staff that such scenarios were unlikely , if not impossible . during discussions on this point , an nrc official acknowledged that if the alternative attack scenario had been fully assessed , nrc's security assessment might have demonstrated more significant consequences . nrc states that we incorrectly assumed that terrorists could use certain tactics in attacking research reactors since there is a lack of intelligence information that terrorists have demonstrated these capabilities . we disagree . the events of september 11 , 2001 , and the threats faced by our armed forces in iraq demonstrate that terrorists are capable of innovating how they conduct attacks . consequently , we believe that , in conducting its security assessment , nrc should have considered a fuller range of threats , including both the threats that have occurred and the possibility of emerging threats . nrc also disagreed with our characterization of ( 1 ) what portion of a reactor could be damaged in a terrorist attack and ( 2 ) the extent of the radiation released from such an attack . however , experts at inl and dhs provided our evidence on these points . as previously discussed , according to an inl vulnerability expert , a well - executed terrorist attack could damage a significant portion of a research reactor and release a larger amount of radioactivity into the neighboring communities than nrc estimates . on this point , inl's deputy associate laboratory director for national and homeland security directorate told us that additional analysis and study is warranted in order to gain a more comprehensive understanding of both how much of a reactor could be damaged in an attack and what the resulting radiological consequences would be . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly release the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will then send copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of energy ; the administrator of nnsa ; the chairman of nrc ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or aloisee@gao.gov .