the views of publishers we spoke with cannot be generalized to all publishers . while we reviewed documentation of publisher efforts to provide information to faculty and make bundled materials available for sale individually , we did not evaluate whether these practices , as supported by documentation or described to us in interviews , were in compliance with the law . we also interviewed others with relevant expertise , including faculty groups at three schools , two national campus retailers that operate hundreds of bookstores nationwide , a textbook rental company , a company that provides price comparison software for campus bookstores , and professional organizations that represent publishers , bookstores , faculty , students , and schools . to determine the extent to which postsecondary schools have provided students and college bookstores access to textbook information , we reviewed websites of a nationally representative , stratified random sample of 150 schools to determine the extent to which they disclosed textbook information in their fall 2012 course schedules . the sample was drawn from education's 2010-2011 integrated postsecondary education data system ( ipeds ) , which contains data on over 7,200 institutions eligible for federal student aid programs authorized under title iv of the higher education act of 1965 , as amended . we assessed the reliability of the ipeds data by reviewing education's quality control procedures and testing the data electronically . we determined the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . our sampling frame consisted of all public , private nonprofit , and private for - profit 2-year and 4-year degree - granting postsecondary schools that participated in title iv federal student aid programs , had undergraduate programs , were not u.s. military academies , and had at least 100 students , yielding a universe of 4,293 schools . we created six strata to stratify the sampling frame by sector ( public , private nonprofit , and private for - profit ) and level ( 2-year and 4- year ) . this sample of schools allowed us to make national estimates about the availability of textbook information , as well as estimates by sector and level . the percentage estimates reported from this review have margins of error at the 95 percent confidence level of 9 percentage points or less , unless otherwise noted . in order to review comparable information across the sampled schools , we developed a standardized web - based data collection instrument and pre - tested it in july 2012 . using the finalized data collection instrument , we examined available textbook information for an introductory business , psychology , and biology course at each school in our sample . we judgmentally selected these subjects because they are among the top 10 undergraduate majors for degree - completing students , according to ipeds data . in addition , these courses likely affect a larger number of students than upper division courses . we reviewed school websites from july through september 2012 , as students would be obtaining textbooks for their fall 2012 term courses .