houston , tex . casis is working to expand its network . cooperative agreements differ from contracts . generally , cooperative agreements are used when the principal purpose of a transaction is to stimulate or support research and development for a public purpose , and substantial involvement is expected between the executive agency and the award recipient when carrying out the activity identified in the agreement . in contrast , contracts are used when the principal purpose is acquisition of property or services for the direct benefit or use of the federal government . casis is bound by the responsibilities outlined in the cooperative agreement , which tasks casis with maximizing the value of the iss national laboratory by stimulating interest and use of the iss for scientific research by directly soliciting potential users and fostering a market to attract others . casis is also charged with maximizing the use of the iss for advancing science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education . pursuant to the cooperative agreement , nasa will provide casis $15 million annually through 2020 , of which it will seek to award at least $3 million for research grants . casis officials said that the remainder of nasa funding is used for infrastructure and direct costs such as labor and travel - related expenses . according to the cooperative agreement , casis will solicit non - nasa funding for research by targeting various sources — such as government grants , foundation funding , charitable contributions , private equity , venture financing , and private investors — and facilitate matching of projects that meet the research objectives with those qualified funding sources . additionally , the cooperative agreement requires the development of an annual program plan , which includes a detailed plan of casis's proposed activities for the following year , which casis must meet using its “best efforts,” and annual and quarterly performance metrics . the cooperative agreement outlines responsibilities for nasa such as providing resources and accommodations to casis to meet iss national laboratory requirements and performing the payload operations integration to ensure safe and effective flight readiness and vehicle integration . the cooperative agreement technical officer , a nasa employee within the iss program office at johnson space center , is charged with oversight of the cooperative agreement . the cooperative agreement technical officer is to coordinate the approval of the annual program plan and track performance to the plan using the metrics reflected in casis's quarterly reports . casis has taken steps to carry out its responsibilities to manage and promote research activities on the iss national laboratory as outlined in its cooperative agreement . for example , casis identified key research areas and released seven requests for proposals to solicit interest for research projects . our survey of a sample of researchers who had submitted proposals to casis revealed generally positive comments about casis's management effort . for example , many respondents indicated that casis's processes were clear and that it evaluated their proposals fairly . casis , however , has not been able to coordinate with the iss national laboratory advisory committee ( inlac ) , as required , because nasa has yet to staff the committee .