these are nominal rates . these rates are published monthly by the internal revenue service ( irs ) and are based on an average of high - quality corporate bond rates for the month . private - sector pension plan sponsors have some flexibility in selecting a method for determining which monthly averages would be used to calculate lump sums offered in a particular plan year . as a result , for a lump sum payable in a particular month , the applicable erisa segment rates could be those for a month up to 16 months prior to the month of the lump - sum payment , depending on the provisions of the plan . minimum lump sums under erisa also include a “mortality discount,” which means that the lump sum is reduced to reflect the fact that for any future scheduled pension payment , there is a probability that the retiree will no longer be alive to receive it . we included this mortality discount in our erisa calculations . dod decided not to include a mortality discount in the brs lump - sum methodology . dod officials told us that mortality rates from age 44 to age 67 are relatively small , such that the impact of including mortality would be overwhelmed by minor changes in the discount rate . as a result , for simplicity , they decided not to include a mortality discount . not including a mortality discount has the effect of making the brs lump sum somewhat more generous than it would be if it included a mortality discount . thus , key differences in the determination of lump - sum amounts under brs and for erisa minimums include the following: the development of the gdr starts with corporate bond rates for a 23-year maturity , whereas the erisa segment rates are based on corporate bond rates for many maturities that are summarized into three segment rates for three different ranges of maturities . thus , the comparison at any point in time will be affected by the shape of the yield curve . given stream of converted pension payments . the ndaa for fiscal year 2016 directed the secretary of defense to choose a discount rate for brs lump sums that ( 1 ) uses average personal discount rates that take into consideration “applicable and reputable studies of personal discount rates for military personnel and past actuarial experience in the calculation of personal discount rates,” and ( 2 ) is in accordance with generally accepted actuarial principles and practices . researchers have sought to quantify personal discount rates by studying personal choices in a variety of contexts involving the tradeoff of payoffs at different times ( see sidebar ) . these senior servicemembers supervise junior servicemembers who , as a group , were most likely to have had to make a decision on whether to opt into brs . we also met with the groups' installation - level financial management professionals — personal financial managers ( pfm ) , personal financial counselors ( pfc ) , or command financial specialists ( cfs ) — who provide servicemembers additional financial literacy training and one - on - one financial counseling . we asked questions of all group interview participants related to: 1 .