ii. ) we believe that ssa's stated commitment to developing improved data on di beneficiaries' earnings and employment represents a positive development . such a commitment should include the development and implementation of a comprehensive strategy that would collect the data required for assessing the earnings and employment of all di beneficiaries rather than just a subset , such as those who participate in particular programs initiated under the ticket to work act . this strategy should also include additional data elements that would provide insight into our understanding of di beneficiaries' employment , such as data identifying beneficiaries who are blind or who are participating in a trial work period . ssa also provided some technical comments . the agency noted that although our report acknowledges various data limitations that affected our analysis , including limitations in ssa's earnings data , we did not sufficiently emphasize the extent to which these earnings data might include income that is not related to current employment . in addition , ssa stated that our data on reasons for exit , or termination , from the di program varied from those published by ssa's office of the chief actuary . finally , ssa questioned our analysis of beneficiaries whose earnings consistently exceed the sga level . with regard to our discussion of limitations in the earnings data , we agree with ssa that these limitations are considerable and have noted that throughout the report . in particular , ssa highlighted the potential for ssa earnings records to include income that may not be related to current work . it is unclear whether a substantial portion of the earnings data we analyzed was unrelated to current work . for example , an ssa studystated that the agency's earnings data may include “certain payments from profit sharing plans.” however , the study also noted that few beneficiaries had actually participated in such plans . in addition , although this study indicated a sizeable discrepancy between ssa earnings data and earnings reported by some beneficiaries in a survey interview , it was unclear whether this discrepancy was due to limitations in ssa data or to limitations inherent in self - reported data . regarding the differences between our data on the reasons for program exit , or termination , and the data reported by ssa , we acknowledge in the report that ssa data indicate somewhat higher exit rates due to reasons other than death and conversion to retirement benefits . we believe that these differences are likely attributable to the use of different sources of data on program exit . we used the cwhs because it was the most appropriate data set for conducting a longitudinal analysis of beneficiaries' earnings in relation to the sga level . further , although the termination rates we report do differ from ssa's data , the trends portrayed in our data on exits are , in fact , generally consistent with those indicated in the ssa data .