( app . ii shows states' practices with regard to supplemental payments. ) there are now approximately 3,500 rhcs . fqhcs and rhcs receive , on average , one - quarter to one - third of their revenues from medicaid , a joint federal - state program that annually finances health care for more than 40 million low - income americans . ( see fig . fqhcs primarily rely on medicaid reimbursement and hrsa grant funds as sources of revenue . from 1996 through 1999 , medicaid dollars per medicaid patient increased from $348 to $383 , while hrsa grant dollars per uninsured fqhc patient declined from $228 to $219 . additionally , we interviewed representatives from 12 state primary care associations , which are private , nonprofit membership organizations that receive grant funds from hrsa . we also analyzed national demographic , financial , and utilization information on fqhcs using hrsa's uniform data system ( uds ) for 1996 through 1999 . we conducted site visits in five states: michigan , new york , ohio , oklahoma , and rhode island . we selected these states because they had ( 1 ) unique reimbursement methodologies , ( 2 ) rural and / or urban populations , or ( 3 ) different levels of managed care penetration . these states also varied in their policies regarding supplemental payments , ranging from making the full payments required by bba to having received approval to waive supplemental payments entirely . within each state , we interviewed representatives from the medicaid office and medicaid managed care organizations . we also met with officials from eight fqhcs and nine rhcs . to assess the impact of the new pps enacted under bipa for 2001 , we examined bipa in light of previous statutes regarding medicaid reimbursement for fqhcs and rhcs and hcfa regulations applicable to the new statute . we examined the indexes used by four states – connecticut , colorado , delaware , and florida — from 1996 through 1999 and compared them to the annual inflation adjustments specified in bipa . our work was conducted from may 2000 through may 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . table 2 shows states' practices regarding the provision of supplemental payments to fqhcs and rhcs participating in capitated medicaid managed care . as shown below , 25 states and the district of columbia have made supplemental payments to fqhcs as required by bba . additionally , four states have made payments to fqhcs that are not the full amount required under bba since the states have 1115 waivers . rhcs have received supplemental payments as required by bba in 16 states , while 2 states with 1115 waivers have made some level of payment to rhcs . our draft report already recognized that payments under the alternative methodology can be no lower than payments under the pps , and we have not changed the report . third , hhs requested that we emphasize that states cannot impose a stricter definition of reasonable costs in establishing 2001 payment rates than they had under the prior reimbursement system . we have no basis to question hhs' position , but because bipa does not include explicit language to that effect , we have not modified the report .