the air force submitted the report in january 2018 . the conference report accompanying the act also included a provision that we review the air force's report to congress . see figure 1 for a photo of the cobra dane radar . congress has expressed interest in dod's plan to use cobra dane to meet various mission requirements and how it would maximize the radar's reliability and minimize life - cycle costs . specifically , the conference report accompanying a bill for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2018 ( “the act” ) included a provision that the air force , in coordination with mda and u.s. northern command , submit a report on the cobra dane radar to the congressional defense committees with its fiscal year 2019 budget request . the report was to outline the capabilities of cobra dane and alternative radars , dod's plan for the operation and sustainment of cobra dane , and the costs to sustain cobra dane and its site at shemya island . this report identifies information included in the air force's report and describes additional information that we reviewed on ( 1 ) the capabilities of the cobra dane radar and other planned radars to meet dod's mission requirements , ( 2 ) cobra dane's operational availability and the plan to mitigate the effect on those missions when cobra dane is not operationally available , and ( 3 ) dod's funding plan and project cost estimates related to the operation and sustainment of cobra dane and its site at shemya island . for all objectives , we reviewed the air force report to congress and identified information related to requirements outlined in the conference report . we interviewed officials from headquarters air force , air force space command , the air force life cycle management center , mda , u.s. northern command , and u.s. strategic command to discuss information contained within the air force report , and to identity other information and documentation relevant to each of our three objectives . for objective one , we also reviewed documentation that outlined the capabilities of cobra dane and other radar investments . our review included mda's reports on the lrdr and its analysis of alternatives on ballistic missile defense sensors . we also reviewed a u.s. strategic command briefing for information on the capabilities of cobra dane and alternative radar systems . we did not independently review the quality of the technical materials or the process by which mda or u.s. strategic command assessed the capabilities of cobra dane or other radar systems because doing so was beyond the scope of our review to describe additional information on the capabilities of cobra dane and other radar investments . for objective two , we also reviewed documentation related to the operational availability of cobra dane and the associated effects if cobra dane is not available , including air force data on the operational availability and space surveillance performance of cobra dane . we asked cognizant air force officials questions about the reliability of their operational availability data and reviewed relevant documentation on how they calculate that data . we determined that we could use these data for the limited purpose of describing the reported operational availability of cobra dane compared to its requirement .