reporting . hud has not reported on its lead efforts as required since 1997 . title x includes annual and biennial reporting requirements for hud . staff from hud's lead office and general counsel told us that in 1998 the agency agreed with the congressional committees of jurisdiction that hud could satisfy this reporting requirement by including the required information in its annual performance reports . lead office staff told us hud's recent annual performance reports do not contain specific information required by law and that hud has not issued other publicly available reports that contain the title x reporting requirements . title x requires hud to annually provide congress information on its progress in implementing the lead grant programs ; a summary of studies looking at the incidence of lead poisoning in children living in hud - assisted housing ; the results of any required lead technical studies ; and estimates of federal funds spent on lead hazard evaluation and reduction in hud - assisted housing . as previously stated , the annual performance reports have provided information on the number of housing units made lead - safe through the agency's lead grant programs , but not through the voucher or public housing programs . in march 2018 , lead office staff told us hud plans to submit separate reports on the agency's lead effort , covering the title x reporting requirements , starting in fiscal year 2019 . by hud complying with title x statutory reporting requirements , congress and the public will be in a position to better know the progress hud is making toward ensuring that housing is lead - safe . lead exposure can cause serious , irreversible cognitive damage that can impair a child for life . through its lead grant programs and oversight of lead paint regulations , hud is helping to address lead paint hazards in housing . however , our review identified specific areas where hud could improve the effectiveness of its efforts to identify and address lead paint hazards and protect children in low - income housing from lifelong health problems: documenting and evaluating grant processes . hud could improve documentation for its lead grant programs' processes by providing more specific direction to staff and documenting grant award rationale . in doing so , hud could better ensure that grant program staff score grant applications consistently and appropriately and provide greater transparency about its award decisions . additionally , periodically evaluating its grant processes and procedures could help hud better ensure that its lead grants reach areas most at risk for lead paint hazards . identifying areas at risk for lead hazards . by developing specific time frames to finalize and incorporate the results of its model to more fully identify areas at risk for lead paint hazards , hud can better identify and conduct outreach to at - risk localities that its lead grant programs have not yet reached . overseeing compliance with lead paint regulations . false self - certifications of compliance by some phas and other limitations in hud's compliance monitoring approach make it essential for hud to develop a plan to mitigate and address limitations , as well as establish procedures to determine when enforcement decisions are needed .