ras . our analysis of the ra statement of work indicates that conducting postpayment claims reviews is the ras' primary function . use of ras was designed to be an addition to macs' existing claims review processes , since the number of postpayment reviews conducted by the macs and other contractors was small relative to the number of claims paid and amount of improper payments . to implement the national recovery audit program , cms contracted with four ras to conduct postpayment reviews of medicare ffs claims to identify overpayments and underpayments within four geographic jurisdictions . in part because of issues that were raised during the ra demonstration program , cms made changes in the ra's requirements to provide more oversight over their activities . as in the demonstration , under the national program the ras are paid on a contingency fee basis , but cms officials indicated that the percentage is smaller . for the national program , the fee ranges from 9 to 12.5 percent of the overpayments and underpayments collected . in contrast to the macs , zpics , and cert contractor , which are paid on the basis of the contractually negotiated costs for the tasks performed , ras are compensated from the funds that are recouped . however , if an ra's overpayment determination is overturned on appeal , the ra is not paid for that claim . the ras conducted nearly five times as many complex reviews in fiscal year 2012 as the other three contractors combined — over 1.1 million complex postpayment claims reviews and nearly 1 million automated review denials . with an increased focus on measuring and reducing medicare improper payments and the implementation of ras , there has been a significant increase in the number of claims being reviewed postpayment ( see table 3 ) . our analysis of data from cms indicates that from 2011 to 2012 , the ra's complex postpayment reviews increased 77 percent . except for the cert contractor , which reviews a randomly selected sample of claims each year to estimate the error rates , all contractors increased their postpayment claims reviews by 16 percent or more . however , the 2.3 million reviews performed by these contractors accounted for less than 1 percent of the over 1 billion ffs claims paid annually , and about 1.4 million were complex reviews . cms has different requirements for postpayment claims reviews across different contractor types , and some of these differences can sometimes impede effectiveness and efficiency by increasing administrative burden on providers . due in part to cms's experience with the ra demonstration and issues raised by providers during the demonstration , cms sets more limits through claims review requirements on ras than on other contractors . cms officials generally described some other differences as developing when different requirements were set by different groups within the agency at different times . cms has begun an effort to examine whether its claims reviews activities add administrative burden for providers . as a result of lessons learned during the ra demonstration project and to establish tighter controls on ras , cms imposed certain postpayment requirements unique to the ras when it implemented the national program ( see table 4 ) .