for data to be properly validated , it should be recorded in a uniform format . once key data elements relating to disaster relief eligibility are determined , our work has shown that it is important to record the information in a format that will facilitate data validation with external sources . otherwise , agencies may be faced with thousands or tens of thousands of registrations being rejected or placed in a manual review status because data was not recorded accurately . this is also particularly important when recording names , identity information , and addresses in order to prevent registrants from getting multiple payments by changing the spelling of their address or name . for example , data collected by hotels providing lodging that was paid for by fema did not record occupant's ssn or fema registration id numbers . thus , there were no common data elements that could be used to ensure people already staying at fema paid hotels did not also improperly receive rental assistance . within the federal government , many organizations such as ssa , united states postal service ( usps ) , and irs maintain information on disaster assisted registrants . by monitoring these types of uses and contacting and possibly penalizing those who misuse funds , agencies may be able to ensure that disaster funds are used to help mitigate losses and not for inappropriate items . to detect existing fraud and prevent new cases in the future , agencies should also set up mechanisms to identify and investigate existing cases . the use of hotlines where individuals can anonymously call and report potential fraud can provide valuable investigation leads . the department of homeland security ( dhs ) office of inspector general set up one such hotline specifically dedicated to fraud related to hurricanes katrina and rita . similar hotlines are useful within any disaster relief program to help identify any fraudulent activity not caught by controls . in conjunction with fraud identified through data - mining or hotline tips , agencies should have in place teams ready to investigate leads , not only for future prosecution , but also to provide suggestions for how the fraud can be prevented in the future . the final aspect of a program designed to reduce fraud in a disaster assistance program is the investigation and aggressive prosecution of individuals who have fraudulently received disaster assistance . suspicious cases identified through preventive , detective , and monitoring controls , along with hotline tips , should be referred to investigators for further review . in the course of our work performed on ihp fraud for hurricanes katrina and rita , we identified tens of thousands of potentially fraudulent registrations . also , setting up hotlines to identify potential frauds is an important activity that should be in place when distributing disaster funds . finally , any lessons learned from detection and monitoring efforts should be used to improve preventive controls to reduce the risk for fraud , waste , and abuse in the future . this included one individual indicted for fraudulently obtaining over $25,000 from fema based on bogus registrations . figure 4 displays how investigations and prosecutions fit into an overall fraud prevention program .