the board has not implemented the mutual fund window . according to tsp officials , both the board and etac were similarly split on whether to include a mutual fund window and the board tabled the discussion of the mutual fund window to address more immediate issues , such as adding a roth tsp option . they also noted that while tsp has not moved forward with adding a mutual fund window , it may at some future point . the board has developed investment policies for each tsp fund . these policies , which the board reaffirms quarterly , provide the rationale for selecting the fund's investments . how would the addition of an index fund tracking an sri index have affected past tsp stock fund portfolio performance ? how do the performance and costs of sri mutual funds compare to non - sri mutual funds ? to determine the challenges associated with sri , we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations related to fersa and tsp , and literature . we also interviewed officials from tsp , the employee thrift advisory council ( etac ) , investment management or consultant firms , and a nonrepresentative sample of 15 public pension plans . to identify our sample , we contacted plans that were signatories of the united nations' principles for responsible investment and employed a snowball sampling technique based on recommendations of interviewees . to assess how the addition of an index fund tracking an sri index would have affected past tsp stock fund portfolio performance , we identified the best performing u.s. - based sri stock index based on 10-year risk - adjusted performance data , and analyzed its potential impact on the tsp stock portfolio over the past 20 years ( 1992 through 2011 ) . because this analysis is strictly based on past performance , this result does not guarantee or imply that the addition of an sri index would have the same effect on future tsp stock fund portfolio performance . to determine how the performance and costs of sri mutual funds compared with those of non - sri mutual funds , we analyzed historical performance data for several time periods over the past 15 years ( dating back from december 2011 ) — the longest time period for which data were available — and cost data from fiscal year 2010 . we focused our analysis exclusively on three share classes of mutual funds — institutional , front - load , and no - load — of u.s. domiciled open - end mutual funds , which experts identified as the most common form of sri funds . to better demonstrate the full range of performance and costs trends between sri and non - sri mutual funds , we analyzed funds by subcategories such as share class , and also ran regressions to control for factors such as fund asset size and investment strategy . we assessed the reliability of the quantitative data used in this engagement by reviewing related documentation , interviewing knowledgeable officials , reviewing related internal controls , comparing to published data , and tracing a selection of data to source documentation . based on this evaluation , we determined these data were reliable for the purposes of this report .