gao - 03-646 . washington , d.c.: may 27 , 2003 . d.c. child and family services: key issues affecting the management of its foster care cases . what progress has the d.c. courts made in procuring permanent physical space ? what progress have the superior court and relevant district of columbia agencies made in sharing data from their computer systems ? to answer these questions , we analyzed data provided by the family court on the status of transferred cases and its timeliness in resolving these and other abuse and neglect cases . we also reviewed the family court act , applicable district laws , and the family court transition plan and subsequent reports required by the act to identify qualification requirements for judges and prescribed procedures for appointing associate judges ; reviewed documents regarding the family court's progress in acquiring permanent physical space and those related to integrating the computer systems of the superior court and the district ; and interviewed relevant district , superior court , and family court officials . in addition , we interviewed child welfare and court experts , as well as court officials in other jurisdictions , to obtain information on potential best practices and a perspective on court operations in other jurisdictions . we focused our review on abuse and neglect cases because of congressional interest and the former family division's past problems in handling such cases . we conducted our work between april and december 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . appendix i provides a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology . the d.c. family court act fundamentally changed the way the superior court's family division handled its family cases . to transition the family division into a family court , the family court act required that the superior court prepare a transition plan describing such things as the function of the presiding judge and the number of magistrate judges , the flow and management of cases , and staffing needs . one of the central organizing principles for establishing the family court was the one family / one judge case management concept , whereby the same judge handles all matters related to one family . judges in other court jurisdictions , such as hamilton county juvenile court in cincinnati , ohio , report that implementing a one family / one judge approach in their courts facilitated more efficient and effective court operations and improved compliance with required timeframes of asfa . the act re - established the family division as a family court , which has jurisdiction over alleged child abuse and neglect , juvenile delinquency , domestic violence , child support , and other family matters . the act also established specific qualifications for judges and extended their term requirements and established various case management practices to improve the family court's administration of cases and proceedings . additionally , in creating the new position of magistrate judge ( formerly hearing commissioners ) , the act specified that the magistrate judges would assist associate judges in deciding how to dispose of cases and identifying cases that were to be transferred from judges outside of the family court .