balance . dod's set of performance measures lack balance . we have previously reported that balance exists when a set of measures ensures that an organization's various priorities are covered . according to dod , performance measures best cover its priorities when five measurable aspects of performance , as defined by dod — input , process , output , outcome , and impact — are present in its performance measures . as an example , “number of attendees to basic counterdrug intelligence course” is , in our determination , a measure of output , as it measures the services provided by dod . we estimate 93 percent of dod's fiscal year 2009 performance measures are input , process , or output measures , while 6 percent are outcome measures and 0 percent are impact measures . therefore , given that dod's set of measures is highly skewed towards input , process , and output measures and contains no impact measures , we determined that the set is not balanced by dod's criteria . performance measurement efforts that lack balance overemphasize certain aspects of performance at the expense of others , and may keep dod from understanding the effectiveness of its overall mission and goals . limited overlap . we determined there to be overlap among dod's performance measures . we found instances where the measures and their results appeared to overlap with other measures and results . when we spoke with dasd - cn > officials concerning this , they stated that the set of measures could be conveyed using fewer , more accurate measures . we have reported that each performance measure in a set should provide additional information beyond that provided by other measures . when an agency has overlapping measures , it can create unnecessary or duplicate information , which does not benefit program management . of the remaining six attributes of successful performance measures , only one attribute — linkage — was present in almost all of the measures , while the other five attributes — governmentwide priorities , reliability , objectivity , clarity , and measurable targets — appeared in varying degrees ( see figure 1 ) . dod's counternarcotics performance measures demonstrate linkage . we estimate that 99 percent of dod's measures are linked to agencywide goals and mission . dod's counternarcotics performance measurement system database requires that for each performance measure entered into the database , a goal and related objective of dod's counternarcotics mission be identified . our analysis found that in all but one instance , linkage between dod's goals and performance measures is easily identified . however , dod's counternarcotics performance measures did not fully satisfy five attributes . governmentwide priorities . we estimate that 41 percent of the measures we analyzed cover a broader governmentwide priority , such as quality , timeliness , efficiency , cost of service , or outcome . we determined , for example , that the governmentwide priority of “quality” was reflected in the measure “number of sensors integrated and providing reliable and dependable radar data to jiatf - s and / or host nations,” because it measures the reliability and dependability of detection services . in the majority of the instances , however , measures did not address a governmentwide priority .