precipitation . the may 2012 assessment of nws forecasting also noted that precipitation gauge and radar data on precipitation in the missouri river basin were insufficient during the flood . agencies have begun taking steps to address some data limitations . how should the corps make reservoir operations decisions in the face of uncertainty in runoff forecasts ? how , if at all , should the corps incorporate uncertainty in runoff forecasts into information provided to basin stakeholders or the public ? what are the pros and cons of the corps' policy to regulate releases based on “water on the ground” ? what steps , if any , could the corps take to improve runoff forecasting ? in the 2011 flood , were there additional reservoir release actions the corps might have taken to better manage flood risks and , if so , what may have been the consequences of not taking these actions ? what constraints might exist on those actions ? in the 2012 and 2013 drought , were there additional reservoir release actions the corps might have taken to better manage drought risk and , if so , what may have been the consequences of not taking these actions ? what constraints might exist on those actions ? does the corps have appropriate flexibility to regulate the river to manage risk of flood and drought ? what are the pros and cons of the current amount of flexibility the corps has ? during low water conditions , the corps works to balance the competing interests of the eight authorized purposes of the missouri river reservoirs . how well is the corps balancing these purposes and what , if any , improvements could the corps make ? what constraints might exist on those actions ? the most recent changes to the master manual raise the threshold below which the corps regulates the system in drought conservation mode . what are the pros , and cons , of this new threshold ? this report describes ( 1 ) experts' views on the corps' release decisions during the 2011 flood and 2012 and 2013 drought ; ( 2 ) additional actions , if any , experts recommend to improve the corps' ability to make future release decisions ; and ( 3 ) stakeholders' views on how the corps communicated information during the flood and drought and improvements , if any , stakeholders suggest . to address all of our objectives , we reviewed relevant laws , including the flood control act of 1944 that authorized the construction of dams along the missouri river . in addition , we reviewed the documents that the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) uses to guide their release decisions , including the missouri river mainstem reservoir system master water control manual ( master manual ) ( last updated in 2006 ) and the annual operating plans for 2010-2011 , 2011-2012 , and 2012-2013 . we also reviewed documents produced or commissioned by the corps that describe the details of the corps' release decisions during the flood and drought , including “summary of actual 2011 regulation,” “summary of actual 2012 regulation,” and the december 2011 independent technical review report .