carrier audits . audits of carriers receiving high - cost program support are the primary tool used to oversee carrier activities , and audits may be conducted by usac , state regulators , or fcc's oig . usac primarily relies on assessments from the payment quality assurance program and beneficiary and contributor audit program that occur after disbursements have been made to detect improper payments , which may include fraud . carrier data validation process . all cost data that the carriers submit to neca for purposes of high - cost support are subject to several electronic validations , which focus on ensuring that all required data are reported and that the data ranges are consistent with information reported in previous years . in addition , neca compares the reported cost data with financial records supporting carriers' audited financial statements to identify any discrepancies and to require corrections when discrepancies are discovered . carriers' broadband deployment verification . since 2018 , usac has performed carrier broadband deployment verifications by obtaining broadband location data to monitor whether a carrier's broadband deployment meets fcc requirements . carriers receive verification reports from usac that reflect the results of the verification process . whistleblower process . usac maintains a whistleblower log that is shared with fcc . through whistleblower complaints , usac may identify instances of potentially fraudulent activity . fcc has identified three rate - of - return carriers that received at least $34 million in improper payments from the high - cost program in prior years . two such cases were described above . in the third case , a rate - of - return carrier self - reported to neca and usac what it represented to be the costs and revenues of providing its telecommunications service ; as discussed previously , neca and usac rely upon the accuracy and completeness of the carrier's reporting to calculate the carrier's support . an fcc oig investigation later revealed that the carrier had manipulated fcc's accounting rules by including the costs of a nonregulated , commercial mobile radio service in the information it submitted to neca , thus inflating the amount of high - cost program support the carrier received . fcc eventually determined that the carrier owed the federal government almost $7 million in support overpayments received between 2005 and 2010 . a petition for reconsideration is pending . as there is a finite amount of funding for the high - cost program , compensating carriers for improper , ineligible , and inflated costs they claim means less program funds are available for deploying service to the areas the program was designed to serve . federal internal control standards , along with gao's fraud risk framework , omb guidance , and the fraud reduction and data analytics act of 2015 have placed an increased focus on the need for federal program managers to take a strategic approach to managing improper payments and risks , including the risk of fraud . gao's fraud risk framework provides comprehensive guidance for conducting fraud - risk assessments and using the results to develop a robust fraud risk management strategy .