rec . h9307 , h9841 ( daily ed . dec. 11 , 2014 ) ( explanatory statement ) , accompanying pub . 113-235 , 128 stat . focused on programs that allow or require school districts to use program funds to lengthen the school day , week , or year for all students in a school . activities that take place beyond the regular school day , such as after - school activities and programs or summer school programs , are outside the scope of this review . we also reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , guidance , and program - specific information , such as program performance reports . we analyzed sig program data for school years 2010-2011 through 2014-2015 . we assessed data reliability by reviewing existing information about the data system . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we also interviewed education officials and other key stakeholders to clarify which federal program funds schools may be using for this purpose . the key stakeholders included officials from organizations that provide and / or are familiar with extended learning time as well as from organizations that represent state educational agencies , school districts , and teachers . we identified organizations based on a review of selected literature and discussions with education officials . to determine what is known about learning time in public schools nationwide , we analyzed national data from education's schools and staffing survey ( sass ) for school year 2011-2012 , the most recent year for which data were available . sass contains data from a generalizable sample of k - 12 public elementary and secondary schools nationwide . we used sass data to estimate the distribution of instructional time by hours per day and days per year . to identify schools with the most learning time , we created a measure of the number of hours each school provides annually . this measure of annual school time was calculated by multiplying the number of hours of instruction that students receive per day by the number of days the school operates during the school year . to describe the characteristics of schools with the most learning time , we analyzed schools with the most school hours annually , which we defined as the top 10 percent of schools , and compared them with the remaining 90 percent of schools . for this analysis we looked at selected school characteristics from the sass dataset , including the length of the school day ; number of days in the school year ; school level and type ( eg , traditional public and charter schools ) ; location ( eg , census region and urban vs. rural locations ) ; and student demographics , such as race , ethnicity , and socioeconomic status . we assessed data reliability by reviewing existing information about the data system . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . for both research objectives , we reviewed selected reports on extended learning time , including how schools fund extended learning time initiatives and how schools use the additional time in the school day .