navigant consulting , inc . in addition to the individual named above , carolyn a. frye , mary b. merrill , donald r. neff , and lisa j. crye made key contributions to this report . the general accounting office , the investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . additional information on our scope and methodology is in appendix i . we conducted our review from july 2001 through may 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested comments from the chairman of tva or his designated representative on a draft of this report . tva's chairman provided written comments , which are reproduced in appendix ii . we also received oral comments of a technical nature from the senior advisor to tva's chief financial officer ( cfo ) , which we incorporated as appropriate . tva has been benchmarking since the 1980s and since the early 1990s has primarily used navigant to perform staffing benchmarking studies . these studies initially assessed the staffing levels of tva's nuclear program and , in 1998 , tva began to assess its non - nuclear business units as well . recent benchmarking studies performed by navigant have indicated that tva's nuclear and transmission units are close to the industry's best in terms of staffing efficiency , but that opportunities for improvement exist in all four of the business units most recently benchmarked — fossil power group , transmission power supply , nuclear , and river system operations & environment . tva has used these studies to initiate automation and reorganization at the business unit level , and also to make organizationwide changes . tva continues to utilize benchmarking to assist in identifying potential areas for improvement . because staffing needs of different business units vary and utilities have a differing mix of business units , simply using benchmarking to compare total number of employees would not provide meaningful comparisons . this is further complicated by the fact that tva primarily sells wholesale power and other electricity providers primarily sell retail power . however , benchmarking studies can provide meaningful comparisons at the business unit level . tva's goal is for its business units to be among the best performing in the industry . to accomplish this , tva's staffing levels would have to be comparable to those of the industry's best . tva's business units include: nuclear , river system operations & environment , fossil power group , transmission power supply , bulk power marketing , customer service , and corporate . according to tva officials , the results of benchmarking studies are used as a management tool to determine the best areas to target to improve performance and operate more efficiently . tva's business units use benchmarking studies that focus on staffing to identify trends by functional areas ( eg , operations , technical engineering ) in the electric utility industry to assist in workforce planning . while the results are not strictly used as “performance indicators” or “targets,” they are considered in determining appropriate staffing levels .