i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have . rus neither agreed nor disagreed with this recommendation . chairman hoeven , vice chairman udall , and members of the committee , this completes my prepared statement . if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact mark goldstein , director , physical infrastructure issues at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or goldsteinm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony are rose almoguera , katherine blair , keith cunningham , crystal huggins , sally moino , and tina paek . other staff who made contributions to the reports cited in this testimony are identified in the source product . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . fcc uses data from this form to determine which areas qualify for broadband funding . the work upon which this testimony is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in our september 2018 report on broadband access on tribal lands , we found that fcc collects broadband availability data from broadband providers , but its method for collecting the data does not accurately or completely capture broadband access — the ability to obtain service — on tribal lands . specifically , fcc directs fixed broadband providers to submit a list of census blocks where service is available on their form 477 filings . in the form 477 instructions , fcc defines “available” as whether the provider does — or could , within a typical service interval or without an extraordinary commitment of resources — provide service to at least one end - user premises in a census block . thus , in its annual reports and maps of fixed broadband service , fcc considers an entire block to be served if a provider reports that it does , or could offer , service to at least one household in the census block . as shown in figure 1 , fcc's definition of availability leads to overstatements of fixed broadband availability on tribal lands by: ( 1 ) counting an entire census block as served if only one location has broadband , and ( 2 ) allowing providers to report availability in blocks where they do not have any infrastructure connecting homes to their networks if the providers determine they could offer service to at least one household . fcc has noted that overstatements of availability can be particularly problematic in rural areas , where census blocks cover larger areas .