state and usaid concurred with our recommendations . chairman ros - lehtinen , ranking member deutch , members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . we made several recommendations in our report . we also interviewed cognizant officials . to determine the extent to which state , usaid , and their partners have assessed risks to the programs , and to evaluate implementation of controls to mitigate risks and ensure appropriate financial oversight of assistance , we selected a nongeneralizable sample of 12 of 52 fiscal year 2015 state and usaid funding instruments from 9 different implementing partners and evaluated the risk assessments and control activities associated with the funding instruments . our review resulted in the following findings . first , several factors complicate the delivery of humanitarian assistance to people inside syria . second , u.s. agencies and implementing partners have assessed some risks of delivering humanitarian assistance inside syria , but most partners have not assessed risks of fraud . lastly , partners have implemented controls to mitigate certain risks of delivering humanitarian assistance inside syria , but u.s. agencies could improve their oversight of these programs . as a result , we made several recommendations to state and usaid to improve financial oversight . we identified three key factors that affect delivery of humanitarian assistance to people inside syria . first , the increasingly violent and widespread syrian conflict has hindered effective delivery of humanitarian assistance . based on our analysis of monthly unsg reports on the situation inside syria , as well as interviews with officials providing assistance to syria based both inside and outside of the country , humanitarian assistance is routinely prevented or delayed from reaching its intended target due to shifting conflict lines , attacks on aid facilities and workers , an inability to access besieged areas , and other factors related to active conflict ( see fig . second , administrative procedures put in place by the syrian government have delayed or limited the delivery of humanitarian assistance , according to unsg reports . these reports detail multiple instances of unanswered requests for approvals of convoys , denial or removal of medical supplies from convoys , difficulty obtaining visas for humanitarian staff , and restrictions on international and national ngos' ability to operate . as of may 2016 , the unsg reported that 4.6 million people inside syria are located in hard - to - reach areas and more than 500,000 of those remain besieged by islamic state of iraq and syria , the government of syria , or non - state armed opposition groups . the un further reported that in 2015 , only 10 percent of all requests for un interagency convoys to hard - to - reach and besieged areas were approved and assistance delivered . in addition , according to implementing partner officials based in damascus , syria , even when these convoys were approved , the officials participating in delivering the assistance were subjected to hours - long delays . third , due to restrictions , usaid and state staff manage the delivery of humanitarian assistance in syria remotely from neighboring countries .