several small employers also offered ideas . for example , a small employer said the federal government should focus education and outreach efforts on service providers instead of on small employers . conversely , some small employers said the federal government should have a limited role or no role in providing education and outreach efforts . domestic pension reform proposals from public policy organizations , as well as practices in other countries , include features such as asset pooling that could reduce the administrative and financial burdens of small employers . for example , one domestic proposal calls for the creation of a federally managed and federally guaranteed national savings plan . under this proposal , participation in the program would generally be mandatory for workers ; both employers and employees would contribute to the plan ; and plan funds would be pooled and professionally managed . by pooling funds , plan administration would be simplified and administrative costs and asset management fees would be reduced . in addition , automatic iras — which are individual iras instead of employer - sponsored plans — are another proposal that draws from several elements of the current retirement system: payroll - deposit saving , automatic enrollment , and iras . such a proposal would provide employers who do not sponsor any retirement plans with a mechanism that allows their employees to save for retirement . however , as we reported in 2009 , such proposals pose trade - offs . for example , although a proposal that mandates participation would increase plan sponsorship and coverage for workers , employers might offset the resulting sponsorship costs by reducing workers' wages and other benefits . more complete information on our scope and methodology is available in our issued report . for example , as we previously reported , the predominant pension systems in the netherlands and switzerland pool plan assets into pension funds for economies of scale and for lower plan fees . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards from october 2010 to march 2012 . in summary , we found that the likelihood that a small employer will sponsor a retirement plan largely depends on the size of the employer's workforce and the workers' average wages . small employers , retirement experts , and other stakeholders also identified a number of challenges — such as plan complexity and resource constraints — to starting and maintaining retirement plans . in addition , stakeholders offered options for addressing some challenges to plan sponsorship , which included simplifying federal requirements for plan administration and increasing the tax credit for plan startup costs . although labor , irs , and the small business administration ( sba ) collaborate in conducting education and outreach on retirement plans , agencies disseminate information online through separate websites and in a largely uncoordinated fashion . in addition , irs currently does not have the means to collect information on employers that sponsor a certain type of ira plan . as a result of our findings , we are recommending efforts for greater collaboration among federal agencies to foster small employer plan sponsorship and more complete collection of ira plan sponsorship data .