( see fig . while these and other rivers provide food , transportation , and recreation for people , as well as habitat for fish and wildlife , their waters also shape the landscape . in particular , ice jams on rivers and flooding of riverbanks during spring breakup change the contour of valleys , wetlands , and human settlements . permafrost ( permanently frozen subsoil ) is found over approximately 80 percent of alaska . it is deepest and most extensive on the arctic coastal plain and decreases in depth further south , eventually becoming discontinuous . in northern alaska , where the permafrost is virtually everywhere , most buildings are elevated to minimize the amount of heat transferred to the ground to avoid melting the permafrost . however , rising temperatures in recent years have led to widespread thawing of the permafrost , causing serious damage . as permafrost melts , land slumps and erodes , buildings and runways sink , and bulk fuel tank areas are threatened . ( see fig . rising temperatures have also affected the thickness , extent , and duration of sea ice that forms along the western and northern coasts . loss of sea ice leaves coasts more vulnerable to waves , storm surges , and erosion . when combined with the thawing of permafrost along the coast , loss of sea ice seriously threatens coastal alaska native villages . furthermore , loss of sea ice alters the habitat and accessibility of many of the marine mammals that alaska natives depend upon for subsistence . as the ice melts or moves away early , walruses , seals , and polar bears move with it , taking themselves too far away to be hunted . federal , state , and local government agencies share responsibility for controlling and responding to flooding and erosion . the u.s. army corps of engineers has responsibility for planning and constructing streambank and shoreline erosion protection and flood control structures under a specific set of requirements . the department of agriculture's natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) is responsible for protecting small watersheds . the continuing authorities program , administered by the corps , and the watershed protection and flood prevention program , administered by nrcs , are the principal programs available to prevent flooding and control erosion . in contrast , some villages have been able to qualify for assistance from nrcs's two other programs — the emergency watershed protection program and the conservation technical assistance program . for example , under its emergency watershed protection program , nrcs allows consideration of additional factors in the cost / benefit analysis . specifically , nrcs considers social or environmental factors when calculating the potential benefits of a proposed project , and the importance of protecting the subsistence lifestyle of an alaska native village can be included as one of these factors . in addition , while nrcs encourages cost sharing by local communities , this requirement can be waived when the local community cannot afford to pay for a project under this program . such was the case in unalakleet , where the community had petitioned federal and state agencies to fund its local cost - share of an erosion protection project and was not successful .