the commissioner agreed with our recommendations . his letter notes that the agency is actively committed to improving its processes . specifically the agency will ( 1 ) conduct a thorough gap analysis between fpc 65 elements and business continuity planning guidance ; ( 2 ) update the internal revenue manual guidance and business resumption plan templates to reflect areas of improvement resulting from the gap analysis ; and ( 3 ) formally direct annual tests , training , and exercises of business resumption plans through the agency's emergency management and preparedness steering committee . finally , the commissioner stated that the agency will revise and implement its emergency plans based on the results of the aforementioned activities . as agreed with your staff , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of the treasury , the commissioner of internal revenue , and other interested parties . this report will also be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . should you or your staff have questions on matters discussed in this report , please contact bernice steinhardt at ( 202 ) 512-6543 or steinhardtb@gao.gov , or linda koontz at ( 202 ) 512-6240 or koontzl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributions to this report were made by william doherty , assistant director ; james r. sweetman , jr. , assistant director ; thomas beall ; michaela brown ; terrell dorn ; nick marinos ; and nhi nguyen . the objectives of this report were to evaluate how the internal revenue service's ( irs ) emergency operations plans address federal guidance related to continuity planning and evaluate the extent to which irs emergency operations plans contributed to the actions taken by irs officials in response to the flood . to address how irs emergency operations plans address federal guidance related to continuity planning , we obtained the irs headquarters emergency operations plans that were available to agency officials at the time of the june 2006 flood . these included the continuity of operations ( coop ) plan and a suite of business continuity plans , including the incident management plan and 13 business resumption plans from business units affected by the flood . although we also obtained the headquarters occupant emergency plan , we did not evaluate its contributions to addressing the elements because its purpose is limited to outlining procedures for building occupants and emergency personnel in responding to threats that require building evacuations or shelter in place . we did not obtain the disaster recovery plan , a contingency plan for the recovery of information technology equipment , because recovery of information technology equipment was addressed in a report from the treasury inspector general for tax administration .