the data in this report are based on dfas records . with the exception of travel card delinquency rates , we were unable to independently verify or audit the accuracy of these data . we performed our work from june 2002 to february 2003 in accordance with u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards . we received written comments on a draft of this report from the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) . details of our scope and methodology are in appendix i . we requested comments from the secretary of defense and the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) . dod's comments are reprinted in appendix ii . we considered and incorporated dod's suggested technical comments as appropriate . for years , auditors have reported long - standing weaknesses in dod's ability to promptly pay its bills and accurately account for and record its disbursements . numerous of our and dod inspector general audit reports have cited deficiencies in management oversight , a weak internal control environment , flawed financial management systems , complex payment processes , delinquent and inaccurate commercial and vendor payments , and lax management of dod's travel card programs . those deficiencies have resulted in billions of dollars in unrecorded or improperly recorded disbursements , over - and underpayments or late payments to contractors , and fraudulent or unpaid travel card transactions . dod's disbursement processes are complex and error - prone . although dfas is responsible for providing accounting services for dod , military service and other defense agency personnel play a key role in dod's disbursement process . in general , military service and defense agency personnel obligate funds for the procurement of goods and services , receive those goods and services , and forward obligation information and receiving reports to dfas . separate dfas disbursing offices and accounting offices then pay the bills and match the payments to obligation information . several military services and dod agencies can be involved in a single disbursement and each has differing financial policies , processes , and stand - alone , nonstandard systems . as a result , millions of disbursement transactions must be keyed and rekeyed into the vast number of systems involved in any given dod business process . also , transactions must be recorded using an account coding structure that can exceed 75 digits and this coding structure often differs — in terms of the type , quantity , and format of data required — by military service . dfas's ability to match disbursements to obligation records is complicated by the fact that dod's numerous financial systems may contain inconsistent or missing information about the same transaction . input errors by dfas or service personnel and erroneous or missing obligation documents are two of the major causes of inconsistent information . for calculating and reporting performance metrics related to payment recording errors , officials from the comptroller's office included the following categories . unmatched disbursements — payments that were made by a dfas disbursing office and received by a dfas accounting office but have not yet been matched to the proper obligation . negative unliquidated obligations — payments that have been matched to and recorded against the cited obligations but which exceed the amount of those obligations .