( recommendation 2 ) . the project is currently in the monitoring phase . as of the end of 2017 , the deepwater horizon trustee council had approved 34 habitat protection projects , many of which were still in progress as of december 2017 . the initial results of these projects include the restoration of over 4,000 acres of habitat and the creation of over 40 artificial reefs , according to a written statement by the federal trustees . the trustee council has authorized roughly $349 million to enhance recreational use — about 83 percent of the almost $420 million ordered for this use by the settlement . “assessment of crude oil biodegradation in arctic seashore sediments: effects of temperature , salinity , and crude oil concentration.” environmental science and pollution research ( 2016 ) : 14881-14888 . shi , x. , p.w . bellino , a. simeoni , and a.s. rangwala . “experimental study of burning behavior of large - scale crude oil fires in ice cavities.” fire safety journal , vol . united states coast guard , on scene coordinator report deepwater horizon oil spill , ( september 2011 ) . white , helen k. , shelby l. lyons , sarah j. harrison , david m. findley , yina liu , and elizabeth b. kujawinski . “long - term persistence of dispersants following the deepwater horizon oil spill.” environmental science & technology letters ( 2014 ) : 295-299 . according to the 2016 programmatic restoration plan , enhancing recreational use includes acquiring land along the coast , building improved or new infrastructure , and improving navigation for on - water recreation . for example , during the first phase of early restoration in 2012 , the deepwater horizon trustee council authorized approximately $5.3 million to the florida department of environmental protection to repair and construct boat ramps in pensacola bay and perdido bay , florida . construction was completed in 2016 , and the project is currently in the monitoring and operations and maintenance phase . as of the end of 2017 , the deepwater horizon trustee council had approved 43 projects to enhance recreational use , many of which were still in progress as of december 2017 . these projects have provided new or enhanced facilities , such as pavilions , picnic areas , and boat ramps , according to a written statement by the federal trustees . the deepwater horizon trustee council has authorized roughly $218 million to restore coastal and marine wildlife — about 12 percent of the almost $1.8 billion ordered for this use by the settlement , primarily for birds ( $108 million ) , sea turtles ( $50 million ) , oysters ( $38 million ) , and fish ( $20 million ) . according to the 2016 programmatic restoration plan , restoring coastal and marine wildlife includes activities that restore the resources , such as fish , sea turtles , and deep coral communities , which contribute to a productive , biologically diverse , and resilient ecosystem .