vol . dynamic benchmark . asset class composition: equivalent to the asset class composition for the pbgc total fund . this is a dynamic composition portfolio , where the asset allocation varies over time in such a fashion so as to match that of the pbgc total fund for the broad asset classes domestic equity , foreign equity , fixed income , and riskless short maturity fixed - income assets ( eg , cash ) . the purpose of the dynamic benchmark in the pbgc total fund portfolio performance evaluation is to reflect the systematic risk exposure of the pbgc total fund as closely as possible while at the same time abstracting from any active tactical asset allocation undertaken by the pbgc total fund management , such as tactical allocations in specific subsectors within an asset class or investments in specific individual securities . the comparisons allowed us to analyze various aspects of the pbgc total fund's risk - adjusted performance . given that the primary function of pbgc is to support its liabilities — the pension benefits associated with terminated , trusteed plans — the portfolio performance evaluation was conducted using asset - only returns and asset returns net of the liability return . to determine how well pbgc's investment policies and operations comport with best practices in the industry , we interviewed pbgc's inspector general , current pbgc board member's representatives , and pbgc staff . we also reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations . to evaluate pbgc's operational guidelines and procedures , we obtained procedures manuals and documents that pbgc's staff uses to manage and oversee their operations . to evaluate pbgc's investment policy statements against industry best practices , we obtained information and documentation of actual practices used by industry experts , foreign pension insurers in canada , the netherlands , switzerland , and the united kingdom , investment committee documents from large state pension plan providers , and a property and casualty insurance provider . to identify a list of items that could be included in an investment policy we first conducted a literature search for documents with guidance on investment policy statements . we found documents from expert organizations which provide standards that financial industry professionals follow to ensure they are meeting the fiduciary requirements under relevant state and federal laws . these organizations include the chartered financial analyst institute , the foundation for fiduciary studies , the association of pension plan fund auditors , the government finance officers association , and independent fiduciary services . we started with the chartered financial analyst institute's documents and listed elements of an investment policy identified in a document created by the institute and then compared that list to elements identified in the documents we reviewed created by other organizations . we also considered the investment policy statements of other entities and the elements that were frequently found in those statements . in our list , we kept items that were mentioned in more than one of the documents from the five expert organizations .