both concurred with our recommendation . state said it very much agreed with the overall findings and , in particular , the recognition that continued u.s. programs will be needed for the foreseeable future to sustain operations in colombia and achieve u.s. foreign policy goals . it further said that the time is appropriate for a comprehensive review of u.s. programs with the colombian army and the colombian national police and intends to address our recommendation for providing key program information to the congress beginning in the fiscal year 2005 appropriations cycle . defense stated that it would work with state to establish clear objectives and would coordinate with state and other agencies involved to develop performance measures . defense added that , once performance measures are established , it would augment staff at the u.s. embassy bogotá military group to collect information for measuring progress . to determine the status of u.s. counternarcotics assistance provided to the colombian army in fiscal years 2000-03 , and how this assistance has been used , we reviewed pertinent planning , implementation , and related documentation and met with cognizant u.s. officials at the departments of state and defense , washington , d.c. ; the u.s. southern command headquarters , miami , florida ; and the u.s. embassy in bogotá , colombia . we also met with u.s. - funded contractor representatives at various colombian army bases ; the colombian army aviation battalion commander and his staff at tolemaida ; and the counternarcotics brigade commander and his staff at larandia and tres esquinas . in addition , we observed a colombian army counternarcotics brigade airlift operation . to determine what the u.s. - supported colombian national police aerial eradication program has accomplished in recent years , we reviewed pertinent documentation and met with cognizant officials at the department of state , bureau for international narcotics and law enforcement affairs in washington , d.c. , and the office of aviation headquarters office at patrick air force base , florida . in colombia , we met with office of aviation officials and contractor representatives at the office of aviation headquarters office at the el dorado international airport in bogotá ; the colombian national police base at guaymaral ; and operational sites at larandia , san jose del guaviare , santa ana , and villa garzon in the primary coca - growing regions of colombia . this has not always been the case . for example , according to u.s. embassy data , at least 105 colombian army personnel have completed the basic helicopter maintenance course . as of january 2003 , 65 of these individuals were scheduled to receive additional training that would enable them to become fully qualified mechanics who can perform maintenance without u.s. - contractor oversight . of these , 22 had not reported for training . neither the military group nor the aviation battalion could provide us the location of these individuals . according to u.s. contractor personnel , at least 10 pilots - in - command should be available to fly missions . although 19 colombian army personnel were qualified to serve as pilots - in - command on uh - 1n helicopters , as of january 2003 , only one pilot was assigned to serve in this position .