ncua would be regulating its competition . if ncua , like ftc , were to consider enforcement of the requirement as called for by evaluating the conclusions of the audit or scrutinizing the financial health of the insurer , ncua's action would be inherently suspect . in addition to the regulatory conflict of interest , closely associating ncua with nonfederally insured institutions could have an undesirable “shadow effect.” for example , if ncua were to be responsible for reviewing the private insurer's audit report , ncua would be closely associated with determinations about the financial health of the private deposit insurer . should the insurer , which is subject to state regulation , fail to honor its insurance commitments , ncua's credibility as a regulator would be compromised . concerns about a regulatory conflict of interest also would accompany ncua actions involving the shut - down requirement . to determine the extent to which asi provided copies of its annual audits to state regulators and credit unions it insures , we interviewed state regulators in states where asi insures credit unions and contacted the management of 26 credit unions that are insured by asi . additionally , to understand the state regulatory framework for asi , we interviewed officials at the ohio department of insurance and department of financial institutions . to evaluate which federal agency could most effectively enforce these requirements , we interviewed ftc staff and officials from ncua , fdic , and various interested industry groups to discuss their perspectives and obtain their positions on enforcement of section 43 requirements . in effect , ncua would be shutting down the institutions that are members of the agency's competition — the private deposit insurer . similarly , ncua enforcement of the look alike provision could be seen as an attempt by the agency to eliminate entities that compete with federally insured credit unions . ncua's concern that its enforcement of section 43 would require federally insured institutions to subsidize the regulation of institutions that forgo insurance , in part involves a question of a level playing field ; that is , federally insured institutions would be forced to pay the cost of regulating competitors who may benefit from avoiding federal deposit insurance . this concern also touches on other considerations . for example , this additional cost could act as an incentive for federally insured credit unions to convert to private deposit insurance . however , who pays for the oversight of nonfederally insured institutions is a more complicated issue , because federally insured institutions could also benefit from clarifying for consumers the insurance status of these institutions , and if ftc oversees nonfederally insured institutions , taxpayers bear the costs . section 43 specifies that ftc shall enforce compliance with its requirements , and any regulations or orders issued under it . in addition , the section charges ftc with specific responsibilities . ftc is to prescribe “the manner and content of disclosure required under the section” in order to “ensure that current and prospective customers understand the risks involved in forgoing federal deposit insurance.” also , the section authorizes ftc , in consultation with fdic , to exempt an institution from the shut - down provision .