area . terminaling of gasoline and other light petroleum products ; wholesale sale of gasoline . marketing of motor gasoline ; refining and marketing of carb gasoline ; bidding for and refining of jet fuel for the u.s. navy ; terminaling of gasoline and other light petroleum products ; pipeline transportation of light petroleum products ; pipeline transportation of crude oil ; refining and marketing of paraffinic base oil ; production and sale of jet turbine oil . excludes two divestiture orders in the funeral services industry . the service corporation international and lagrone divestiture order ( c - 3959 ; 981-0108 ) announced for public comment on may 18 , 2000 , required a divestiture of a funeral home only if the corporation acquired a particular funeral home . as of june 30 , 2002 , the corporation had not acquired the funeral home ; therefore , it had no obligation to divest the funeral home . the loewen group inc. , and loewen group international , inc. , and heritage family funeral services , inc. , divestiture order ( c - 3678 ; 931-0084 ) announced for public comment on may 14 , 1996 , required a divestiture of a funeral home . as of june 30 , 2002 , the merger had not taken place ; therefore , it had no obligation to divest the funeral home . the hart - scott - rodino act ( hsr act ) of 1976 reviews usually begin with the parties filing for a proposed merger or acquisition . the premerger notification provisions of the hsr act require companies exceeding certain thresholds of company size and value of the transaction to notify the federal trade commission ( ftc ) and the department of justice's ( doj ) antitrust division of the proposed merger transaction , submit documents and other information to the agencies concerning the transaction , and refrain from consummating the transaction until a specified waiting period has expired or their request for early termination of the waiting period is granted by the appropriate antitrust enforcement agency . table 8 shows that the number of transactions reported has more than doubled from 2,262 in fiscal year 1990 to 4,926 in fiscal year 2000 , and the percent of early terminations granted has ranged from 65.8 percent to 81.3 percent over the same time period . in fiscal 2001 , however , after the filing thresholds and filing fees were raised , there were only 2,376 filings . the hsr act was amended in late 2000 to significantly increase the filing thresholds . ftc and the antitrust division also may become aware of mergers that are not subject to hsr act requirements but that are potentially anticompetitive , using techniques such as ( 1 ) monitoring the trade press and internet resources ; ( 2 ) responding to and following up on case leads from congressional offices , other executive branch agencies , and state and local governments ; and ( 3 ) encouraging consumers , businesses , and the bar to notify the ftc and the antitrust division of possibly anticompetitive mergers .