also , this option has precedent . and by word - of - mouth . one association's web site we identified lists the names and telephone numbers of school officials in counties covered by social security and how to contact those officials for such work . a financial planner's web site we identified indicated that individuals who worked as little as 1 day under a social security - covered position to quality for the gpo exemption could earn $150,000 or more in benefits over their lifetime . in georgia , officials in one district reported that 24 individuals have used or plan to use covered employment to take advantage of the gpo exemption . officials told us that teachers generally agreed to work for approximately 1 year in another teaching position in a school district covered by social security to use the gpo exemption . today i will discuss the findings of our review . in summary , because no central data exists on use of the gpo exemption by individuals in approximately 2,300 state and local government retirement plans nationwide , we could not definitively confirm that this practice is occurring in states other than texas and georgia . in those two states , 4,819 individuals had performed work in social security - covered positions for short periods to qualify for the gpo last - day exemption . in texas , teachers typically worked a single day in nonteaching positions covered by social security , such as clerical or janitorial positions . in georgia , teachers generally agreed to work for approximately 1 year in another teaching position in a school district covered by social security . officials in both states indicated that use of the exemption would likely continue to grow as awareness increases and it becomes part of individuals' retirement planning . for the cases we identified , increased long - term benefit payments from the social security trust fund could be about $450 million over the long term and would likely rise further if use of the exemption grows in the states we visited and spreads to others . ssa officials acknowledged that use of the exemption might be possible in other state and local government retirement plans that include both those positions covered by social security and those not . the gpo “loophole” raises fairness and equity concerns for those receiving a social security pension and are currently subject to the spousal benefit offset . in the states we visited , individuals with a relatively minimal investment of work time and social security contributions can gain access to potentially many years of full social security spousal benefits . the last - day exemption could also have a more significant impact if the practice grows and begins to be adopted by other states and localities . considering the potential for abuse , our report presented options for revising the gpo exemption , such as changing the last - day provision to a longer minimum time period or using a proportional approach based on the number of working years spent in covered and noncovered employment for determining the extent to which the gpo applies . the social security act requires that most workers be covered by social security benefits . workers contribute to the program via wage deductions .