we then estimated the monthly cost for each device . for leased devices , we used the monthly cost of the lease . for purchased devices , we used the total cost of the device divided by an estimated service life for the device . we estimated this service life using some indication available in the documentation , such as the length of time a maintenance agreement or extended warranty was provided for the device . army officials provided 183 quotes for devices . of those , we were able to include 24 in our analysis . we excluded the other 159 because either we could not determine the cost for individual devices in a quote , there was not enough information on a device's specifications , there was no dla document services equivalent for the device , or we were unable to estimate a service life based on the information provided . because the information included all vendor quotes provided and not just those that were selected by a customer , the costs may not represent the actual costs of devices to the customer . for the air force , we used an estimated average monthly cost based the standard pricing included in the air force's 2018 catalog for print devices . we reviewed the catalog and assigned each multifunction device offered to a dla document services category , based on the devices' specifications . the air force's catalog contained 32 devices ; we were able to determine the equivalent dla document services category for 13 of those devices . the guidance noted that those reductions could save millions of dollars annually . the guidance also included a requirement for biannual reporting by all army commands , organizations , and activities on their print device inventory , number of printing devices required , and annual costs for printing device acquisitions . in june 2014 , army commands reported an average of 5 users for each single function printer , compared to an industry standard of 7 users per device and a dod goal of one print device per office space of 12 or fewer users and assessing the ratio of printers to employees in larger spaces . according to headquarters , department of the army officials , however , army commands objected to the workload associated with this reporting requirement and discontinued issuing the reports . as a result , the army did not follow through with enforcing the reporting , which limited the ability of army officials to ensure that army commands achieved the planned reductions . navy and marine corps: the department of the navy established guidance in 2013 , directing department of the navy officials to work with dla document services to conduct assessments and develop a phased execution plan for the number and type of print devices navy and marine corps organizations require . the guidance also directed department of the navy officials to develop policy requiring that the acquisition of new devices be exclusively through dla document services . dla subsequently conducted these assessments and found that the navy and marine corps had an average of one device for every seven users .