energyguide . energyguide is designed to provide information displayed on a label attached to selected products that enables consumers to compare the estimated energy cost and energy consumption of different models within a given product category . energyguide's familiar yellow label has aided consumers for over 30 years in selecting household appliances and consumer electronics such as televisions and dishwashers by providing information on how much it will cost to run particular models per year and their level of energy consumption . epca requires doe , in consultation with ftc , to study new product categories to determine whether they should be added to the energyguide program and to report annually on the energy savings of the program . manufacturers' compliance with the standards is mandatory . ftc has the authority to add additional product categories if the commission determines that labeling for the product is likely to assist consumers in making purchasing decisions . the statute requires ftc to set and revise standards through the federal rulemaking process . energy star . energy star is designed to identify the most energy efficient models – – generally the top 25 percent – – within a given category of products without sacrificing performance . manufacturers of qualified products can place the widely recognized energy star label on qualifying products as an indication of energy efficiency , which gives the manufacturer an incentive to improve energy efficiency . participation is voluntary . epa has reported that the additional incentive the energy star program provides as a marketing tool for manufacturers encourages efficiency beyond the level of federal minimum efficiency standards , further reducing energy consumption and the associated greenhouse gas emissions . according to epa , as of 2012 , energy star products had prevented more than 150 million metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions annually and reduced electricity consumption by more than 200 billion kilowatt - hours ( kwh ) per year – – a savings that offsets the need for more than 185 additional power plants . figure 1 provides an example of the different types of information conveyed to consumers for household appliances and consumer electronics by each of the three programs . specifically , the figure illustrates a hypothetical case of two models of dishwasher , a product covered by all three programs . in the example , both dishwashers meet the federal minimum efficiency standards . however , the model on the left side of the figure qualifies for an energy star label – – as noted by the energy star logo on the lower right corner of the energy guide label for that product – – while the model on the right does not . the manufacturers of both models also publish an energyguide label as shown in the figure and are compliant with the federal minimum energy efficiency standard . in 2011 , the most recent year for which data are available , doe's budget for these programs was $42 million ; epa's was $53.3 million ; and ftc officials estimated that ftc spent about $215,000 , for a total of about $96 million to administer these programs . the scope of products that the three federal energy efficiency programs cover varies .