as a result , they underestimated the demand for some items . a customer orders the items from the prime vendor . once the defense supply center - philadelphia approves the order , the prime vendor fills , ships , and tracks the order through final acceptance . the prime vendor then submits an invoice to defense supply center - philadelphia , which authorizes payment to the prime vendor and bills the customer . according to dla , the benefits of prime vendor contracts include improved access to a wide range of high - quality products , rapid and predictable delivery , and reduced overhead charges . other benefits of prime vendor contracts include significant reductions in the manpower needed to manage and warehouse these items at dla and reduced transportation costs . in addition , prime vendor contracts provide for surge and broader mobilization capabilities , and worldwide customer support . dla also uses service contractors to provide services other than the acquisition of commodities . for example , the defense reutilization and marketing service uses contractors to support the disposal of government equipment and supplies considered surplus or unnecessary to dod's mission . similarly , dla uses service contractors to provide oversight , audit , and verification procedures for the destruction of dod scrap property ; operate defense reutilization and marketing office locations around the world including sites in kuwait , iraq , and afghanistan ; and run the defense distribution center , kuwait , southwest asia which provides distribution services and surge capability to all four service components to support the warfighters operating in the region . current commodities distributed by the center are repair parts , barrier / construction materiel , clothing , textiles , and tents . the center also provides consolidated shipment and containerization services , as well as , routine logistic support to the military community in the u.s. central command's theater of operations . dla determines what and how many items it buys based on requirements from its military service customers . he further identified defense acquisition as the chief institutional challenge facing the department . given these budgetary pressures and the crucial role dla plays in supporting the military service in the united states and overseas , it is vital that dod ensure dla is getting value for the commodities and services it acquires . earlier this year we testified before this committee that significant improvement in dod's acquisition of weapons systems is possible and that the ability to measure knowledge , processes , and outcomes is critical to achieving such improvements . we also testified that dod continues to face challenges in employing sound practices when contracting for and managing service contracts . according to contract documents , the contract actions were not competed because of an “unusual and compelling urgency,” one of the circumstances permitting other than full and open competition . despite these actions , dla was unable to meet its deadline due to quality and delivery problems and had to terminate several contracts because the contractors could not meet delivery requirements . when contracting for commodities or services , dla has a number of choices regarding the contracting arrangements to use .