( see fig . the remaining 7 percent of hud's total budgetary resources included the government national mortgage association ( ginnie mae ) ; the offices of policy development and research , fair housing and equal opportunity , and lead - based paint and poisoning prevention ; and hud's management and administration including financial operations across all of hud's programs . pih - administered programs are intended to ensure safe , decent , and affordable housing for low - income families ; create opportunities for self - sufficiency and economic independence ; reduce improper payments ; and support mixed income developments to replace distressed public housing . these programs include grants and subsidies to public housing authorities ( pha ) nationwide to provide affordable housing opportunities for about 3.3 million low - income families . section 8 of the united states housing act of 1937 , as amended , includes programs for tenant - based vouchers and project - based rental assistance . during fiscal years 2007 through 2011 , the number of phas increased from 3,100 to 4,150 . the oh - administered programs include fha , which insures mortgages and loans made by fha - approved lenders for single and multifamily housing units intended to serve borrowers who are not being adequately served by the conventional market , including first - time homebuyers , minorities , low - income families and residents of underserved communities . during the recent mortgage crisis , larger segments of the market began using fha - insured loans , resulting in the more than doubling of the dollar amount of these mortgage loans from about $439 billion in fiscal year 2007 to over $1 trillion in fiscal year 2011 . ( see fig . cpd provides funding mainly through the community development block grants ( cdbg ) program , which is the most widely available source of federal assistance to state and local governments for neighborhood revitalization , housing rehabilitation activities , and economic development . because of the funding mechanism that the cdbg program already has in place to provide federal funds to states and localities , the program is widely viewed as a convenient tool for disbursing large amounts of federal funds to address emergencies . over the past two decades , cdbg has repeatedly been adapted as a vehicle to respond to federal disasters , such as floods , hurricanes , and terrorist attacks — including being used to facilitate disaster relief funds in the wakes of hurricanes katrina and rita in 2006 and 2007 . in addition , hud programs are used to deliver funds for activities associated with the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) , which is one of the federal government's key efforts to the stimulate the economy in response to the recent economic crisis . goals of the recovery act include helping preserve and create jobs , promoting economic recovery from the recent economic recession , providing investments to increase economic efficiency by spurring technological advances , and investing in infrastructure to provide long - term economic benefits .