we confirmed this information with each program . in addition , we reviewed documents and conducted interviews with program officials in six private school choice programs in five states ( arizona , florida , indiana , ohio , and wisconsin ) . we also interviewed officials from the u.s. department of education ( education ) as well as national stakeholder groups and private school choice researchers , which we selected to obtain a range of perspectives on private school choice initiatives . to describe information that participating private schools make available to the public , we conducted a review of a nationally representative stratified random sample of 344 private schools participating in one of the voucher programs to identify information provided on school websites to parents and the public . to obtain information on how parents are informed about changes in their child's rights under federal law , we reviewed education guidance and policy documents on the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) and parentally placed private school students . to provide examples of how individual schools and programs make information available to the public and families , we also visited and interviewed officials at two private school choice programs , three private schools , and one school district in florida . additionally , we spoke with 17 families who had recently interacted with private school choice programs . we have clarified the language in the final report as appropriate . further , education commented that the draft report did not address factors that often lead parents to enroll their children in private schools in state choice programs . these factors were not addressed because they are beyond the scope of our objectives for this report . finally , education noted that parents may believe that educational benefits or services provided by private schools to their children with disabilities outweigh any rights conferred by idea or services provided by public schools . this is an important point , and this perspective was included in the draft education reviewed . for example , in the draft education reviewed , we stated that some families with whom we spoke were not concerned about any changes in rights because they felt their students were not being well served in public schools . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to interested congressional committees and to the department of education . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 617 ) 788-0580 or nowickij@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .