omb circular no . a - 102 , grants and cooperative agreements with state and local governments , provides governmentwide guidance for administering grants provided to state and local governments and prescribes similar procedures as those included in circular no . direct assistance programs are not subject to the same governmentwide policies as grants ; procedures governing the application and award processes for direct assistance are prescribed in guidance and regulations promulgated by the cognizant federal agency responsible for administering the program . most grant applicants that apply directly to the federal government are required to complete an application for federal assistance , standard form ( sf ) 424 . the sf 424 provides federal agencies with entity information , such as name , employer identification number , address , and a descriptive title of the project for which the grant will be used . the applicant is required to certify that the information provided on the sf 424 is true and correct and whether the applicant is currently delinquent on any federal debt . while most federal grant and direct assistance recipients pay their federal taxes , we identified tens of thousands of grant and direct assistance recipients that collectively owed about $790 million in federal taxes as of september 2006 . these tax debts were owed by entities who received federal payments directly from federal payment systems during fiscal years 2005 and 2006 and individuals who participated in hud's section 8 tenant - based housing program as landlords during fiscal years 2005 and 2006 . we used irs's september 2006 unpaid assessments file data to calculate the amount of taxes owed at or about the time the various grant recipients received their grant payments . specifically , we found 2,000 of about 32,000 recipients ( about 6 percent ) who received federal grant and direct assistance benefits directly from three of the largest federal payment systems had more than $270 million of unpaid federal taxes . about $110 million of the $270 million in unpaid taxes represents unpaid payroll taxes . 37,000 of over 1 million landlords ( about 4 percent ) participating in the hud section 8 program had about $520 million of unpaid federal taxes . most of these tax debts were unpaid individual income taxes . in our audit , we found that grant recipients had a substantial amount of unpaid payroll taxes . employers may be subject to civil and criminal penalties if they do not remit payroll taxes to the federal government . when an employer withholds taxes from an employee's wages , the employer is deemed to have a fiduciary responsibility to hold these funds “in trust” for the federal government until the employer makes a federal tax deposit in that amount . to the extent these withheld amounts are not forwarded , the employer is liable for these amounts , as well as the employer's matching federal insurance contribution act contributions for social security and medicare . individuals employed by the employer ( eg , owners or officers ) may be held personally liable for the withheld amounts not forwarded and assessed a civil monetary penalty known as a trust fund recovery penalty ( tfrp ) .