usda had no comments . ntsb generally agreed with our findings and recommendations to faa and provided several comments . first , ntsb noted that our use of the terms “reactive” and “proactive” implied a new approach to aviation safety data analysis that is different from past analyses of accidents and incidents to improve safety . the agency noted that a more efficient , effective approach to safety analysis should continue to include faa's previous reactive approach as well as new , more predictive capabilities . we agree with ntsb's comment and note that our report indicates that faa plans to continue to use data to analyze past safety events as it also works to use data more proactively . ntsb further noted that the success of sms will depend on the maturation of faa's data analysis capabilities . second , ntsb agreed with our finding that the lack of a final plan for asias and for sms implementation , which are key elements of faa's planned proactive safety analysis capability , was a cause for concern . the agency noted that it had made several recommendations to faa to require sms programs for part 121 , part 135 , and part 91 carriers and that faa had not yet taken action to require these programs . third , regarding faa's access to voluntarily reported data , ntsb agreed with our finding that the redaction of flight details from asap and foqa analyses is a serious constraint on the thoroughness and potential utility of asias and other assessments of safety . if faa does not address these data limitations , ntsb observed , such constraints are likely to pose serious and continuing threats to the broader use of voluntary reporting programs to support safety analysis . in ntsb's view , our recommendations to faa do not go far enough to recommend mechanisms besides redaction , such as statutory exemptions from disclosure , to protect these data from enforcement and disciplinary uses or public release . we did not revise our recommendations to faa to include these issues because , while we found that participation was temporarily affected , in part , by employees' fears of disciplinary action by their employers , we did not find evidence that participation was inhibited by the fear of enforcement action by faa or public disclosure . in addition , our work indicated that the current mechanisms to protect the data appeared to be working . fourth , regarding faa's access to data on various safety events , ntsb noted the importance of faa collecting the necessary data to support its new approaches to data analysis rather than simply combining existing data sources into an analysis program . what does faa do to help ensure the quality of the data it uses to oversee aviation safety ? to answer these questions , we reviewed 13 aviation safety databases maintained by faa , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , the national transportation safety board ( ntsb ) , and the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .