for terrorist financing . the lack of such data hinders the fbi from conducting systematic analysis of trends and patterns focusing on alternative financing mechanisms from its case data . without such an assessment , the fbi would not have analyses that could aid in assessing risk and prioritizing efforts to address these and other mechanisms . according to tfos , it and the doj counterterrorism section have initiated a number of proactive data mining and data link analyses using a number of government and private data sources to identify potential terrorists and terrorist - related financing activities , but these initiatives generally focus on formal financial systems , not alternative financing mechanisms . according to the chief of tfos , the fbi plans to collect information from the field offices through its crime survey / threat assessment and annual field office reports , and these tools might include information on alternative financing mechanisms . however , the formats and results of these tools were not available to us during our review . it is important to note that there are few such cases . further details about our scope and methodology are contained in appendix i . in its fight against terrorism , the united states has focused on individuals and entities supporting or belonging to terrorist organizations including al qaeda , hizballah , hamas and others . we continue to believe the fbi should work in consultation with relevant u.s. government agencies to systematically collect and analyze information involving terrorists' use of alternative financing mechanisms , which would include strategizing with and engaging the expertise of other agencies such as treasury and dhs , among others . in response to our recommendation that the secretary of the treasury and the u.s. attorney general produce a planned report on precious stones and commodities , the department of the treasury responded that the report would be issued as an appendix to the 2003 national money laundering strategy . however , the strategy was to be issued in february 2003 and had not been issued as of our receipt of treasury's comments on october 29 , 2003 . further , the treasury did not address whether their report would include up - to - date information from law enforcement investigations of links between precious stones and commodity trading and the funding of terrorist groups , as required under the strategy . the department of justice did not comment on this recommendation . we continue to recommend that their report be based on up - to - date law enforcement investigations given the conflicting views and the lack of comprehensive reporting on terrorists' use of precious stones and commodities . the irs agreed with our overall recommendation to establish irs procedures and state charity official guidelines to regularly share data on charities as allowed by federal law . although irs told us at the conclusion of our fieldwork that they planned to establish this information - sharing program by december 31 , 2004 , in response to our draft report and recommendation , the irs committed to expediting its efforts by one year , having procedures in place by the end of calendar year 2003 . subsequent to our fieldwork , the irs exhibited progress by producing draft procedures and guidelines .