recovery services . three of the stakeholders we interviewed identified gaps in recovery service research for adolescents and young adults . officials from one advocacy and education organization said there has been little research conducted to determine the types of recovery services that are most effective for adolescents in preventing relapse . officials from one research organization said that it would be beneficial to develop a variety of recovery services , since services are likely to vary in effectiveness for different groups of adolescents and young adults . recovery research projects . one research project involved testing the effectiveness of a smartphone application to deliver recovery services to adolescents after they received treatment for a substance use disorder , compared to a control group of adolescents that received recovery services via traditional methods . examples of recovery services delivered with a smartphone application include participating in online recovery group discussions and receiving motivational messages . the project's participants included 400 adolescents to be assessed over a 9-month period . the project planned to collect a variety of information , such as how frequently participants used the smartphone application , how long they abstained from substance use , and their quality of life . in fiscal year 2017 , nida and nine other entities within hhs provided grant funding for a large study — the adolescent brain cognitive development study — designed to examine the effects of substance use and other factors on development of the adolescent brain . this study was established as a result of the collaboration of several federal agencies that determined such a study was needed because of gaps in knowledge about how substance use and other factors affect brain development . this study is a longitudinal study that plans to collect data from a sample of about 11,000 children across the country for 10 years , beginning when they are 9 or 10 years old . twenty - one research sites across the country were selected to collect information from children about their brain development , genetics , substance use , mental health , physical health , environment , and other measures . in addition , this study is funding a data analysis and informatics center to develop the procedures for data collection , create and maintain a common database pooling data from all of the research sites , and conduct data analysis . education did not have comments on our draft . ( see app . i for the percentages of persons served that were adolescents and young adults , by grantee. ) in addition to the substance abuse prevention and treatment block grant , other federal grant programs provide funds for prevention , treatment , and recovery services across age groups , but do not specifically target adolescents and young adults . for example , the state targeted response to the opioid crisis grant program , administered by samhsa , aims to help states and others reduce the number of opioid overdose related deaths by providing funds for prevention , treatment , and recovery services for opioid use disorders . in fiscal year 2017 , samhsa awarded about $485 million in grants to 50 states , the district of columbia , and 6 territories through this program .