other administrative services . analyzing the economic aspects of foreign nuclear programs , analyzing and producing reports on nuclear security issues in one region , processing correspondence , and data entry . one performance work statement included providing administrative and clerical support for functions such as responding to freedom of information act inquiries and providing support for training procurement , development , and evaluation . other management support services . providing technical coordination and document - editing services and reviewing , assessing , and linking government requirements to project documents . task monitors . normally assigned by a program office , task monitors assist the cor with oversight of contractor performance . during the life of a contract , contracting officers and cors regularly monitor contractors' performance to ensure the contractors are complying with the terms of the contract . this monitoring varies across contracts and can include , for example , reviewing the contractor's monthly invoices or reports and conducting formal annual evaluations . according to nnsa officials , nnsa increased its use of sscs in fiscal years 2010 through 2018 due to: ( 1 ) increases in appropriations under the weapons activities appropriations account for additional work and ( 2 ) a decrease in the number of authorized federal employee ftes due to a decrease in the statutory cap from fiscal years 2014 to 2015 . first , as shown in figure 3 , nnsa's total appropriations increased from about $9.9 billion in fiscal year 2010 to $14.7 billion in fiscal year 2018 in current dollars . the increase in nnsa's appropriations occurred mainly in the weapons activities appropriations account , which increased from $6.4 billion in fiscal year 2010 to $10.6 billion in fiscal year 2018 in current dollars . during the same period , nnsa's appropriations for defense nuclear nonproliferation generally remained around $2 billion per fiscal year in current dollars , and appropriations for federal salaries and expenses — which covers the costs of all federal employees , including those working on weapons activities and defense nuclear nonproliferation programs — remained around $400 million per fiscal year in current dollars . the increases in appropriations for the weapons activities account generally reflect the increasing workload to modernize the nuclear weapons stockpile and its associated infrastructure , as described in the 2010 and 2018 nuclear posture reviews . according to an official in the office of defense programs , that office has increased its use of sscs because of the increase in refurbishment activities in the nuclear stockpile . nnsa uses the defense nuclear nonproliferation appropriation account to fund programs: ( 1 ) that provide , for example , policy and technical leadership to prevent or limit the spread of materials , technology , and expertise related to weapons of mass destruction ; ( 2 ) that develop technologies to detect nuclear proliferation ; ( 3 ) that secure or eliminate inventories of nuclear weapons - related materials and infrastructure ; and ( 4 ) that ensure a technically trained emergency - management response is available both domestically and worldwide to nuclear and radiological incidents . table 1 provides information on the three funding sources and the types of sscs funded with each source .