we will continue to monitor the agency's implementation of the other recommendations . to be eligible for disability insurance ( di ) or supplemental security income ( ssi ) benefits , an individual generally must have a medically determined physical or mental impairment that ( 1 ) has lasted or is expected to last at least 1 year or result in death and ( 2 ) prevents the individual from engaging in substantial gainful activity ( sga ) . once an individual is receiving benefits , cdrs are periodically conducted by ssa to determine if the individual has medically improved to the point of being able to work and is no longer eligible for benefits . when an individual becomes eligible for di or ssi benefits , ssa mails a ticket to them . generally , di and ssi beneficiaries from 18 to 64 years old are eligible ticket holders and may choose whether or not to use their tickets , and with which service providers . likewise , ssa - approved ens can decide whether to serve an individual ticket holder . ticket holders who assign their tickets and demonstrate “timely progress” toward self - supporting employment , such as by fulfilling minimum earnings or education requirements to be reviewed regularly , are exempted from medical cdrs . this provision provides an incentive for individuals to assign their tickets who otherwise might not attempt to work out of fear that a medical cdr would cause them to lose benefit eligibility . the ticket holder's ticket becomes “assigned” once the ticket holder and en decide to work together and submit an individual work plan describing the services the en will provide . a ticket holder can unassign the ticket from the en at any time , sometimes switching to a different en . a more detailed explanation of our methodology is available in our full report . our work was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , we found that more ticket holders and ens are participating in the ticket program since ssa revised its regulations in 2008 , but the overall participation rate remains low . in preliminary research examining the program prior to the 2008 regulatory changes , mathematica found more exits from the rolls would be needed to offset existing operational costs . ssa has not yet studied whether the 2008 changes have enabled more ticket holders to obtain employment and exit the benefit rolls . however , prioritizing and carrying through with their plans will be important going forward to determine the extent to which ticket holders actually exit the rolls due to long - term employment . previously , ens were not eligible for ssa payment until a ticket holder had earnings at the sga level or above . now there is a first phase of four $1,275 payments over a ticket holder's first 9 months working at the trial work level , which is below sga and , in many cases , equates to part - time work .