ii. ) in january 1999 , hcfa issued final rules requiring hhas to conduct comprehensive patient assessments incorporating the oasis data elements and electronically report the oasis data collected . the requirement covers most private pay as well as medicare and medicaid patients . collection of the information relies on both observation of patient function by a nurse or therapist and patient responses . for each patient receiving skilled care , the data are generally collected at the initial visit , every 60 days thereafter for the duration of treatment , and at discharge . hhas report the data to their state survey and certification agencies , which then report the data to a central repository maintained by hcfa . concerns regarding the privacy of oasis information were expressed shortly after hcfa issued its rules on oasis data collection and reporting in january 1999 . how does hcfa plan to use the oasis - generated information ? since the implementation of oasis , have patient assessments changed and have additional costs been incurred by hhas ? what has hcfa done to safeguard the confidentiality of oasis data ? to answer these questions , we interviewed industry representatives , home health experts , hcfa and state officials , and state surveyors in several states . we also obtained perspectives on oasis implementation by visiting several hhas in urban and rural areas and interviewing agencies with reputations for high - quality practices . because reliable data are not available , we could not obtain a comprehensive accounting of all possible costs associated with complying with the oasis mandate . rather , we conducted a survey of a representative sample of 50 hhas regarding ongoing oasis - related costs beyond those that the hhas previously incurred for patient assessments . we asked specifically for the agencies' estimates of changes in staff time for data collection and reporting and for training new staff . ( for more detail on our survey methodology , see app . finally , we reviewed relevant documents , including hcfa regulations and manuals . our review was conducted from may 2000 to november 2000 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . medicare's home health care benefit enables beneficiaries with post - acute - care needs and chronic conditions to receive certain skilled nursing , therapy , and aide services in their homes rather than in other settings . until recently , medicare has reimbursed hhas for their costs , subject to limits , for services they provide to the program's beneficiaries . between 1990 and 1997 , medicare expenditures for home health services went up three times faster than spending for the program as a whole . to qualify for medicare's home health benefit , a beneficiary must be confined to his or her residence ( “homebound” ) , must be under a physician's care,and must require physical therapy , speech therapy , continued occupational therapy , or skilled nursing on an intermittent basis . beneficiaries are not liable for any coinsurance or deductibles for these services and may receive care as long as they meet the eligibility criteria .