and libraries . .” based on this direction , and following the recommendations of a federal - state joint board on universal service , fcc established the schools and libraries universal service mechanism that is commonly referred to as the e - rate program . the program is funded through statutorily mandated payments by companies that provide interstate telecommunications services . many of these companies , in turn , pass their contribution costs on to their subscribers through a line item on subscribers' phone bills . fcc capped funding for the e - rate program at $2.25 billion per year , although funding requests by schools and libraries can greatly exceed the cap . for example , schools and libraries requested more than $4.2 billion in e - rate funding for the 2004 funding year . in 1998 , fcc appointed usac as the program's permanent administrator , although fcc retains responsibility for overseeing the program's operations and ensuring compliance with the commission's rules . in response to congressional conference committee direction , fcc has specified that usac “may not make policy , interpret unclear provisions of the statute or rules , or interpret the intent of congress.” usac is responsible for carrying out the program's day - to - day operations , such as maintaining a web site that contains program information and application procedures ; answering inquiries from schools and libraries ; processing and reviewing applications ; making funding commitment decisions and issuing funding commitment letters ; and collecting , managing , investing , and disbursing e - rate funds . the telecommunications act of 1996 did not include specific goals for supporting schools and libraries , but instead used general language directing fcc to establish competitively neutral rules for enhancing access to advanced telecommunications and information services for all public and nonprofit private elementary and secondary school classrooms and libraries . as the agency accountable for the e - rate program , fcc is responsible under the government performance and results act of 1993 ( results act ) for establishing the program's long - term strategic goals and annual goals , measuring its own performance in meeting these goals , and reporting publicly on how well it is doing . for fiscal years 2000 through 2002 , fcc's goals focused on achieving certain percentage levels of internet connectivity during a given fiscal year for schools , public school instructional classrooms , and libraries . however , the data that fcc used to report on its progress was limited to public schools ( thereby excluding two other major groups of beneficiaries — private schools and libraries ) and did not isolate the impact of e - rate funding from other sources of funding , such as state and local government . this is a significant measurement problem because , over the years , the demand for internal connections funding by applicants has exceeded the e - rate funds available for this purpose by billions of dollars . unsuccessful applicants had to rely on other sources of support to meet their internal connection needs . fcc permits — and in fact relies on — usac to establish administrative procedures that program participants are required to follow as they work through the application and funding process .