costs to employers . additional administrative costs associated with setting up and managing payroll - deduction iras may be a barrier for small employers , particularly those without electronic payroll processing . small business groups told us that costs are influenced by the number of employees participating in the program and whether an employer has a payroll processing system in place for automatic deductions and direct deposits to employee accounts . several experts told us many small employers lack electronic , or automatic , payroll systems , and these employers would be subject to higher management costs for offering payroll - deduction iras . according to labor , costs to employers also are significantly influenced by the number of ira providers to which an employer must remit contributions on behalf of employees . although experts reported that payroll - deduction iras represent costs to employers , we found varied opinions on the significance of those costs . experts advocating for expanded payroll - deduction iras reported that most employers would incur little or no costs since they already make payroll deductions for social security and medicare , as well as federal , state , and local taxes . according to these experts , payroll - deduction iras function like existing payroll tax withholdings , and adding another deduction would not be substantial . however , other experts and one report we reviewed indicated that employer costs may be significant , particularly for employers without electronic payrolls . the report did not estimate actual costs to employers on a per account basis . in our review , we were unable to identify reliable government data on actual costs to small employers . flexibility to promote payroll - deduction iras . according to ira providers , some employers are hesitant to offer a payroll - deduction ira program because they find labor's guidance limits their ability to effectively publicize the program to employees for fear of being subject to erisa requirements . several experts said expanding the scope of the retirement savings contribution credit , commonly known as the “saver's credit,” could encourage ira participation among workers who are not covered by an employer - sponsored retirement plan . they said expanding the saver's credit to include more middle - income earners and making the credit refundable — available to tax filers even if they do not owe income tax — could encourage more moderate - and low - income individuals to participate in iras . however , an expanded and refundable tax credit would have revenue implications for the federal government . other experts told us that automatically enrolling workers into payroll - deduction and simple iras could increase employee participation ; however , small business groups and ira providers said that mandatory automatic enrollment could be burdensome to small employers . in addition , given the lack of available income for some , several experts told us that low - income workers may opt out of automatic enrollment programs or be more inclined to make early withdrawals . experts also said increasing public awareness of the importance of saving for retirement and educating individuals about how to do so could increase ira participation .