trends in sanctions . based on our assessment of data reliability , we determined that we could assess broad trends in implemented sanctions nationwide , but because we could not conduct checks of the data in all 50 states and the district of columbia , we did not analyze trends across the states . for the homes we reviewed , using data from ltc , aem , and regional office and state enforcement case files as described above , we analyzed the number of civil money penalties ( cmp ) , denial of payments for new admissions ( dpna ) , and terminations implemented over two 3-year time periods — fiscal years 2000 through 2002 and fiscal years 2003 through 2005 . we aggregated sanctions into fiscal years on the basis of their implementation dates . to determine the duration of dpnas across the two time periods , we calculated the difference between the effective dates and the end of the dpnas . to determine the amount of cmps paid , we used the cmp tracking system ( cmpts ) , a cms financial management system , and aggregated cmps into fiscal years according to the year in which they were implemented . based on discussions with cms officials we determined that data in cmpts are generally reliable . they also stated that the system is the primary system used by cms for the collection of cmps and is the only source for cmp payment data used by cms . we matched cmp data in ltc and cmpts based on their collection number . for fiscal year 2005 , we relied on regional enforcement files for the amount of paid cmps . implementation rate of sanctions . we determined the implementation rate of sanctions imposed for the homes we reviewed in fiscal years 2000 through 2005 . the percentage of implemented sanctions was calculated by dividing the number of implemented sanctions by the total number of imposed sanctions . the total number of imposed sanctions included those that were implemented , not implemented , and were pending . we used data from our march 1999 report on imposed and implemented sanctions for the period july 1995 through october 1998 . range of sanctions . cms enforcement data allowed us to differentiate between per day and per instance cmps and mandatory and discretionary dpnas and terminations . we counted the number of sanctions by type and aggregated the number by fiscal year based on the date of implementation . the data provided the value of per day and per instance cmps , which were used to calculate the median values of cmps across the two time periods — fiscal years 2000 through 2002 and 2003 through 2005 . cycling in and out of compliance . we analyzed the enforcement data from ltc , aem , and cms regional office and state records to determine if the 63 homes we reviewed cycled in and out of compliance from fiscal years 2000 through 2005 . to determine the number of times homes cycled in and out of compliance , we counted the number of noncompliance cycles recorded for the 63 homes .