ient . the goal of the second working group is to develop a set of standard term and conditions that agencies can use when procuring light rail vehicles . one of the biggest challenges for transit agencies — particularly for s agencies with limited procurement experience — is writing a contract that makes it easy to identify its terms , including each party's financial risks . currently , each agency addresses risk in its request for proposals ( rfp ) and contracts in a different format , which makes it difficult for manufacturers to identify each party's risks and may slow down the procurement process . the standard terms and conditions document should ( 1 ) reduce ambiguities in procurement documents , ( 2 ) allow tra agencies and manufacturers to save time , and ( 3 ) reduce the need for consultants . according to apta officials , they expect to have a draft of standards and a draft of the contract terms and conditions guidance to industry stakeholders for their comment by late summer 2010 . in addition , there appears to be a push for standardizing high - speed intercity passenger rail cars . ( 2 ) what is the federal government's role in funding and setting standards for transit rail car procurement and design ? ( 3 ) what challenges , if any , do transit agencies face when procuring transit rail cars , and what actions have they and other stakeholders taken to help address them ? to determine the characteristics of the u.s. market for transit rail cars , we reviewed two databases — the fta's national transit database and the american public transportation association's ( apta ) transit database — to determine the number and types of passenger transit rail cars in the united states . we also interviewed officials from 23 of the 54 u.s. rail transit agencies as of 2008 . one is a high - platform car and the other is a low - floor car . the design for a low - floor car can also be used for a streetcar . these basic designs can be custom ized by changing the components as required — for example , stronger air conditioning systems for vehicles to be used in warm weather climates . another manufacturer has developed a basic , more affordable design commuter rail cars that can be customized to meet transit agencies' needs — for example , a customer can change seating and interior materials , but not the shape of the car . the manufacturer also offers custom des igns , but at a higher cost . manufacturers may have more opportunities for for standardization if transit agencies seek bids based on performance specifications that detail agencies' needs in terms of car performance , as opposed to design specifications that detail how a car should be built . transit agencies have attempted to decrease costs by jointly procuring transit rail cars or “piggybacking” on another transit agency's contract to take advantage of economies of scale . a joint procurement means that rail cars are purchased by two or more agencies under the same contract . fo r example , the miami - dade transit jointly purchased heavy rail cars with the maryland mass transit administration in the 1980s .