a - 123 processes . va also said that fpiar will migrate to a set of corrective action plan tools , templates , and documented procedures in fiscal year 2010 . va partially concurred with our recommendation that va establish a secretariat - level agencywide governance structure for omb circular no . a - 123 and financial statement audit remediation activities . in its comments , va stated it already established a senior assessment team as the coordinating body for corrective action planning to address control deficiencies identified as a result of omb circular no . a - 123 reviews and financial statement audits . as discussed in our draft report , we recognized va has taken action to establish agencywide accountability for oversight of its corrective action plans and has begun to establish related practices . however , these practices had not yet evolved into the rigorous framework needed to effectively ensure timely control weakness remediation . va stated that its internal controls service is developing a handbook for all stakeholders that will provide detailed guidance for corrective action planning , monitoring , reporting , and validation procedures for all financial statement audit and omb circular no . a - 123 significant deficiencies and material weaknesses . also , va noted that as fpiar matures , it will continue to define and meet staffing requirements . va also concurred with our recommendation that va issue procedures for specific actions and identify reasonable time frames , such as within 30 days , to implement va policy to capitalize pp&e projects when they are placed in service . va provided a copy of recently issued procedures which identified specific actions and time frames for the capitalization of pp&e . these procedures provide guidance for monthly communications between engineering staffs , program directors , and the appropriate fiscal activity regarding construction project status , costs , and useful life . the procedures also provide that property should be capitalized no later than the end of the fiscal month following the month that the property is put into use or accepted by va . if fully and effectively implemented , the guidance should help address the problems we found related to timely capitalization of va's pp&e . in its written comments , va also provided technical comments which we considered and incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to other interested congressional committees and to affected federal agencies . in this regard , we reviewed documentation and transactions concerning 25 projects that had been placed in service since the start of fiscal year 2008: 21 projects at the albuquerque , new mexico medical center and 4 projects at the lyons , new jersey medical center to determine how long it took va to capitalize these projects after they had been placed in service . we also reviewed va's progress in implementing benefit payment reconciliation procedures in a timely manner . we interviewed va , oig , and independent auditor officials about mechanisms in place to oversee the design and implementation of near - term corrective action plans to remediate material financial reporting weaknesses identified through financial statement audits .