( percentage ) . the table lists the questions we asked rns at the eight vamcs we visited and their five most frequent responses . , rns performing non - nursing tasks ) how would you improve recruitment and hiring ? what contributes to the rn shortage ? lack of support for new hires lack of support staff ( i.e. shorten va's hiring process better advertisement for rn positions increase outreach ( i.e. , to nursing schools ) how is staffing determined ? available full - time equivalent employees ( ftee ) what types of supplemental staffing strategies are used ? randall b. williamson at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or williamsonr@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , marcia a. mann , assistant director ; n. rotimi adebonojo ; mary ann curran ; linda diggs ; martha a. fisher ; krister friday ; susannah bloch ; and suzanne worth made major contributions to this report . va health care: recruitment and retention challenges and efforts to make salaries competitive for nurse anesthetists . gao - 08-647t . washington , d.c.: april 9 , 2008 . va health care: many medical facilities have challenges in recruiting and retaining nurse anesthetists . gao - 08-56 . washington , d.c.: december 13 , 2007 . nursing workforce: hhs needs methodology to identify facilities with a critical shortage of nurses . nursing workforce: emerging nurse shortages due to multiple factors . gao - 01-944 . washington , d.c.: july 10 , 2001 . gao - 07-492r . what is not at your facility now that would keep you working here ? washington , d.c.: april 30 , 2007 . checked ( percentage ) q5: what steps did this facility take in the last 5 years to simplify or shorten the hiring process for new rns ? ( percentage ) 1 . ( during a hiring freeze units typically require authority from a resource board or other similar entity within the facility or visn to fill a vacant rn position. ) ( percentage ) q8: what was the average length of the visn or facility imposed hiring freezes that affected your ability to hire bedside non - management rns ? checked ( percentage ) q9: did this facility experience a lag in hiring that affected its ability to hire bedside non - management rns in the last 5 years ? ( a lag in hiring is a temporary delay in hiring rns or can be a recurring process that delays hiring , i.e. , only allowing a certain number of rns to be brought on board per pay period or requiring vacant positions to be approved by an entity such as a resource board. ) checked ( percentage ) q10: what type of restrictions imposed during a hiring freeze or lag affected your ability to fill bedside non - management rn positions ? visn freeze ( percentage ) center freeze ( percentage ) hiring lag ( percentage ) 1 . recruitment for vacant rn positions needed approval by the equivalent of a resource board 26 ( 16 ) 51 ( 31 ) 62 ( 38 ) 2 . recruitment for each rn position needed approval by the equivalent of a resource board 31 ( 19 ) 49 ( 30 ) 61 ( 37 ) 3 .