gao - 10-73 . washington , d.c.: november 24 , 2009 . the department of state did not provide comments . hhs also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate . in its comments , hhs stated that it agreed on the importance of expertise and research to the development of influenza vaccines produced using alternative technologies — cell - based and recombinant technologies and adjuvants . hhs also noted that the department has made significant contributions to advancing such expertise and research , as reflected in the collaboration within the department as well as with influenza vaccine manufacturers during the 2009 h1n1 pandemic . for example , hhs described how the biomedical advanced research and development authority , fda , and nih worked with manufacturers producing both the seasonal and pandemic influenza vaccine . after approving seasonal vaccines from six manufacturers during the summer of 2009 , fda approved pandemic vaccines from four manufacturers in september 2009 , and a pandemic vaccine from a fifth manufacturer in november 2009 . hhs also described work done that allowed for influenza vaccine to be produced more rapidly . for example , fda developed a technique to assess the sterility of vaccine , reducing the time for testing from 14 days to 5 days . hhs's written comments also noted the department's concern that our description of challenges identified by stakeholders could be construed as an endorsement of them . however , as stated in our objectives , scope , and methodology , we examined challenges identified by stakeholders to the development and licensure of influenza vaccines produced using alternative technologies , and we believe our report clearly attributes these statements to the stakeholders . in response to industry concerns , hhs stated that fda has an excellent record of responding to industry within agreed - upon time frames under applicable law and that fda's guidance documents cannot be specific to individual manufacturing processes because these processes are trade secrets . hhs also stated that fda provides clear guidance to manufacturers regarding the size of clinical trials and meets with sponsors of new vaccines at key stages of the product development process to provide further guidance that is informed by earlier trials . in its comments , dod agreed with the contents of the draft and noted that it had no substantive or administrative issues with the draft report . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of hhs , dod , and state and to interested congressional committees . the report also is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or crossem@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi . the research , development , and review of licensing applications for new influenza vaccine for the u.s. market involve several stages .