officials . we assessed the methodology for the ice - funded study and determined that it was sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to determine the extent to which ice has processes to track and manage detention facility costs , we analyzed relevant documents , such as ice financial management guidance and gao reports , and interviewed agency officials . we assessed our findings related to ice's financial management practices against standards for internal control in the federal government and ice's fiscal years 2010-2014 strategic plan . we also analyzed the extent to which ice's average daily population ( adp ) in its facilities met the guaranteed minimums — the number of beds ice pays for each day regardless of their utilization — in those facilities . we also excluded facilities for juvenile detainees — individuals under 18 years of age — because these facilities are regulated by the department of health and human services . to determine how federal costs compare across different types of immigration detention facilities , we analyzed ice fiscal year 2013 data , the most recent fiscal year for which data were available , related to ice expenditures for detention facilities . these data include the contract financial monitoring file ( cfmf ) , a manual tool maintained by ice office of enforcement and removal operations' ( ero ) operational support division to budget and track costs at individual facilities , and ice office of budget and program performance ( obpp ) fiscal year 2013 data drawn from ice's federal financial management system ( ffms ) . ice obpp uses these data to calculate ice's average facility “bed rate” — the average cost to house one detainee for 1 day . to determine the reliability of the cfmf , we conducted data testing to look for anomalies , reviewed related documentation , and interviewed knowledgeable agency officials . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes , but have limitations as discussed in this report . to assess the reliability of ice obpp's bed rate data , we tested the data and interviewed knowledgeable agency officials . we determined that the data are not reliable for reporting on the differences in cost by facility type , as discussed in this report . to determine the reasons for possible differences in costs , we analyzed ice documents , including an ice - funded study of detention bed rate costs across facilities and in particular at ice - owned service processing centers ( spc ) , and interviewed agency officials . we assessed the methodology for the ice - funded study and determined that it was reliable for our purposes . to determine the extent to which ice has processes in place to track and manage detention facility costs , we analyzed relevant documents , including dhs annual financial reports , previous gao reports related to dhs financial management , and ice financial management guidance , and interviewed agency officials . we assessed our findings related to ice's financial management practices against standards for internal control in the federal government and ice's 2010-2014 strategic plan .