ii ) . in commenting on our recommendation , however , dod noted that department of defense directive 5144.1 ( may 2 , 2005 ) indicates that the dod chief information officer is responsible for integrating information and related activities and services across the department . while this directive is intended to help strengthen the department's management of investments such as the gig , we remain concerned that the responsibility , authority , and accountability for developing the components of the gig reside among many organizational entities across the department . dod also noted in its comments that department of defense directive 8115.01 ( october 10 , 2005 ) establishes policy for managing information technology by portfolios and that this portfolio approach should provide a critical tool for improving integration across the department's major decision support systems ( jcids , ppbe , and the defense acquisition system ) . we agree that the concept of portfolio management holds promise ; however , we are not confident that dod will be able to effectively implement the policy unless it substantially changes its decision - making processes and ensures that portfolio managers are sufficiently empowered to influence dod components' information technology investment decisions . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the air force , army , and navy ; the assistant secretary of defense for networks and information integration ; the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics ; the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) ; the director of the defense information systems agency ; and interested congressional committees . we will provide copies to others on request . the stakes are high . management inefficiencies that were accepted as the cost of doing business in the past could jeopardize crosscutting efforts like the gig because greater interdependencies among systems will mean that problems in individual development programs will ripple through to other programs , having a damaging effect on the overall effort . in addition , the likelihood of slowed growth and perhaps even reductions in dod's future budgets that may result from the nation's long - term fiscal imbalance will limit the department's ability to mitigate the impact of these problems with additional budgetary resources . without significant change in dod's management approach and processes , we believe the department will not be able to achieve the gig as envisioned and may have to settle for a different , more expensive solution farther out in the future than planned . to better accommodate the crosscutting nature of the gig development effort , we recommend dod adopt a management approach that will ensure a joint perspective is taken . in doing so , dod should ( 1 ) consolidate responsibility , authority , and control over resources — within the existing management structure or in a new entity — necessary to enforce investment decisions that cut across organizational lines and ( 2 ) hold the organization accountable for ensuring the objectives of the gig are achieved . in written comments on a draft of this report , dod concurred with our findings and recommendation ( dod's letter is reprinted in app .