measures . both the selected literature we reviewed and the officials we interviewed supported including measures of quality along with measures of cost , and ensuring that measures are actionable by providing information that can help physicians improve their performance . the officials we interviewed were divided as to whether these measures should reflect physicians' performance at the individual level or the group level . quality measures . all five of the insurers we contacted were profiling physicians in terms of quality and cost , and four of the five had adopted a model code for physician ranking programs that called for rankings to be based on quality as well as cost . “changing physician practice: providing physicians useful feedback.” in effective peer review: a practical guide to contemporary design , 2nd ed. marblehead , mass . : hcpro , inc. , 2007 . micklitsch , christine n. and theresa a. ryan - mitlyng . physician performance management: tool for survival and success . englewood , colo.: medical group management association , 1996 . mold , james w. , cheryl a. aspy , and zsolt nagykaldi . “implementation of evidence - based preventive services delivery processes in primary care: an oklahoma physicians resource / research network ( okprn ) study.” journal of the american board of family medicine , vol . nathanson , philip . “influencing physician practice patterns,” topics in health care financing , vol . pacific business group on health . advancing physician performance measurement: using administrative data to assess physician quality and efficiency . september 2005 . paxton , e. scott , barton h. hamilton , vivian r. boyd , and bruce l. hall . “impact of isolated clinical performance feedback on clinical productivity of an academic surgical faculty.” journal of american college of surgeons , vol . teleki , stephanie s. , rebecca shaw , cheryl l. damberg , and elizabeth a. mcglynn . providing performance feedback to individual physicians: current practice and emerging lessons . rand health working paper series . july 2006 . van hoof , thomas j. , david a. pearson , tierney e. giannotti , janet p. tate , anne elwell , judith k. barr , and thomas p. meehan . “lessons learned from performance feedback by a quality improvement organization.” journal for healthcare quality , vol . veloski , jon , james r. boex , margaret j. grasberger , adam evans , and daniel b. wolfson . “systematic review of the literature on assessment , feedback and physicians' clinical performance: beme guide no . 7.” medical teacher , vol . most of the specialty society officials we interviewed also called for the inclusion of quality measures in physician feedback reports , and some cautioned that focusing solely on costs could create perverse incentives — for example , encouraging physicians to reduce inappropriately the level of care provided to patients . the lack of widely accepted , claims - based quality measures for some specialties has limited the number of specialties some insurers profile . for example , at the time of our interview , one insurer was profiling physicians in only one specialty ( cardiology ) while planning to begin profiling other specialties within a year . actionable measures .