burundi . one organization — seruka center — working with victims of sexual violence in bujumbura reported 1,288 cases of sexual assault during 2016 . according to state , the actual number of rapes was likely higher , given factors that prevent women and girls from seeking medical treatment . another organization — humura center — responsible for investigating cases of sexual violence and rape received 160 cases of sexual and gender - based violence in 2016 , according to state . rwanda . in 2016 , rwanda's national public prosecution authority reported 190 cases of rape . according to state's report , domestic violence against women in 2016 was common , but most incidents were not reported or prosecuted . uganda . state's 2016 report reiterated that rape remained a serious problem throughout the country and that the government did not consistently enforce the law . as we noted previously , the police crime report through june 2015 , the most recent available , registered 10,163 reported sexual offenses . in addition , un entities reported the following case - file data about sexual violence in the drc and burundi: drc . data collected by the congolese government with support from the un population fund indicate that from january 2016 through march 2017 , gender - based violence service providers responded to at least 24,364 incidents of gender - based violence . women and girls were the victims in 97 percent of the reported cases in 2016 . in addition , in 2016 , the un organization stabilization mission in the drc , known as monusco , verified 637 cases of conflict - related sexual violence , with illegal armed groups responsible for 74 percent of cases , and state security forces , mainly fardc , responsible for the remaining 26 percent of cases . burundi . in 2016 , unhcr — the un refugee agency — reported 2,250 gender - based violence incidents targeting refugees in neighboring countries , with 23 percent of incidents occurring in burundi or en route from the country . since 2013 , the drc government has made some progress in addressing sexual violence in the eastern drc , according to a 2017 un report . the report notes improvements in the capacity of drc state security forces to address sexual violence in the following respects: adoption of codes of conduct prohibiting sexual violence ; investigation of alleged incidents in order to hold perpetrators accountable ; and formation of specialized police units capable of addressing sexual violence . in addition , law enforcement measures such as arrests and prosecutions have increased , and training for the military has improved , according to an official from the un special representative of the secretary - general on sexual violence in conflict . this official also noted that in 2014 , the drc government appointed a personal representative to the president on sexual violence and child recruitment to advise the president on sexual violence issues , ensuring that sexual violence remains on the government's agenda . more recently , the drc government and the united nations have expressed interest in exploring linkages between mining and sexual violence , according to this official .