i for a complete list ) . although our analysis found that since 2007 the structure of the market , with respect to the average number of effective competitors and average concentration levels , has not substantially changed in the highest - traffic city - pair markets , many stakeholders we spoke to stressed that there are competition concerns beyond the number of effective competitors and level of concentration . stakeholders identified a number of challenges , which we categorized into four challenges to airline competition: ( 1 ) barriers that prevent airlines from entering the industry or specific markets ; ( 2 ) the lack of transparency in airline fare and fee disclosure ; ( 3 ) the effects of consolidation on competition ; and ( 4 ) emerging international competition concerns . certain stakeholders also suggested several actions the federal government could take that in their view would help address these challenges — including removing slot controls , which limit the number of takeoffs and landings per hour at four capacity - constrained airports ; eliminating airline loyalty programs ; and encouraging the completion of federal regulations that would provide consumers greater transparency in fares and fees . a majority of the stakeholders we interviewed cited barriers to entry as a key challenge to competition in the domestic passenger airline industry . barriers to entry are practices or conditions that impede a firm's ability to enter either an industry or specific markets within the industry . as entry , or the threat thereof , may have a disciplining effect on incumbent firms' behavior , barriers that make entry more difficult can hamper competition and enable incumbent firms to charge higher prices without fear that doing so will attract new competitors . the last major airline to enter the u.s. market was virgin america in 2007 . we grouped the entry barriers stakeholders identified into three primary categories: barriers to airport access , diminished cost advantages and access to capital for new airlines , and advantages held by network airlines . airport access: the inability to obtain access and secure a foothold at some key airports was identified as a major entry barrier by 10 of the 26 stakeholders we interviewed . these stakeholders drew attention to slot controls that are in place at four major congested airports . we have previously found that slot controls allow airports to manage congestion ; however , they also limit access for new entrants to some of the busiest airports in the country . according to one industry analyst , difficulty in obtaining landing rights at these airports makes it harder for new airlines to compete for the most lucrative business travelers . as we found in september 2012 , airlines that hold slots might underutilize them by , for example , using smaller aircraft instead of giving the slots up , thereby reducing access by new - entrant airlines that could use the slots to offer new service or lower fares and also limiting passenger growth at these airports . in addition to slot controls , 5 stakeholders , including academic and research experts and travel and consumer advocacy organizations pointed to limited access to gates and facilities at other airports as an entry barrier .