system strategy documents . numerous system strategy documents that provide the foundation for the system development and operations are critical aspects of an effective system project . these four pilots are prime examples . while there was an attempt made to coordinate the pilots , ultimately each organization designed its erp pilot to accommodate its specific business needs . the navy recognized the need for a working group that would focus on integration issues among the pilots , especially because of the desire to eventually extend the pilot programs beyond the pilot organizations to the entire navy . in this regard , the navy established the horizontal integration team in june 1999 , consisting of representatives from all of the pilots to address this matter . these documents are used for guidance in developing documents for articulating the plans and procedures used to implement a system . examples of such documents include the life - cycle test strategy , interface strategy , and conversion strategy . the iv&v reports should identify the project management weaknesses that increase the risks associated with the project to senior management so that they can be promptly addressed . the navy erp program's approach to the verification and validation of its project management activities relies on in - house subject matter experts and others who work for the project team's quality assurance leader . the results of these efforts are reported to the project manager . while various approaches can be used to perform this function , such as using the navy's approach or hiring a contractor to perform these activities , independence is a key component to successful verification and validation activities . the system developer and project management office may have vested interests and may not be objective in their self - assessments . accordingly , performing verification and validation activities independently of the development and management functions helps to ensure that verification and validation activities are unbiased and based on objective evidence . the navy's adoption of verification and validation processes is a key component of its efforts to implement the disciplined processes necessary to manage this project . the boards are responsible for reviewing and approving investments to develop , operate , maintain , and modernize business systems for their respective business areas . the various boards are to report to the defense business systems management committee ( dbsmc ) , which is ultimately responsible for the review and approval of the department's investments in its business systems . to help facilitate this oversight responsibility , the reports prepared by the iv&v function should be provided to the appropriate investment review board and the dbsmc to assist them in the decision - making process regarding the continued investment in the navy erp . the information in the reports should provide reasonable assurance that an appropriate rate of return is received on the hundreds of millions of dollars that will be invested over the next several years and the navy erp provides the promised capabilities . to help ensure that the navy erp achieves its cost , schedule , and performance goals , the investment review should employ an early warning system that enables it to take corrective action at the first sign of slippages .