iii ) . to better adapt to the changing landscape of human and animal diseases ( including the rapid global movement of humans , animals , and food products ) , aphis has begun to shift its disease - specific surveillance approach to ( 1 ) monitor the overall health of livestock and poultry and ( 2 ) improve its ability to analyze health information about livestock and poultry . usda stated that aphis will include better performance metrics in its planning efforts and develop more explicit linkages between its swine surveillance activities and other national homeland security efforts . aphis faces several challenges in carrying out this new approach , including obtaining new data from current and additional sources and determining how best to deploy declining resources , given increasing fiscal constraints . disease surveillance in livestock and poultry is a component of biosurveillance . usda on disease surveillance for influenza , a zoonosis that infects humans and some livestock and poultry . threats from biological agents , including zoonotic pathogens , highlight the need for an effective agricultural defense system , including disease surveillance in livestock and poultry . animal disease surveillance consists of collecting , analyzing , and interpreting animal health data to detect diseases early , enable rapid reporting and response during disease outbreaks , and control the spread of disease . according to international animal health authorities , disease surveillance in livestock and poultry has as its main purpose the early detection of diseases and disease outbreaks . it also plays an important role during outbreaks , such as monitoring how fast a disease is spreading through animal populations and in what direction . disease surveillance is also critical in determining how effective efforts have been in controlling and eradicating disease from a particular area or animal population and in recognizing when that disease no longer poses an immediate threat to animal or human health . further , surveillance supports international trade , allowing officials to certify that animals are healthy and safe to move across borders . disease surveillance in livestock and poultry is particularly important because billions of cattle , swine , poultry , and other animals used for food are annually moved from place to place over long distances throughout the food supply chain — from wherever producers are located and then to feedlots and local , regional , and even overseas markets and slaughterhouses . thus , to prevent the spread of contagious diseases and protect the welfare of healthy herds , animal health authorities often restrict the movement of animals . such restrictions can lead , paradoxically , to the destruction of large numbers of uninfected animals and substantial economic losses . federal , state , tribal , and industry entities share responsibility for carrying out disease surveillance in livestock and poultry ( see app . under the national animal health reporting system , aphis typically works with states to monitor , control , and eradicate certain animal diseases . according to aphis documents and state veterinary officials , such activities include , for example , issuing guidance on how to identify and report particular diseases of national concern , developing vaccination programs , and providing additional staff to work alongside state investigators tracking outbreaks of infectious diseases .