gao - 17-317 . washington , d.c.: february 15 , 2017 . it continues to move more services online . additionally , ssa uses video service delivery to conduct business such as claims and hearings with customers in remote locations . some ssa staff and a staff member at a community organization shared the benefits of these new approaches . for example one area director said the self - help personal computers in field offices give customers the option of taking care of their business quickly rather than waiting to speak with an ssa staff member . a field office manager said these computers can help educate the public about the online option for accessing ssa services . with regard to video service delivery , one area director told us it is used to conduct claims and other business with native americans on remote reservations , who prefer the personal interaction with ssa provided by the video . a staff member at a community organization that hosts a desktop icon site said that for older , non - english speakers , it has been a helpful alternative to visiting a crowded ssa field office . staff said they walk these clients through each step of using ssa's online services . ssa officials also reported some implementation challenges with these new technologies and approaches . most area directors ( 6 of 10 ) and field office managers ( five of seven ) we spoke with said there have been challenges with the use of self - help personal computers , such as customers who may lack technological skills and need assistance to use the computers . ssa has also experienced some difficulties in working with other organizations to host these new technologies . for example , several ssa staff and a staff member at a host site said some entities have had concerns about including desktop icons on their computers due to issues such as data security and increasing workloads for staff at host sites . while these new service delivery approaches are integral to ssa's efforts to expand remote service delivery , the agency lacks clear performance goals or targets for them . ssa is collecting data on the use of some of these approaches . for example , it collects data on the number of different types of transactions — such as benefit claims and registrations for mysocialsecurity accounts — completed through the self - help personal computers , the number of transactions completed by clicking on desktop icons , and some data on use of video services . however , ssa has not established performance goals for all of these new approaches . in prior work we have identified setting performance goals and collecting performance information related to these goals as key elements of effective customer service . without setting meaningful performance goals , for example , for speed , quality , or customer satisfaction , and measuring progress towards these goals , ssa may miss opportunities to improve its service delivery and potentially encourage more customers to use remote services rather than visit field offices . this may be especially relevant in light of the implementation issues raised by some ssa staff .