( app . i provides detailed information on our scope and methodology. ) in 1991 / 92 , drought caused massive crop failure , threatening 18 million people in 10 southern african countries with famine . because of a similar reduced maize crop after the 2001 / 02 crop cycle , several early warning systems predicted an impending food crisis that would run through the beginning of the following harvest in april 2003 . ( app . ii provides a timeline of the crisis period , and app . iii provides information on early warning systems. ) regional and national assessments of the crisis conducted by wfp , fao , and others estimated that 15.3 million people in the region were at risk of starvation . ( fig . 1 shows the population at risk of famine in each of the six affected countries. ) in july 2002 , wfp initiated the southern africa crisis response emergency operation ( emop ) for providing food aid to the six countries on a regional basis . prior to this consolidation , wfp had been delivering food to the individual country emergency operating programs . wfp's objectives in the southern africa food crisis were to prevent severe food shortages , safeguard the nutritional well - being of vulnerable segments of the population , preserve human assets , and prevent migration out of affected areas . as the major food aid donor in the southern africa crisis , the u.s. government has a significant role in the relief effort . through usaid's food for peace office and its office of foreign disaster assistance and usda , the u.s. government has worked to support the emop and address the crisis . in february 2002 , in an effort to avert famine , the united states began authorizing food aid shipments to the region . as of march 18 , 2003 , the u.s. government had provided approximately $275 million in food aid and $13 million for bilateral nonfood - related assistance such as agriculture , health , shelter , and sanitation . ( see app . iv for additional information on the u.s . contributions. ) wfp , the united states , and other countries partner with nongovernmental organizations to distribute food aid at the regional and village level . in addition , many of these organizations also provide nonfood emergency assistance and long - term development aid . much of the population in each of the affected countries works in the agricultural sector . the percentage of labor force engaged in agriculture ranges from 66 percent in zimbabwe to 86 percent in lesotho and malawi . many of these farmers rely on maize ( corn ) as the primary staple crop . unlike root crops such as cassava and sweet potatoes — which are common but less popular staples in the region — maize is relatively fragile , requiring more fertilizer and differing amounts of water during the growing season . the immediate factor contributing to the food crisis was the erratic weather patterns that disrupted the normal growing cycle , causing maize production in southern africa to drop from a 5-year average of about 7.3 million mt to about 5.2 million mt in 2002 .