phas nationwide . these practices , which are posted on hud's website , included implementing savings accounts for public housing and voucher recipients to promote resident savings . most recently , hud's 2010 report to congress described promising policies , practices , and concerns . in addition , officials from some of the mtw agencies we interviewed noted that hud officials had shared information on activities that had shown positive effects during site visits , quarterly phone calls , newsletters , and annual conferences . finally , hud's statement of work for its proposed evaluation of the mtw program includes the creation of five case studies that would review mtw flexibilities . however , these efforts have shortcomings . in most cases , the practices chosen were based on the opinions of hud or contracted staff and largely involved anecdotal ( or qualitative ) data rather than quantitative data . the lack of standard performance data has affected hud's ability to systematically identify lessons learned . in its 2005 report on the mtw program , the hud inspector general noted that the lack of data on the program made it difficult to identify activities that could be considered models for addressing the three statutory purposes or that could be used to show the importance of individual policy changes . further , hud has not established criteria , such as demonstrated performance , for identifying lessons learned . finally , hud has not made regular efforts to review and identify lessons learned . agencies without mtw status have to implement their activities while adhering to the regulations associated with three different funding streams , evidence of the fragmented nature of housing assistance.certain provisions of the 1937 housing act in order to combine annual funding from separate sources into a single authoritywide funding source . hud field office staff with responsibility for monitoring mtw agencies observed that the single - fund flexibility was beneficial because it enabled participating agencies to develop supportive service programs , such as job training or educational programs , which help move families toward self - sufficiency . one hud field office official stated that this flexibility would be a significant benefit for other phas . an affordable housing advocate we met with also noted that this ability to use different kinds of funds interchangeably was beneficial because it enabled mtw agencies to shift funds based on local priorities . further , officials from the mtw agencies we interviewed agreed that this flexibility was beneficial . for example , officials from one mtw agency stated it had been able to use the single fund to organize itself as a business organization , develop a strategic plan based on the housing needs of low - income families in the community , leverage public funds and public and private partnerships , and develop mixed - income communities . two of the mtw agencies that we interviewed also stated that the single - fund flexibility had enabled them to fund programs that encouraged self - sufficiency among residents . for example , officials explained that they had used funding for coaching and counseling services , job training support , and education programs . finally , officials from three of the mtw agencies we interviewed noted a related benefit of participation .