this information is included in an appendix to this report . to determine the amount of funding rus , eda , reclamation , and the corps provided , we collected and analyzed each agency's obligations for rural water supply and wastewater projects during fiscal years 2004 through 2006 . to determine the extent to which each agency's eligibility criteria and the projects they fund differ , we reviewed and analyzed applicable statutes , agency regulations , policy guidance , and project specific data submitted by each agency to us . in addition , we selected a nonprobability sample of 16 rural water supply and wastewater projects , including at least one project funded by each of the four agencies , and interviewed both local officials from the communities sponsoring these projects and federal agency officials responsible for managing the funding of these projects . to the extent possible , we also analyzed the amount of overhead costs and number of personnel necessary to support these projects at each agency . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is presented in appendix i . rus manages this program through its headquarters in washington , d.c. , and 47 state offices , each supported by area and local offices . eda provides development assistance to areas experiencing substantial economic distress regardless of whether or not they are rural or urban . eda primarily provides assistance for water supply and wastewater projects in distressed areas through its public works and development facilities program and uses a u.s. census bureau definition for rural areas that is based on metropolitan statistical areas . eda manages this program through its headquarters in washington , d.c. , six regional offices , and multiple field personnel . reclamation was established to implement the reclamation act of 1902 , which authorized the construction of water projects to provide water for irrigation in the arid western states . reclamation generally manages numerous municipal and industrial projects as part of larger , multipurpose projects that provide irrigation , flood control , power , and recreational opportunities in 17 western states , unless otherwise directed by the congress . reclamation provides assistance for water supply projects through individual project authorizations and defines a rural area as a community , or group of communities , each of which has a population of not more than 50,000 inhabitants . reclamation manages these projects through its headquarters in washington , d.c. , and denver , colorado , five regional offices , and multiple field offices in the western united states . the corps' civil works programs investigate , develop , and maintain water and related environmental resources throughout the country to meet the agency's navigation , flood control , and ecosystem restoration missions . in addition , the civil works programs also provide disaster response , as well as engineering and technical services . the corps provides assistance for water supply and wastewater projects through authorizations for either a project in a specific location , or for a program in a defined geographic area , and does not have a definition for rural areas . the corps administers its programs and projects through its headquarters in washington , d.c. , eight regional divisions , and 38 district offices .