reg . 1158 ( jan. 7 , 2008 ) and ( 2 ) the implementation of new standards for intelligent mail barcodes , notice of proposed rulemaking ( proposed rule ) in april 2008 , 73 fed . reg . upgrades to postalone ! include a better user interface design for mailers , electronic documentation acceptance capabilities , and more options for mailers to access intelligent mail tracking information . usps plans to use barcode scan information to measure its service performance and report the results to prc . however , usps will need to establish report content and format standards that comply with prc reporting requirements . in order to report service performance to prc , usps will need to develop a strategy to aggregate information from mail pieces that will be representative of all mail . usps will also need to develop standards for information that it will provide to mailers regarding their own mail . usps has said it will be ready to implement intelligent mail as planned in may 2009 . to meet this date , usps has been engaged in an aggressive program development schedule since june 2008 that involved defining program requirements and designing , building and testing systems and interfaces . according to usps , it began defining the requirements of the project in july 2008 , designing the systems in october 2008 , and started building the systems in november 2008 . usps tested the systems both internally and with mailers from february through april 2009 . a limited number of mailers have been involved in testing and integrating their systems with usps's systems . despite this aggressive schedule , a senior postal official told us that usps discovered that it could not implement all of the desired functions of the system by may 2009 , as originally planned . further , he said that additional functions may be added in future phases that will be determined at a later date . the general timeline for intelligent mail implementation is as follows: may 11 , 2009 . usps plans to internally implement the first phase of intelligent mail and expects to have the systems in place to provide full service functions , including address correction service and electronic documentation . may 18 , 2009 and beyond . mailers will begin testing their systems' ability to access and electronically transmit documentation to usps's system and will be ready to fully implement upon completing the tests , which should take about 6 to 8 weeks according to a senior usps official . november 29 , 2009 . usps plans to implement the second phase of intelligent mail and expects to begin offering price incentives for full service . usps also plans to add other program functions , although it had not finalized these plans when we met with usps officials in early april . may 2011 . the use of postnet and planet barcodes will be phased out and mailers seeking reduced automation postage rates will be required to use intelligent mail barcodes . mailers will have approximately 6 months from may through november 2009 to test their systems and begin implementation before the price incentives go into effect .