gao - 04-342 . washington , d.c.: march 17 , 2004 . nonproliferation: improvements needed for controls on exports of cruise missile and unmanned aerial vehicles . gao - 04-493t . washington , d.c.: march 9 , 2004 . the navy was to design and build the air vehicle . others are to establish joint standards and control costs . nonetheless , of the 49 goals , only 1 deals directly with developing and fielding a specific category of uav platform to meet a priority mission - capability requirement — the suppression of enemy air defenses or strike electronic attack . the remaining goals , such as developing heavy - fuel aviation engines suitable for uavs , are predominantly associated with developing uav or related technologies as well as uav - related standards and policies to promote more efficient and effective joint uav operations . however , the roadmap does not establish overall uav program goals . performance indicators — some of the 49 goals have performance indicators that could be used to evaluate progress , while others do not . furthermore , the roadmap does not establish indicators that readily assess how well the program will meet the priority mission capabilities . as the services and defense agencies pursue separate uav programs , they risk developing systems with duplicate capabilities , potentially higher operating costs , and increased interoperability challenges . the house appropriations committee was concerned that without comprehensive planning and review , there is no clear path toward developing a uav force structure . thus , the committee directed that each service update or create a uav roadmap . these roadmaps were to address the services' plans for the development of future uavs and how current uavs are being employed . officials from each of the services indicated that their uav roadmap was developed to primarily address their individual service's requirements and operational concepts . however , in their views , such guidance as the joint vision 2020 , national military strategy , and defense planning guidance did not constitute strategic plans for uavs to guide the development of their individual service's uav roadmap . these officials further stated that the office of the secretary of defense's 2002 uav roadmap provided some useful guidance , but was not used to guide the development of the service's uav roadmaps . moreover , they did not view the office of the secretary of defense's roadmap as either a dod - wide strategic plan or an overarching architecture for integrating uavs into the force structure . according to service officials developing the service - level uav roadmaps , there was little collaboration with other services' uav efforts . as we have described for you today , dod has an opportunity to enhance its strategic planning to improve the management of uav development and fielding . in the report released to you today , we make two recommendations to assist dod to enhance its management control over the uav program . we recommend that dod establish a strategic plan or set of plans based on mission requirements to guide uav development and fielding . we also recommend that dod designate the joint uav planning task force or another appropriate organization to oversee the implementation of a uav strategic plan .