key activities for the development of an agenda have not been completed . this work is conducted principally at the national laboratories . in addition , the web site on which all or part of the repository resides is to be made available to , and be searchable by , federal agencies and non - federal entities , including the general public , and is to facilitate: the coordination of federal r&d activities ; collaboration among those entities conducting federal r&d ; the transfer of technology among federal agencies , and between federal agencies and non - federal entities ; and access by policy makers and the public to information concerning federal r&d activities . the e - government act also requires agencies that fund federal r&d to provide the information needed to populate the repository in the manner prescribed by the director of omb . further , the following activities necessary for the agenda have also not been completed: ( 1 ) specifying timelines and milestones for conducting research and development activities ; ( 2 ) specifying goals and measures for evaluating research and development activities ; ( 3 ) assigning responsibility for implementation , including the accomplishment of the focus areas and suggested research priorities ; and ( 4 ) aligning the funding priorities with technical priorities . until a federal agenda as called for in the national strategy to secure cyberspace is developed , increased risk exists that agencies will focus on their individual priorities for cyber security research and development , which may not be the most important national research priorities . better coordination of research and development efforts will enable the most important topics to receive priority funding and resources and avoid duplication of effort . for the first time , the nitrd program , in response to the president's information technology advisory committee recommendation to strengthen coordination , reported budget information for cyber security research separately from other types of research in its supplement to the president's fiscal year 2007 budget . this important change was made possible with the addition of a new nitrd program component area for cyber security and information assurance . before this addition , budget amounts for cyber security research projects were difficult to identify because they were often grouped with the non - cyber security research projects in other program component areas . if you or members of your staff have questions about this report , please contact gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or keith a. rhodes at ( 202 ) 512-6412 . the number of malicious attacks has increased with the growing number of vulnerabilities . in 2000 , the software engineering institute's cert® coordination center ( cert / cc ) received 1,090 reports of security vulnerabilities . by 2005 , this number had more than quadrupled to 5,990 . figure 1 illustrates the number of security vulnerabilities reported from 1995 through 2005 . over the years , the federal government has taken these and other actions to improve cyber security efforts: publishing best practices and guidelines that assist in the planning , selection , and implementation of cyber security technologies ; partnering with private sector counterparts to assess vulnerabilities and develop plans to eliminate those vulnerabilities ; and awarding grants to support cyber security r&d .