ii ) . the department of justice had no comments on the draft report . in its comments , the forest service said that the report provided a good view of the process , events , and project through december 2005 . the agency generally agreed with our recommendation for the issuance of an annual update on the status of biscuit fire recovery activities but suggested that the time period for producing the report be limited to the next 3- to 5-year period . we stated in the recommendation that the reports should be produced annually until the project is complete and that may be 5 years or longer given the nature of some of the recovery activities . for this reason , we hesitate to provide a specific time limit but believe there is value to providing the agency with some discretion about when they discontinue the report . therefore , we revised the recommendation to state that the reports should be provided until the project's activities are substantially complete . the forest service also stated that an explanation of the litigation , controversies , and protests that occurred since december 2005 would provide the readers an understanding of the complexities of trying to manage fire projects . the report describes the status of sales through 2006 , the emergency situation determination used to expedite the sales , the effects of litigation on the sales , and delays in the inventoried roadless area sales . we believe this discussion is sufficiently descriptive of these events and , therefore , did not make any changes to the report in response to this comment . the forest service also said that the report does not make it clear that the planning processes and appeals do greatly reduce the final timber harvest volumes . while the planning process was a factor in the time taken to develop the eis , we did not evaluate the effects of the process on timber volumes because it was not one of the objectives of this report . also , the report does not discuss the appeals process because the forest service used an emergency situation determination , which eliminated the appeals process for 11 salvage sales . finally , the forest service also provided several clarifications of technical information that we incorporated in the report as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 18 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of agriculture , the attorney general of the united states , the chief of the forest service , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or nazzaror@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of public affairs and congressional relations may be found on the last page of this report .