level of evidence . first , the guideline working group reviews the summaries to identify the level of evidence , or the level of methodological rigor . for example , research studies that have the highest quality are categorized as “i” ( indicating at least one properly done randomized controlled trial ) , while research studies of the lowest quality are categorized as “iii” ( indicating that the research reflects the opinion of respected authorities , descriptive studies , case reports , and expert committees ) . ( see table 8. ) overall quality of research . after determining the level of evidence of individual research studies , the guideline working group makes a determination regarding the overall quality of all of the research that addresses a particular clinical question . the overall quality takes into account the number , quality , and size of all of the individual research studies together as well as the consistency of the results between research outcomes to determine the collective overall strength of the research . based on this review , the guideline working group determines the overall quality of the evidence to be good , fair , or poor . ( see table 9. ) net effect of the intervention . for interventions that were supported by studies of “fair” or “good” overall quality , the guideline working group evaluates the benefits and the potential harms to determine the net effect of the intervention . the net effect of an intervention takes into account the benefits of the intervention minus the harms to determine the overall potential clinical benefit that the intervention may provide to patients . the net effect of the intervention ranges from “substantial” ( meaning the benefit substantially outweighs the harm ) to “zero or negative” ( meaning it has no impact or a negative impact on patients ) . ( see table 10. ) grade of evidence - based recommendation . in the final step , the guideline working group uses its assessment of the overall quality of the evidence and the net effect of the intervention to grade evidence - based recommendations . ( see table 11. ) in addition to the contact named above , mary ann curran , assistant director ; susannah bloch ; stella chiang ; martha r. w. kelly ; melanie krause ; lisa motley ; michelle paluga ; rebecca rust ; and suzanne worth made key contributions to this report . va health care: progress and challenges in conducting the national vietnam veterans longitudinal study . gao - 10-658t . washington , d.c.: may 5 , 2010 . va health care: status of va's approach in conducting the national vietnam veterans longitudinal study . gao - 10-578r . washington , d.c.: may 5 , 2010 . va health care: preliminary findings on va's provision of health care services to women veterans . gao - 09-899t . washington , d.c.: july 16 , 2009 . review of research outcomes . according to va , agency officials and qualified subject matter experts reviewed relevant research outcomes and the quality of the research to determine the most efficacious ptsd treatments available when determining which ptsd services to include in the handbook and make available to veterans .