estimating practice expense costs for specialties . the comments and our discussion are presented below . in comments on a draft of this report , cms agreed with our general findings ( see appendix iv ) . cms agreed that a better estimate of actual oncology supply expenses is needed and acknowledged the usefulness of reviewing indirect cost allocation methods and the importance of this allocation for practice expense payments . it also noted that the studies conducted by the lewin group to evaluate several different allocation options found no reason to change the current methodology . cms also agreed that the alternative methodology used to calculate payments for nonphysician services needs further evaluation . it stated , however , that as an interim policy , the alternative methodology is serving its intended purpose and that changing it would redistribute payments across specialties . cms did not indicate that it plans to implement our recommendations . it also provided a summary of its ongoing efforts to refine practice expense payments . in agreeing that a better estimate of oncology supply expenses is needed , cms indicated that it has suggested changes to the ama's sms survey instrument to improve the sms data , with particular suggestions about supply expenses . a modified survey instrument is an appropriate step in improving the data , but there are no assurances that the ama will implement these changes . further , cms has not indicated that it has any plans to examine the effects of all of the adjustments made to the basic methodology on payments across specialties and types of services . we believe this type of systematic evaluation , followed by targeted refinements to areas with a greater impact on payments , is necessary to improve practice expense payments . in its comments , cms said it would be useful to review the allocation of indirect expenses in establishing practice expense payments , and it asked the lewin group to do the review . the lewin group confirmed the problem with the current indirect allocation method . as two alternatives to improve the practice expense payment calculations , it proposed that cms examine specialty - specific nonphysician practice expense pools or correct the indirect allocation method for nonphysician services and then return these services to the basic method . it acknowledged that any changes to practice expense payment calculations would result in higher payments for some specialties and lower payments for others , and it urged caution in implementing any changes . however , indirect costs are systematically under - allocated to nonphysician services and over - allocated to physician services . further , the alternative method , which was intended to increase payments for nonphysician services , does not consistently do so and it inflates payments for some physician services . we believe that cms should address these issues consistently across all services . we have added discussion of the lewin group studies to the body of our report . cms indicated that it does not intend to eliminate the alternative method for nonphysician services until it can identify and propose a better approach . yet our analysis indicates that this interim approach violates congressional intent that payments be resource - based and significantly changes payments for some services .