it applies 1 . penn state university's ncar mesoscale model version 5 ( mm5 ) – based , real - time four - dimensional data assimilation system ; 2. the national centers for environmental prediction – ncar reanalysis project 2.5 degree , 40-year gridded model dataset for initial and boundary conditions ; and 3. observations from the national centers for environmental prediction's automatic data processing historical repository . in a typical application — as in defining meteorological characteristics associated with a typical day in june in the plum island area — climate - four dimensional data assimilation mesoscale downscaling is performed for each of the past 40 years . each model run resolves fine - scale meteorological processes over a month - long period for the year being studied . these reanalyses are combined statistically to produce a “typical day” ( that is , 24-hour output fields that describe the diurnal variation of weather ) by using an ensemble mean . if the mean is not representative of typical climatological conditions , then clustering methods are used to identify several “typical” conditions characterizing the predominant regimes . to determine the potential risk associated with the release of hazardous material into the atmosphere , hpac , a probabilistic dispersion model , is used with the ensemble mean fields from the individual atmospheric dynamic runs , including the variability in the individual wind fields , to generate dosage probabilities . additionally , hpac - explicit dosage probabilities may be derived from individual runs over a month's time with an mm5 – hpac modeling system . in this way , the modeled transport and dispersion of hazardous material reflect both the frequency distributions of atmospheric states and the fine - scale processes known to drive local hazard levels . in addition , as we previously noted , gaussian plume models typically use only a single constant wind velocity and stability class to characterize turbulence diffusion . gryphon scientific's review of the eis pointed out that the tendency of the wind to push aerosol releases ( and light insects , such as mosquitoes ) in a particular direction should influence the impact from each event at each site . if the wind generally blew away from the counties with large livestock concentrations , it would reduce the probability - weighted impact from an aerosol release of these viruses . gryphon noted that if the wind tends to blow out to sea from plum island , the probability - weighted impact from an aerosol release at this facility would be greatly reduced , whereas if it generally blew into the dairy land on long island , the risk would be amplified . if the weather is unpredictable or highly variable , the increase or decrease in risk would be less a factor . dhs modelers calculated the source term q — amount of respirable aerosol released to the environment from a given accidental incident — using the following five - factor formula: q = mar × dr × arf × rf × lpf 1 . mar ( or material at risk ) is the amount of biological material available from an accidental release , 2 . dr ( or damage ratio ) is the fraction of material that is affected by the 3 .