disasters . this shift in priorities is placing new demands on the agency's workforce and is reflected in the corps' most recent strategic plan — the 2005 campaign plan . this plan outlines the agency's strategic vision for the next 3 to 4 years . for example , the 2005 campaign plan identifies the following as the corps key areas of focus: supporting stability , reconstruction , and homeland security operations ; developing sound water resources solutions ; and improving the reliability of water resources infrastructure using a risk - based asset management strategy . strategic human capital planning — the method by which an agency designs a coherent framework of human capital policies , programs , and practices to achieve the vision outlined in its strategic plan — is an important component of an agency's overall planning effort because it helps ensure that an agency's workforce is adequate to meet its current and future needs . the development and implementation of a human capital plan is a key step in an agency's progress toward building a highly effective , performance - based organization that can recruit , hire , motivate , and reward a high - performing , top - quality workforce . although the structure , content , and format of human capital plans vary by agency , the office of personnel management ( opm ) cites certain common elements that an agency's human capital plan should include ( 1 ) a clearly understood strategic direction ; ( 2 ) human capital goals ; ( 3 ) strategies / objectives for accomplishing the goals ; ( 4 ) an implementation plan ; ( 5 ) a communication / change management plan , if needed , and ( 6 ) a system for measuring how successfully the strategies / objectives have been implemented . additionally , our previous work suggests that regardless of an agency's mission , its human capital management approach should include involving top management , employees , and other stakeholders in developing , communicating , and implementing a human capital plan ; determining the critical skills that will be needed to achieve future developing strategies that are tailored to address gaps in critical skills that need attention ; building the capability needed to address administrative , educational , and other requirements important to support workforce strategies ; and monitoring and evaluating the agency's progress toward its human capital goals and the contribution that human capital results have made toward achieving programmatic goals . in this context , you requested that we examine the ( 1 ) extent to which the corps has aligned its human capital plan with its strategic plan , ( 2 ) extent to which the corps has the information necessary to identify and meet its current and future workforce needs , and ( 3 ) challenges the corps faces in meeting its workforce needs . this report is the third in a series of reports that you have requested on human capital challenges facing those key federal agencies that primarily rely on a scientific , technical , and engineering workforce . ( see related gao products at the end of this report. )