iv. ) by using the value of completed work as a basis for estimating the cost and time needed to complete the program , evm can alert program managers to potential problems early in the program . nasa requires that evm be used on all significant contracts — that is , research and development contracts with a total anticipated final value of $70 million or more , and production contracts with a total anticipated final value of $300 million or more — which includes all of the 10 programs we reviewed in detail . although the program managers for all 10 programs stated that evm was used in their projects , only two programs provided cost performance reports , indicating a true evm process was in place . the remaining eight programs relied on nasa form 533 , which captures planned and actual obligations and expenditures — not the value of the work performed . without a true evm process , programs cannot readily determine if a program is at risk of cost and schedule overruns until it is too late to make programmatic changes to avoid these risks . there are several impediments that nasa needs to overcome to implement effective cost - estimating practices . these include the lack of reliable financial data and other performance information ; lack of trained evm staff , data analysis tools , and incentive for supporting and implementing evm ; and ineffective use of cost analysts . nasa has initiated several measures to begin addressing some of these impediments . according to nasa officials , state - of - the - art cost - estimating tools have been funded and implemented . for example , nasa officials told us that commercial - off - the - shelf models have been used to estimate hardware and software acquisition costs and quantify the level of uncertainty surrounding cost estimates . however , these cost - estimating tools are only as good as the data they rely on to develop the estimates . for more than a decade , we have reported that nasa has failed to develop a system to capture reliable financial and performance information , posing significant challenges to nasa's ability to estimate and control program costs . over the past year alone , we issued numerous reports on nasa's integrated financial management program ( ifmp ) — the agency's third and most recent effort to implement a modern , integrated financial management system . specifically , we found that ifmp — which is under the responsibility of the program executive officer for ifmp — will not , as it is being implemented , routinely provide program managers and other key stakeholders and decision makers — including the congress — with the financial related information needed to measure program performance and ensure accountability . for example , the core financial module ( considered the backbone of the system ) does not appropriately capture property , plant , and equipment , as well as material in its general ledger at the transaction level — which is needed to provide independent control over these assets . in addition , nasa implemented the system before it had the capability to capture the full costs of its programs and projects .