these characteristics can make them vulnerable to physical security threats . moreover , entities within the maritime port environment are vulnerable to cyber - based threats because they rely on various types of information and communications technologies to manage the movement of cargo throughout the ports . these technologies include terminal operating systems , which are information systems used to , among other things , control container movements and storage ; industrial control systems , which facilitate the movement of goods using conveyor belts or pipelines to structures such as refineries , processing plants , and storage tanks ; business operations systems , such as e - mail and file servers , enterprise resources planning systems , networking equipment , phones , and fax machines , which support the business operations of the terminal ; and access control and monitoring systems , such as camera surveillance systems and electronically enabled physical access control devices , which support a port's physical security and protect sensitive areas . all of these systems are potentially vulnerable to cyber - based attacks and other threats , which could disrupt operations at a port . while port owners and operators are responsible for the cybersecurity of their operations , federal agencies have specific roles and responsibilities for supporting these efforts . the national infrastructure protection plan ( nipp ) establishes a risk management framework to address the risks posed by cyber , human , and physical elements of critical infrastructure . it details the roles and responsibilities of dhs in protecting the nation's critical infrastructures ; identifies agencies that have lead responsibility for coordinating with federally designated critical infrastructure sectors ( maritime is a component of one of these sectors — the transportation sector ) ; and specifies how other federal , state , regional , local , tribal , territorial , and private - sector stakeholders should use risk management principles to prioritize protection activities within and across sectors . the nipp establishes a framework for operating and sharing information across and between federal and nonfederal stakeholders within each sector . these coordination activities are carried out through sector coordinating councils and government coordinating councils . in summary , protecting the nation's ports from cyber - based threats is of increasing importance , not only because of the prevalence of such threats , but because of the ports' role as conduits of over a trillion dollars in cargo each year . ports provide a tempting target for criminals seeking monetary gain , and successful attacks could potentially wreak havoc on the national economy . the increasing dependence of port activities on computerized information and communications systems makes them vulnerable to many of the same threats facing other cyber - reliant critical infrastructures , and federal agencies play a key role by working with port facility owners and operators to secure the maritime environment . while dhs , through the coast guard and fema , has taken steps to address cyber threats in this environment , they have been limited and more remains to be done to ensure that federal and nonfederal stakeholders are working together effectively to mitigate cyber - based threats to the ports . until dhs fully implements our recommendations , the nation's maritime ports will remain susceptible to cyber risks .