again , this is not surprising . because loan repayment recipients do not commit to service until after they have completed training , they are more likely to know what they want to do and where they want to live or practice at the time they make the commitment . however , our work indicates that this advantage has not been realized in practice . for nhsc providers beginning practice in 1993-1994 , we found no significant difference between scholarship and loan payment recipients in the priority that nhsc assigned to their service locations . this suggests that the scholarship program should be tightened so that it focuses on those areas with critical needs that cannot be met through loan repayment . in this regard , the congress may want to consider reducing the number of sites that scholarship recipients can choose from , so that the focus of scholarships is clearly on the neediest sites . while placing greater restrictions on service locations could potentially reduce interest in the scholarship program , the program currently has more than six applicants for every scholarship — suggesting that the interest level is high enough to allow for some tightening in the program's conditions . if that approach should fail , additional incentives to get providers to the neediest areas might need to be explored . providers' current difficulty recruiting and retaining health care professionals such as nurses and others could worsen as demand for these workers increases in the future . current high levels of job dissatisfaction among nurses and nurse aides may also play a crucial role in determining the extent of current and future nursing shortages . efforts undertaken to improve the workplace environment may both reduce the likelihood of nurses and nurse aides leaving the field and encourage more young people to enter the nursing profession . nonetheless , demographic forces will continue to widen the gap between the number of people needing care and the nursing staff available to provide care . as a result , the nation will face a caregiver shortage of different dimensions from shortages of the past . more detailed data are needed , however , to delineate the extent and nature of nurse and nurse aide shortages to assist in planning and targeting corrective efforts . regarding the nhsc , addressing needed program improvements would be beneficial . in particular , better coordination of nhsc placements with waivers for j - 1 visa physicians could help more needy areas . in addition , addressing shortfalls in hhs systems for identifying underservice is long overdue . we believe hhs needs to gather more consistent and reliable information on the changing needs for services in underserved communities . a major reason for the difference is the time value of money . because 7 or more years can elapse between the time that a physician receives a scholarship and the time that the physician begins to practice in an underserved area , the federal government is making an investment for a commitment for service in the future . in the loan repayment program , however , the federal government does not pay until after the service has begun .