each concurred with the report and its recommendations . the departments generally agreed with both proposals . as part of your continuing oversight of these efforts , you asked us to report on ( 1 ) va's and dod's efforts to increase joint pharmaceutical procurement , ( 2 ) challenges cited by va and dod in doing so , and ( 3 ) the status of their efforts to pilot test cmop use at dod . to conduct our work , we interviewed va and dod pharmacy policy and acquisition officials and reviewed records on procurement , policy , and mail - out operations . we reviewed dod's and va's preliminary comments , joint procurement plans , and cost avoidance estimates related to the drug classes and individual drugs we identified as potential joint procurement candidates . dod and va define cost avoidance as the difference between the theoretical cost that would have occurred if contracts were not awarded and the actual cost incurred for the drugs affected by each contract . to learn more about the joint procurement potential of drugs in these classes , we consulted with a managed care pharmacist and obtained the views of academic and private sector managed care pharmacy experts . regarding the cmop pilot , we interviewed dod and va officials and reviewed records concerning interagency software needs and costs to establish an electronic link between military pharmacy and cmop center computers , as well as other issues affecting the pilot's progress . we also visited two va and dod medical centers to observe pharmacy computer systems and to discuss links with cmops for electronically transmitting refill prescriptions for processing and mailing to beneficiaries . patients would also be motivated to use drugs on the formulary because such use reduces their out - of - pocket costs . other managed care pharmacy experts told us that these types of outreach efforts are a necessary and routine part of pharmacy benefit management . according to these experts , the additional administrative effort and cost to reach out to providers and beneficiaries will be more than offset by the financial benefits of less costly drug procurement and utilization . in our view , periodic expert input and congressional review could help sustain the important progress va and dod have made to address the challenges they face in jointly procuring drugs . while various experts in managed care pharmacy — including several responsible for the iom study — agreed that the differences in va's and dod's demographics and health systems are not insurmountable obstacles to joint procurements , they were generally sympathetic to the clinical and operating challenges ahead as the departments continue to expand their efforts . also , several experts told us that the departments' efforts might be enhanced by periodically conferring with private managed care pharmacy experts in order to exchange information , experiences , and lessons learned that are relevant to the departments' joint procurement plans and efforts . external reporting could also help bolster va and dod's efforts to enhance their joint procurement activities — a general finding we reported to the congress in may 2000 .