gao - 12-912t . a november 2012 report by doe's office of independent oversight raised concerns about safety culture issues at nnsa's pantex plant . more recently , in september 2011 , nnsa estimated that increases.the facility would cost from $4.2 billion to $6.5 billion to construct — a nearly seven - fold cost increase from the original estimate . in april 2010 , we reported that weak management by doe and nnsa had allowed the cost , schedule , and scope of ignition - related activities at the national ignition facility to increase substantially . we reported that , since 2005 , ignition - related costs have increased by around 25 percent — from $1.6 billion in 2005 to over $2 billion in 2010 — and that the planned completion date for these activities had slipped from the end of fiscal year 2011 to the end of fiscal year 2012 or beyond . ten years earlier , in august 2000 , we had reported that poor management and oversight of the national ignition facility construction project at lawrence livermore national laboratory had increased the facility's cost by $1 billion and delayed its scheduled completion date by 6 years . in march 2010 , we reported that nnsa's mixed - oxide fuel fabrication facility currently being constructed at doe's savannah river site in south carolina had experienced delays , but project officials said that they expected to recover from these delays by the end of 2010 and planned for the start of operations on schedule in 2016 . in addition , after spending about $730 million on design , nnsa has cancelled the pit disassembly and conversion facility and is now planning to use existing facilities at doe's savannah river and los alamos sites and will add equipment to the mixed oxide facility . nnsa is working on a cost and schedule estimate for the use of these existing facilities and for adding the additional equipment . this arrangement has historical roots . since the manhattan project produced the first atomic bomb during world war ii , nnsa , doe , and predecessor agencies have depended on the expertise of private firms , universities , and others to carry out research and development work and efficiently operate the facilities necessary for the nation's nuclear defense . currently , doe spends 90 percent of its annual budget on m&o contracts , making it the largest non - department of defense contracting agency in the government . doe generally regulates the safety of its own nuclear facilities and operations at its sites . in contrast , the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) generally regulates commercial nuclear facilities , and the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) generally regulates worker safety at commercial industrial facilities . however , because of the dangerous nature of work conducted at many sites within the nuclear security enterprise — handling nuclear material such as plutonium , manufacturing high explosives , and various industrial operations that use hazardous chemicals — oversight of the nuclear security enterprise is multifaceted .