( see app . i for a more detailed list of medicaid hedis measures related to service utilization. ) twelve of the 14 states we reviewed used hedis measures to help assess medicaid beneficiaries' utilization of services . eleven states required participating plans to submit hedis performance results , while 1 state — ohio — conducted its own hedis analysis using encounter data submitted by plans . some states used the full set of hedis measures , while others used selected measures corresponding to areas of interest . despite the potential of hedis to provide valuable information regarding beneficiaries' use of managed care services , its narrow focus in identifying beneficiaries to be included in the assessments often limits the ability to generalize results to all beneficiaries within a plan or within a state . many hedis measures require beneficiaries to have 12 months of continuous enrollment in a single managed care plan in the assessment year in order to be included in the measures . as a measurement criterion , the continuous enrollment requirement is intended to ensure that comparisons of performance across health plans are made on the basis of sample populations that have been enrolled for similar periods of time . however , because beneficiaries' average length of time in the medicaid program can be less than 12 months — ranging from 6 to 9 months in three states — this 12-month enrollment requirement excluded at least one quarter of medicaid beneficiaries from most of the states we reviewed and more than half in four states , as shown in table 5 . consequently , hedis measures may not provide a representative measure of service utilization for a significant share of children covered by medicaid managed care . another limitation of the hedis measures is that they are often based on encounter data and are thus subject to the reliability concerns previously raised . several states we reviewed provided examples of how they used the hedis data they received from participating plans . these included using the information to compare each plan's performance against national medicaid averages for selected measures and developing report cards to compare results across plans . given issues we identified with the completeness of the data , however , such uses and comparisons may not be reliable indicators of beneficiaries' use of services and may render a false impression of beneficiaries' actual experience in service utilization . state medicaid managed care programs are required to have an internal quality assurance system , which can involve administering beneficiary satisfaction surveys . thirteen of the 14 states we reviewed reported using cahps to assess beneficiaries' experiences with their medicaid managed care plans . cahps is a standardized survey designed to compare the performance of managed care plans on the basis of beneficiaries' perceptions regarding the care they received through their plans . the cahps survey covers a range of topics related to service utilization , including appointment scheduling , waiting time in a physician's office , and the use of specialty services , as shown in table 6 . like hedis , however , information from cahps is only gathered from a subset of beneficiaries . cahps has a 6-month continuous enrollment requirement for medicaid beneficiaries to be included in the survey sample .