( see fig . in comparison , for fiscal years 2002 through 2007 , about 85 percent of fda's inspections of domestic establishments were gmp inspections conducted to examine the manufacturing of drugs currently marketed in the united states . fda conducts a similar number of preapproval inspections in domestic and foreign establishments each year , but many more domestic gmp inspections . agency officials said that preapproval inspections are driven by specific goals for the timely review of new drug applications , which may necessitate the inspection of establishments referenced in those applications . fda often included a systemwide gmp inspection when it visited a foreign establishment for a preapproval inspection . from fiscal years 2002 through 2007 , the majority of fda's foreign inspections combined a preapproval inspection with a broader gmp inspection . according to fda officials , because foreign establishments are inspected infrequently , it is expedient for the agency to conduct preapproval inspections and gmp inspections during the same visit to a foreign establishment . relatively few foreign establishments identified through cder's risk - based process are selected for the agency to conduct surveillance of drugs currently marketed in the united states . in fiscal year 2007 , after using this process to rank the 3,249 establishments by their potential risk level , cder forwarded to ora a list of 104 foreign establishments that it considered to be a high priority for inspection and requested that ora complete surveillance inspections of 25 of them . fda officials indicated that 29 such inspections were actually completed in fiscal year 2007 . in fiscal year 2008 , cder submitted a list of 110 foreign establishments to ora , with a target of at least 50 inspections . though fda oversight resulted in foreign establishments taking actions to address serious deficiencies identified during inspections , fda's subsequent inspections of these establishments were not always timely . fda identified deficiencies during most of its inspections of foreign establishments . however , determining the number of inspections during which fda identified serious deficiencies is hindered by inconsistent data on inspection classifications . fda issued 15 warning letters to foreign drug establishments found to be out of compliance with gmps . to determine the adequacy of an establishment's corrective actions , fda often relied on information provided by the establishment , rather than information obtained from another fda inspection . although fda verified these corrective actions during subsequent inspections , fda inspections to determine establishments' continued compliance were not always timely and identified additional deficiencies . fda identified deficiencies during most of its inspections of foreign establishments . based on our review of classification data in facts , fda identified deficiencies necessitating a classification of vai or the more serious oai in about 62 percent of foreign inspections conducted from fiscal years 2002 through 2006 , compared to about 51 percent of inspections of domestic establishments . however , we determined that fda's data did not provide reliable information about the number of foreign inspections with serious deficiencies classified specifically as oai . determining the number of inspections during which fda identified serious deficiencies is hindered by inconsistencies in databases used by fda to track inspections .