the bus is the body of the satellite . it carries the payload and is composed of a number of subsystems , like the power supply , antennas , telemetry and tracking command , and mechanical and thermal control subsystems . the bus also provides electrical power , stability , and propulsion for the entire satellite . the payload — carried by the bus — includes all the devices a satellite needs to perform its mission , which differs for every type of satellite . for example , the payload for a weather satellite could include cameras to take pictures of cloud formations , while the payload for a communications satellite may include transponders to relay data such as television or telephone signals . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the air force , navy , and army ; and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or chaplainc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . our review focused on the ground networks used to perform satellite control operations . as such , we reviewed relevant satellite control upgrades , and sustainment and modernization efforts for the air force , navy and army to determine the potential for fragmentation or duplication . we reviewed satellite control plans , requirements , budgets , and studies associated with current and future capabilities . we developed an inventory of key satellite programs to enable a comparison of satellite control operations types , attributes , and funding . to identify any potential for fragmentation and duplication , we assessed military service investments in satellite control operations , acquisitions , and capabilities , and reviewed prior gao work for relevant criteria . we also used the information associated with various aspects of the modernization efforts , and actual or planned satellite control operations capabilities , to assess whether any of the efforts were potentially duplicative . we analyzed documentation and interviewed officials from various offices of the secretary of defense , to include the office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for communications , command and control and cyber , air force , navy , army , and national reconnaissance office ( nro ) . we did not , however , review nro systems , budgets , or requirements , but did obtain perspectives on satellite operations from the nro , which could not be incorporated due to their classification . we also determined the extent to which various aspects of the modernization efforts were duplicative by reviewing briefings on satellite control operations and obtaining status updates from air force , navy , and army officials .