what is known about the number of flsa lawsuits filed ? how does whd plan its flsa enforcement and compliance assistance efforts ? to describe what is known about trends in the number of flsa lawsuits filed , we analyzed data from the federal district courts for fiscal years 1991 through 2012 provided by the federal judicial center . we also reviewed complaints from a randomly selected and generalizable sample of 97 flsa lawsuits filed in federal district courts in fiscal year 2012 to generate estimates about selected characteristics of such lawsuits . we did not review flsa lawsuits filed in state courts or cases from the federal appeals courts . to describe how whd plans its flsa enforcement and compliance assistance efforts , we reviewed the agency's planning and performance documents and its published guidance on flsa enforcement and compliance assistance . we also compared whd's planning process to internal control standards and best practices that we have previously identified . we did not assess whd's implementation of its enforcement and compliance assistance plans . to inform both objectives , we interviewed dol officials , attorneys who specialize in wage and hour cases , federal judges , officials from organizations representing workers and employers , and academics about flsa litigation trends and whd's enforcement and compliance assistance activities , and reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations . we conducted this performance audit from november 2012 to december 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . for more information on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . the flsa requires that workers who are covered by the act and not specifically exempt from its provisions be paid at least the federal minimum wage ( currently $7.25 per hour ) and 1.5 times their regular rate of pay for hours worked over 40 in a workweek . the act also regulates the employment of youth under the age of 18 and establishes recordkeeping requirements for employers , among other provisions . there are a number of exceptions to the requirements of the flsa ; for example , independent contractors are not covered by the flsa , and certain categories of workers , such as those in bona fide executive , administrative , or professional positions , are exempt from the minimum wage requirements , overtime requirements , or both . whd has issued regulations implementing the flsa that further define these exemptions and other requirements of the flsa . the mission pursued by dol through its whd is to promote and achieve compliance with labor standards to protect and enhance the welfare of the nation's workforce . the flsa authorizes dol to enforce its provisions by , for example , conducting investigations , assessing penalties , supervising payment of back wages , and bringing suit in court on behalf of employees .