insider threat . in june 2015 , we made 4 recommendations to address challenges with dod's insider threat program — of which dod concurred with two , and partially concurred with two . dod is developing an insider threat implementation plan to address two of the recommendations , but that plan has not yet been published . dod officials told us that the department is no longer taking action to address our recommendation to evaluate the extent to which its insider - threat programs address capability gaps . this recommendation originated in part when dod did not complete a continuing analysis of gaps in security measures and of technology , policies , and processes that are needed to increase the capability of its insider - threat program to address these gaps , as required by statute . this survey would have allowed dod to define existing insider - threat program capabilities ; identify gaps in security measures ; and advocate for the technology , policies , and processes necessary to increase capabilities in the future . in their comments to the draft report , dod officials stated that the department analyzes security gaps each quarter through its self - assessments , which identify program capability gaps . however , dod has not evaluated and documented the extent to which the current assessments describe existing insider - threat program capabilities , as required by law . without a documented evaluation , the department will not know whether its capabilities to address insider threats are adequate , or whether the capabilities address statutory requirements . defense civil support . washington , d.c.: may 20 , 2011 . defense cyber efforts: management improvements needed to enhance programs protecting the defense industrial base from cyber threats . gao 12-762su , august 3 , 2012 . defense cybersecurity: dod needs to better plan for continuity of operations in a degraded cyber environment and provide increased oversight . gao - 14-404su , april 1 , 2014. insider threats: dod should strengthen management and guidance to protect classified information and systems . gao - 15-544 , june 2 , 2015 . defense infrastructure: improvements in dod reporting and cybersecurity implementation needed to enhance utility resilience planning . gao - 15-749 , july 23 , 2015 . defense cybersecurity: opportunities exist for dod to share cybersecurity resources with small businesses . gao - 15-777 , september 24 , 2015 . civil support: dod needs to clarify its roles and responsibilities for defense support of civil authorities during cyber incidents . gao - 16-332 , april 4 , 2016 . defense civil support: dod needs to identify national guard's cyber capabilities and address challenges in its exercises . gao - 16-574 , september 6 , 2016 . we did not receive any responses from 2 of the components . dod cio also compiled an official response from dod to the dual - hat leadership arrangement questions that reflected views from across the 25 dod components to whom we sent questionnaires . our report reflects the dod - wide response and the information we received from the 14 components who responded to our questions .