ch . 154 , § 1 , colo. rev . stat . an act concerning expenditures for the programs and services of the department of public health , 2000 conn. acts 00-216 , § 15 ( d ) ( 1 ) , conn. gen. stat . an act to create the delaware health fund , 72 del . laws , ch . 198 , § 1 ( 1999 ) , del . code ann . tit . an act relating to the hawaii tobacco settlement special fund , 1999 haw . sess . laws act 304 , § 2 , haw . rev . stat . created the tobacco master settlement fund for receipt of all revenues and several additional funds to which funds are transferred . several of these funds have non - supplant provisions: ( 1 ) indiana tobacco use prevention and cessation trust fund requires funding proposals to state “the extent to which the expenditure will supplement or duplicate existing expenditures of other state agencies , public or private entities , or the executive board.” other funds — ( 2 ) indiana health care trust fund funds health programs including chip , cancer detection , local health departments and community centers ; ( 3 ) biomedical technology and basic research trust fund ; ( 4 ) indiana local health department trust fund ; ( 5 ) indiana prescription drug fund — include the language: “appropriations and distributions from the fund under this chapter are in addition to and not in place of other appropriations or distributions made for the same purpose.” the children's trust , renamed the kansas endowment for youth ( key ) fund , was established to receive all tobacco settlement funds . all moneys credited to the key fund must be invested to provide an ongoing source of investment earnings available for periodic transfer to the children's initiatives fund . “moneys allocated or appropriated from the children's initiatives fund shall not be used to replace or substitute for moneys appropriated from the state general fund in the immediately preceding fiscal year.” established the millennium trust fund and the louisiana fund and creates the education excellence fund as a special fund within the millennium trust fund . “no amount appropriated as required in this paragraph shall displace , replace or supplant appropriations from the general fund for elementary and secondary education , including implementing the minimum foundation program . this subparagraph shall mean that no appropriation for any fiscal year from the education excellence fund shall be made for any purpose for which a general fund appropriation was made in the previous year unless the total appropriations for the fiscal year from the state general fund for such purpose exceed general fund appropriations of the previous year.” the fund for a healthy maine was created for receipt of all tobacco settlement revenues . “when allocations are made to direct services , services to lower income consumers must have priority over services to higher income consumers . allocations from the fund must be used to supplement , not supplant , appropriations from the general fund.” created the cigarette restitution fund for all revenues received by the state resulting from the tobacco settlement .