pub . this section was originally codified at 10 u.s.c . ยง 2304 ( note ) . competence and resources to ensure effective and timely response to mobilizations , contingencies , or other emergencies and assign these government - owned and operated facilities ( the depots ) to ensure that the department can maintain cost sufficient workloadefficiency and technical competence during peacetime while preserving the ability to respond to a mobilization , contingency , or emergency . dod has a process to implement this statutory requirement in which the services are required to use a computational methodology to identify their essential core capability requirements and the planned workloads to help support this core maintenance capability . the services are then required to submit biennially to the secretary of defense an internal report that summarizes the results of this process and identified shortfalls between requirements and planned workload . in 2009 , we reported that dod , through this internal biennial reporting process , had not comprehensively and accurately assessed whether it had the required core maintenance capability to support systems currently in use in the military depots . we found , among other things , that dod's method of compiling and internally reporting core capability requirements and planned workloads did not reveal shortfalls between the requirements and the planned workloads for specific categories of weapon systems or equipment that we had identified . further , we found that congress lacked visibility into dod's process , because there was no requirement for dod to provide its biennial core report to congress . we recommended that the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics take several actions related to improving the biennial core report , including requiring dod to compile and report the services' core capability requirements , planned workloads , and any shortfalls in workloads by work breakdown structure category.included a matter for congressional consideration to require dod to provide this report to congress . appendix ii provides more information on our recommendations and actions dod has taken to implement them . the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 section 2464 to require dod to , among other things , submit to congress a biennial report , no later than april 1 of each even - numbered year . the statute states that dod is required to identify the following three items for each military service , for the subsequent fiscal year: 1 . the core depot - level maintenance and repair capability requirements and sustaining workloads , organized by work breakdown structure expressed in direct labor hours . the corresponding workloads necessary to sustain core depot - level maintenance and repair capability requirements , expressed in direct labor hours and cost . in any case where core depot - level maintenance and repair capability requirements exceed or are expected to exceed sustaining workloads , a detailed rationale for the shortfall and a plan either to correct or mitigate the effects of the shortfall .