the investigation phase . federal investigative standards and opm's internal guidance are used to conduct and document the investigation of the applicant . the scope of information gathered in an investigation depends on the level of clearance needed and whether an investigation for an initial clearance or reinvestigation for a clearance renewal is being conducted . for example , the federal standards require that investigators collect information from national agencies , such as the federal bureau of investigation , for all initial and renewal clearances . for an investigation for a confidential or secret clearance , investigators gather much of the information electronically . for an investigation for a top secret clearance , investigators gather additional information through more time - consuming efforts , such as traveling to conduct in - person interviews to corroborate information about an applicant's employment and education . after the investigation is complete , the resulting investigative report is provided to the agency . according to the performance accountability council's strategic framework , for the purposes of irtpa timeliness reporting , investigative time is the time in days from the receipt date of the completed personnel security package by the investigative service provider to the date the final investigative file is forwarded to the adjudicative facility if sent electronically . the adjudication phase . adjudicators from an agency use the information from the investigative report to determine whether an applicant is eligible for a security clearance . to make clearance eligibility decisions , federal requirements specify that adjudicators consider guidelines in 13 specific areas that elicit information about ( 1 ) conduct that could raise security concerns and ( 2 ) factors that could allay those security concerns and permit granting a clearance . according to the performance accountability council's strategic framework , for the purposes of irtpa timeliness reporting , adjudicative time is the time in days from the date the final investigative file is forwarded ( or received electronically ) to the adjudicative unit to the date of the adjudicative decision . separate from , but related to , security clearances , are suitability determinations . executive branch agencies conduct additional suitability investigations for individuals to ensure that they are suitable for employment in certain positions . for example , the department of justice conducts additional suitability checks to ensure applicants for jobs with the drug enforcement agency have not used drugs . in addition , health and human services conducts additional suitability investigations on applicants for jobs working with children . similarly , the intelligence community requires a polygraph evaluation , among other things , to determine suitability for most positions . in light of long - standing delays and backlogs in processing security clearances , congress set goals and established requirements for improving the clearance process in the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 . in 2005 , gao designated dod's personnel security clearance program as a high risk area . as can be seen in figure 1 , a number of steps have been taken to reform the process , including: role of the office of management and budget in security clearance process .