pipeline safety . our report gao - rced - 00-128 , pipeline safety: the office of pipeline safety is changing how it oversees the pipeline industry , found that the department of transportation's office of pipeline safety was reducing its reliance on states to help oversee the safety of interstate pipelines . the report stated that allowing states to participate in this oversight could improve pipeline safety . as a result , the office of pipeline safety modified its interstate pipeline oversight program for 2001-2002 to allow greater opportunities for state participation . temporary assistance for needy families grant program . we reported on key national and state labor market statistics and changes in the levels of cash assistance and employment activities in five selected states . we also highlighted the fact that the five states had faced severe fiscal challenges and had used reserve funds to augment their spending above the amount of their annual temporary assistance for needy families block grant from the federal government . issued to coincide with the start of each new congress , our high - risk update lists government programs and functions in need of special attention or transformation to ensure that the federal government functions in the most economical , efficient , and effective manner possible . this is especially important in light of the nation's large and growing long - term fiscal imbalance . our latest report , released in january 2003 , spotlights more than 20 troubled areas across government . many of these areas involve essential government services , such as medicare , housing programs , and postal service operations that directly affect the lives and well - being of the american people . our high - risk program , which we began in 1990 , includes five high - risk areas added in 2003: implementing and transforming the new department of homeland security , modernizing federal disability programs , pension benefit guaranty corporation's ( pbgc ) single - employer pension insurance program . in fiscal year 2003 , we also removed the high - risk designation from two programs: the social security administration's supplemental security income program , and asset forfeiture programs administered by the u.s . departments of justice and the treasury . in fiscal 2003 , we issued 208 reports and delivered 112 testimonies related to high - risk areas , and our related work resulted in financial benefits totaling almost $21 billion . our sustained focus on high - risk problems also has helped the congress enact a series of governmentwide reforms to strengthen financial management , improve information technology , and create a more results - oriented and accountable federal government . the president's management agenda for reforming the federal government mirrors many of the management challenges and program risks that we have reported on in our performance and accountability series and high - risk updates , including a governmentwide initiative to focus on strategic management of human capital . following gao's designation of federal real property as a high - risk issue , the office of management and budget ( omb ) has indicated its plans to add federal real property as a new program initiative under the president's management agenda .