( see app . i for characteristics of title iii and title v institutions and their students. ) title iii and title v statutory provisions generally outline broad program goals for strengthening participating institutions , but provide grantees with flexibility in deciding which approaches will best meet their needs . an institution can use the grants to focus on one or more activities that will help it achieve the goals articulated in its comprehensive development plan — a plan that each applicant must submit with its grant application outlining its strategy for achieving growth and self - sufficiency . the statutory and regulatory eligibility criteria for all of the programs , with the exception of the hbcu program , contain requirements that institutions applying for grants serve a significant number of economically disadvantaged students . see table 1 for additional information about eligibility requirements . historically , one of the primary missions of title iii has been to support historically black colleges and universities , which play a significant role in providing postsecondary opportunities for african american , low - income , and educationally disadvantaged students . these institutions receive funding , in part , to remedy past discriminatory action of the states and the federal government against black colleges and universities . in addition to reviewing grantee fiscal , performance , and compliance information , program staff are also required to consider a number of factors affecting the ability of grantees to manage their grants in the areas of project management and implementation , funds management , communication , and performance measurement . education reports that identifying appropriate risk factors have been a continuous process and that these factors are still being refined . these programs are generally referred to as titles iii and v of the hea . the amount of federal funds available for these programs has nearly doubled from about $230 million in fiscal year 1999 to about $448 million in fiscal year 2007 . given the recent expansion of these programs and that hea is slated for reauthorization this year , this hearing presents a timely opportunity to explore these grant programs . my testimony today focuses on ( 1 ) how institutions used their title iii and title v grants and the benefits they received from using these grant funds , ( 2 ) what objectives and strategies the department of education ( education ) has developed for title iii and title v programs , and ( 3 ) to what extent education monitors and provides assistance to title iii and title v institutions . in summary , we found that grantees most commonly reported using title iii and title v grant funds to strengthen academic quality ; improve support for students and student success ; and improve institutional management and reported a wide range of benefits . for example , sinte gleska , a tribal college in south dakota , used part of its title iii grant to fund the school's distance learning department , and to provide students access to academic and research resources otherwise not available at its rural isolated location . congress has identified many areas in which institutions may use funds for improving their academic programs .