gao - 07-59 . washington , d.c.: january 31 , 2007 . medicare durable medical equipment: class iii devices do not warrant a distinct annual payment update . gao - 06-62 . washington , d.c.: march 1 , 2006 . bidding and implementation processes were similar at both locations . the demonstration ended on december 31 , 2002 . in december 2003 , the mma required cms to conduct competitive bidding for dme , supplies , off - the - shelf orthotics , and enteral nutrients and related equipment and supplies on a large scale . the mma required that competition under the program begin in 10 of the largest metropolitan statistical areas in 2007 , in 80 of the largest metropolitan statistical areas in 2009 , and in other areas after 2009 . the law established a new accreditation requirement for all medicare suppliers of medical equipment and supplies and required cms to develop financial and quality standards to use in selecting suppliers for the competitive bidding program . the law required cms to take appropriate steps to ensure that small suppliers have an opportunity to be considered for participation in the competitive bidding program . cms was required to establish a methodology for selecting bids from suppliers so that enough suppliers were selected to meet demand for competitively bid items within a given area . the law specified that at least two suppliers would be selected in each competitive area . the law also precluded judicial or administrative review of cms's decisions to establish payment amounts , award contracts , designate areas for competition , select items and services , phase in implementation , and determine the bidding structure and number of suppliers selected under the competitive bidding program . the mma required that an advisory committee be established to assist in carrying out the program . to help implement the competitive bidding program , cms published its notice of proposed rulemaking on may 1 , 2006 , and its final rule on april 10 , 2007 . cms's final rule provided more detail on the agency's implementation steps . for example , the law specified that the agency could not award a contract to an entity unless it met applicable financial standards specified by the secretary of hhs . because of concerns that competitive bidding may prompt suppliers to cut their costs by providing lower - quality items and curtailing services , ensuring quality and access through adequate oversight is critical . limiting the number of suppliers could potentially affect beneficiaries' access to quality items and services if there are an insufficient number to meet their needs . for some beneficiaries , having a choice of suppliers for some items and services could be important . in our september 2004 report , we evaluated cms's competitive bidding demonstration and recommended implementation actions for cms to consider , including how to ensure access to quality items and services for beneficiaries . we indicated that quality assurance steps could include monitoring beneficiary satisfaction , setting standards for suppliers , providing beneficiaries with a choice of suppliers , and selecting winning bidders based on quality , in addition to the dollar amounts of bids .