gao - 11-881 . washington , d.c: september 7 , 2011 . information sharing environment: better road map needed to guide implementation and investments . gao - 11-455 . washington , d.c: july 21 , 2011 . they generally agreed and have started to address this issue . the program manager and agencies have not yet identified the incremental costs necessary to implement the ise , as envisioned by the intelligence reform act . our prior work shows that cost information can help agencies allocate resources and investments according to priorities and constraints , track costs and performance , and shift such investments and resources as appropriate . we recognize that developing accurate and reliable incremental cost estimates for the ise is a difficult undertaking , complicated further by the fact that the program manager and agencies are still defining what the ise is , is to include , and is to attain . in our july 2011 report , we recommended that the program manager — in coordination with the office of management and budget — task the key ise agencies to define , to the extent possible , the incremental costs needed to help ensure successful implementation of the ise . the program manager acknowledged the importance of identifying incremental costs and noted that the office of the program manager will continue to work directly with the office of management and budget to provide agencies with budget guidance that calls for them to identify their costs to implement the ise . the intelligence reform act requires the program manager to , among other things , monitor implementation of the ise by federal departments and agencies to ensure adequate progress is being made and regularly report the findings to congress . in june 2008 , we reported that the office of the program manager was monitoring ise implementation — as demonstrated through its annual report to congress — but that such monitoring did not include an overall assessment of progress in implementing the ise and how much work remained . thus , we recommended , among other things , that the program manager develop a way to measure and demonstrate results and to show the extent to which the ise had been implemented , as well as more fully define the key milestones needed to achieve the ise . the program manager generally agreed and in january 2011 , the information sharing and access interagency policy committee ( isa ipc ) and the office of the program manager initiated an effort to make ise priority programs and related goals more transparent and to better monitor progress . specifically , according to the deputy program manager , agencies that are responsible for implementing ise priority programs are leading efforts to establish 3- , 6- , and 12-month goals for these programs . information on progress made in reaching these goals may be included in future ise annual reports . in addition he explained that the office of the program manager is working with agencies to develop a performance management framework that will be linked to the updated national strategy .