see figure 1 . the personal property exchange / sale authority allows agencies to replenish property that is not excess or surplus and that is still needed to meet the agency's continuing mission . agencies must meet several requirements , including: the property exchanged or sold is similar to the property acquired . agencies can meet the similarity requirement in one of several ways . first , the property acquired is identical to the property replaced . second , the acquired property and the replaced property fall within a single federal supply group of property . third , both the acquired and the replaced property constitute parts or containers for similar parts . fourth , the acquired and the replaced property are designed or constructed for the same purpose . for instance , ambulances and station wagons adapted for use as ambulances would be considered similar . the property exchanged or sold was not acquired for the principal purpose of later exchanging or selling it using the authority . for example , an agency cannot purchase a costly piece of equipment for the sole reason that it will deliver a higher value when sold using the authority . proceeds from the sale can only be put toward the purchase of replacement property and cannot be spent on services . in other words , an agency can use proceeds from the sale of a vehicle to purchase a new vehicle , but it cannot use proceeds to hire a mechanic to repair an existing vehicle . in addition , gsa regulations , except as otherwise authorized by law , require that proceeds from sales be available during the same fiscal year the property was sold or the following fiscal year for replacement property . for an item sold in fiscal year 2018 , an agency has the rest of fiscal year 2018 as well as fiscal year 2019 to purchase a replacement item . if agencies do not spend these funds by the end of fiscal year 2019 , monies are to be deposited in the u.s. treasury . finally , agencies are prohibited from using the authority to replace certain types of property ( i.e. , hand tools and clothing ) . see figure 3 . finally , agencies reported using the sale method more than the exchange method . sales by agencies accounted for about $2.9 billion ( or about 91 percent ) , while use of the exchange method accounted for about $275 million ( or about 9 percent ) of total transactions reported , primarily due to gsa's and dod's reporting more use of the sale method over the exchange method . while some agencies reported hundreds of millions of dollars in exchange allowances and sale proceeds , the data show that 10 federal agencies — including the department of labor , office of personnel management , and the social security administration — reported relatively few transactions , which totaled less than $100,000 in exchange allowances and sales proceeds . gsa ogp officials consider the agency - reported data to provide a representative picture of the overall exchange / sale transactions occurring across the federal government . gsa ogp officials rely on the agencies to ensure the accuracy and completeness of the exchange / sale information .