definition of an audit . some contractors used invoice reviews in place of audits to meet the requirement . as discussed previously , doe documents showed that one contractor had never completed an adequate audit of its subcontractors' incurred costs over the 16 years of the contract . according to contractor representatives , the term “audit” was not defined in their contract , and therefore they performed detailed subcontractor invoice reviews instead of conducting subcontract audits to meet the requirement . doe found that these invoice reviews did not meet generally accepted government auditing standards . responsibility for arranging for audits if dcaa is unable to conduct audits . some contractor representatives we interviewed reported that their subcontracts remained unaudited as a result of the dcaa backlog . representatives from one contractor told us that they believed that they were not responsible to conduct the audits if dcaa was unable to do so , and another said that they tried to engage a third - party auditor to conduct the audits themselves , but their subcontractor would not allow the third - party auditor to access their records despite specific language establishing the contractor's responsibilities for audits . differences in the interpretation of the subcontract audit requirements have continued to occur because doe has not clearly defined — in guidance or other documents — how these contract requirements should be met , which could eliminate confusion about which subcontracts should be audited , how an audit is defined , and how to meet subcontract audit requirements if dcaa is unable to conduct the audit . federal internal control standards state that management should externally communicate the necessary quality information to achieve the entity's objectives so that external parties can help the entity achieve its objectives and address related risks . until doe clearly defines how contractors should meet subcontract audit requirements , contractors may not perform subcontract audits as intended and unallowable costs may not be identified or recouped . see figure 3 for the distribution of subcontract obligations by type . we found that in fiscal year 2016 , at least 24 of the 28 entities that were parties to the prime contracts were also subcontractors to the prime contracts in our selection . specifically , these 24 entities held nearly 3,000 subcontracts with fiscal year 2016 subcontract obligations totaling about $927 million . table 2 shows the parties to prime contracts that also held subcontracts in fiscal year 2016 . further , we found that , in some cases , entities held subcontracts on the specific prime contracts to which they were a party . as discussed previously , subcontracting to an entity that is also a party to the prime contract is allowable under the far and doe regulations . each contractor provided data on their subcontracts that were $10,000 or more and that were active in fiscal year 2016 , including: the subcontractor's name , dun & bradstreet's data universal numbering system ( duns ) number , location of subcontractor's office , total award amount , total obligated amount for fiscal year 2016 , type of subcontract , contract award date , and contract term .