therefore we did not change our rating . the agency's comments are reprinted in appendix xix . in an e - mail , the u.s. agency for international development audit , performance and compliance division's management analyst stated that the agency did not have any comments . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the heads of the departments of agriculture , commerce , defense , education , energy , health and human services , homeland security , housing and urban development , the interior , justice , labor , state , transportation , the treasury , and veterans affairs ; the environmental protection agency ; the general services administration ; the national aeronautics and space administration ; the national science foundation ; the nuclear regulatory commission ; the office of personnel management ; the small business administration ; the social security administration ; the u.s. agency for international development ; the director of the office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . this report will also be available at no charge on our website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions on matters discussed in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or pownerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) whether agencies have established complete application inventories and ( 2 ) to what extent selected agencies have developed and implemented processes for rationalizing their portfolio of applications . for the first objective , we reviewed the 24 major agencies covered by the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 . to ensure consistency , we decided to focus on the software applications associated with the business and enterprise information technology ( it ) commodity it categories defined in the office of management and budget ( omb ) guidance since they would be familiar to the agencies in our scope . omb defines enterprise it systems as e - mail , identity and access management , it security , web infrastructure , and collaboration tools ; and business systems as finance , human resources , and other administrative functions . we then identified practices to assess whether agencies had a complete software application inventory . the agency's comments are reprinted in appendix xv . in e - mail comments , the general services administration's associate cio of enterprise planning and governance concurred with the report . the agency also provided evidence of its processes to update the inventory and ensure the reliability of the data in the inventory , including the coordination between its enterprise architecture team and subject matter experts . as a result , we changed the agency's rating for the related practice from partially met to fully met and removed our recommendation to the agency . in written comments , the national aeronautics and space administration concurred with our recommendation and stated that it would utilize the capital investment review process it is currently implementing to improve its inventory . the agency's comments are reprinted in appendix xvi .