certification status . once designated , qualified anti - terrorism technologies become eligible for certification under the safety act , which gives the seller the legal status of a government contractor and renders the seller virtually immune from any claims that might arise in the event the technology fails to thwart an act of terrorism , provided the seller does not act fraudulently or with willful misconduct in submitting information to dhs . to certify , dhs must determine if the qualified anti - terrorism technology will ( 1 ) perform as intended , ( 2 ) conform to the seller's specifications , and ( 3 ) be safe for use as intended . certification status cannot be awarded unless these three criteria have been met . dhs places certified anti - terrorism technologies and services on an approved product list for homeland security . dhs determined that the four private screening contractors serving the five pilot program airports were eligible for safety act protection . once this determination was made , after november 2004 , three of the four current private screening contractors applied for and were provided designation status under the safety act . contractors that apply to the spp in the future are to be evaluated individually , as their applications to the program are processed . tsa awarded a contract for private screening services at sioux falls and jackson hole airports . the status of safety act coverage for these airports , if the contractors apply for coverage , will be determined at a later point in time . as of january 2006 , one issue pertaining to how the safety act would be applied to contractors remained unresolved and is a cause for concern for one of the four contractors we interviewed . specifically , dhs officials stated that they have not been able to award safety act certification status to contractors because tsa has not yet finalized performance standards for assessing whether contractors have performed as intended . dhs safety act officials stated that once tsa finalizes its performance standards , the contractors that previously received designation status may submit an application for safety act certification . the application is to include evidence demonstrating that they are meeting the tsa - defined performance standards . dhs will evaluate the material submitted by the applicant against the tsa standards . according to dhs officials , assuming the applicant is able to demonstrate that it is performing as tsa intends , there should be no impediment to granting certification . when the three contractors that already have safety act designation status were asked to comment on whether they would continue to participate in the spp without certification status , two contractors told us they would . one of these two contractors said it had too much time and money invested in providing private screening services to not participate in the spp . the third contractor said that its company's $50 million in general liability insurance coverage excludes acts of terrorism , thus the company believed it “would remain exposed to serious liability concerns related to terrorist threats risks.” this contractor did not , however , explicitly state that it would not participate in the spp going forward , if certification status were not awarded .