the corresponding percentages for 2005 and 2006 were about the same . we and others have found that loans with down - payment assistance do not perform as well as loans without down - payment assistance . we analyzed loan performance by source of down - payment assistance , using two samples of fha - insured purchase loans from 2000 , 2001 , and 2002 — a national sample and a sample from three metropolitan statistical areas ( msa ) with high rates of down - payment assistance . holding other variables constant , our analysis indicated that fha - insured loans with down - payment assistance had higher delinquency and claim rates than similar loans without such assistance . for example , we found that the probability that loans with nonseller - funded sources of down - payment assistance ( eg , gifts from relatives ) would result in insurance claims was 49 percent higher in the national sample and 45 percent higher in the msa sample than it was for comparable loans without assistance . similarly , the probability that loans with nonprofit seller - funded down - payment assistance would result in insurance claims was 76 percent higher in the national sample and 166 percent higher in the msa sample than it was for comparable loans without assistance . this difference in performance may be explained , in part , by the higher sales prices of comparable homes bought with seller - funded down - payment assistance . our analysis indicated that fha - insured homes bought with seller - funded nonprofit assistance were appraised and sold for about 2 to 3 percent more than comparable homes bought without such assistance . fha has taken actions in response to some of our findings and recommendations . fha has implemented some standards and internal controls to manage the risks associated with loans with down - payment assistance , but stricter standards and additional controls could help fha better manage the financial risks posed by these loans while meeting its mission of expanding homeownership opportunities . like other mortgage industry participants , fha generally applies the same underwriting standards to loans with down - payment assistance that it applies to loans without such assistance . one important exception is that fha , unlike others , does not limit the use of down - payment assistance from seller - funded nonprofits . some mortgage industry participants view assistance from seller - funded nonprofits as a seller inducement to the sale and , therefore , either restrict or prohibit its use . fha has not treated such assistance as a seller inducement and , therefore , does not subject this assistance to the limits it otherwise places on contributions from sellers . concerns about loans with nonprofit seller - funded down - payment assistance have prompted fha and irs to initiate steps that could curb their use . for example , fha has begun drafting a proposed rule that , as described by fha , would appear to prohibit down - payment assistance from seller - funded nonprofits . fha's legislative proposal could also eliminate the need for such assistance by allowing some fha borrowers to make no down payments for an fha - insured loan .