the department concurred with the recommendation . dod stated that it will develop guidance that specifically addresses what is to be included when accounting for operational support . the department's comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix ii . the act amended 10 u.s.c . ยง 115 by establishing an annual authorization requirement for the maximum number of reserve personnel authorized to be on active duty for operational support , thus creating a new accounting category . it also added a provision that allows the secretary of defense to increase the maximum strength authorized for certain reservists voluntarily on active duty to perform operational support by up to 10 percent . dod's estimates for the maximum number of volunteer reservists authorized to be on active duty for operational support increased between fiscal year 2005 and fiscal year 2006 as a result of two key factors . first , dod developed its fiscal year 2005 estimates using inaccurate data from a data source that could not distinguish volunteer reservists on active duty for missions that would be considered operational support from other reservists . second , dod did not formally define operational support prior to establishment of its fiscal year 2005 maximum authorized levels and did not release a definition of operational support until 6 months after the maximum authorized levels were passed under the ndaa . dod increased its estimates for fiscal year 2006 after the reserve components reviewed historical numbers of these reservists based on the published operational support definition . for the fiscal year 2007 estimates , the reserve components submitted the same maximum levels as fiscal year 2006 because there were no substantial increases or decreases in their numbers , according to dod officials . one key factor that contributed to the increase in authorization levels requested for fiscal year 2006 was that dod's initial request for fiscal year 2005 was not developed using data that accurately reflected the maximum number of reservists on voluntary active duty for operational support . in developing the estimate submitted for the fiscal year 2005 ndaa , dod used data that was provided by the reserve components for other purposes . dod derived its estimates from an annual data call where reserve components provide information about reservists' activities throughout the year . these data identified reservists involved in such missions as domestic emergencies , counter - drug activities , major exercises , and mobilizations . according to a dod official , they compiled the estimates from various categories that represented what they considered operational support . to determine dod's authority and role in management of the reservists under the ndaa , we reviewed legislation and the history of relevant provisions of the law . to determine the reliability of the estimates for the maximum authorization levels for the reserve components , we gathered reserve component officials' perspectives on their data systems in the collecting and reporting of reserve strength to dod . to determine the extent to which the reserve components have consistently reported the number of reservists serving in an operational support capacity , we obtained dod's memorandums , implementing guidance , and regulations . we obtained documentation from dod and reserve components to determine the categories included and excluded from operational support .