we selected the u.s . departments of defense , energy , state , and the treasury ; the u.s. nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) ; and the united states agency for international development based on variations in agency mission , organizational structure , size of their career ses workforces to reflect agencies with a large , average , and small number of executives ; and results of their ses performance appraisal systems in terms of the percentage of ses rated at the highest rating levels and the percentage that received performance awards or bonuses from fiscal years 2004 to 2006 , according to opm's governmentwide data reports . we focused on career members of the ses because they represent the majority of all ses appointments governmentwide . to address our first and third objectives , we analyzed selected agencies' documents on their ses performance appraisal and pay systems including performance management policies , directives , guidance , and other related information ; performance planning and appraisal templates ; briefings , memos , and other materials used to communicate aggregate appraisal results to senior executives ; and the submission documents to opm and omb for certification in 2007 . we also interviewed cognizant senior - level officials in the human capital offices at the selected agencies regarding their agencies' ses systems and senior - level opm and omb officials on how organizational performance and safeguards are integrated into the certification process . to address our second objective , we analyzed aggregate ses basic pay , performance rating , bonus , and pay adjustment data as provided by the agencies for fiscal year 2007 . we defined our universe of analysis as career senior executives who received ratings . in calculating the percentage of eligible senior executives who received bonuses ( cash awards ) or pay adjustments ( increases to basic pay ) and average ( or mean ) amounts , we excluded executives who received a rating less than “fully successful” ( level 3 ) , as applicable , from the eligible population since those executives are not eligible to receive bonuses , according to the selected agencies' policies , or pay increases , according to opm regulation . we also excluded senior executives at nrc , treasury , and state who received presidential rank awards from our calculations of percentages of eligible ses members receiving bonuses and average amounts because those individuals were not considered for bonuses that year , according to the agencies' policies . in order to have consistency in our analysis across selected agencies , we included senior executives who were rated but left their positions — because of retirement , attrition , or assignment to a lower grade — prior to performance payouts being made in our analysis . the agencies' policies and practices varied in whether or not senior executives who retired were eligible for performance payouts . in analyzing the basic pay rates , we used the rates of basic pay for rated , career senior executives after pay adjustments were made for the fiscal year 2007 appraisal cycle .