tough choices are inevitable . particularly troubling are the many big - ticket items that taxpayers will eventually have to deal with . the federal government has pledged its support to a long list of programs and activities , including pension and health care benefits for senior citizens , medical care for veterans , and contingencies associated with various government - sponsored entities , whose claims on future spending total trillions of dollars . despite their serious implications for future budgets , tax burdens , and spending flexibilities , these unfunded commitments get short shrift in the federal government's current financial statements and in budgetary deliberations . the federal government's gross debt as of september 2003 was about $7 trillion , or about $24,000 for every man , woman , and child in this country today . but that number excludes many big - ticket items , including the gap between promised and funded social security and medicare benefits , veterans' health care , and a range of other commitments and contingencies . if these items are factored in , the total burden in current dollars is at least $42 trillion . to put that number into perspective , $42 trillion is 18 times the current federal budget , or 3.5 times our current annual gross domestic product . one of the biggest contributors to this total bill will be the new medicare prescription drug benefit , whose estimated current - dollar cost over the next 75 years is more than $8 trillion . stated differently , the current total burden for every american is more than $140,000 — and every day that burden is growing larger . gao's long - term budget simulations show that by 2040 , the federal government may have to cut federal spending by 60 percent or raise taxes to about 2.5 times today's level to pay for the mounting cost of the federal government's current unfunded commitments . either would be devastating . proper accounting and reporting practices are essential in the public sector . after all , the u.s. government is the largest , most diverse , most complex , and arguably the most important entity on earth today . its services — homeland security , national defense , social security , mail delivery , and food inspection , to name a few — directly affect the well - being of almost every american . but sound decisions on the future direction of vital federal government programs and policies are made more difficult without timely , accurate , and useful financial and performance information . fortunately , we are starting to see efforts to address the shortcomings in federal financial reporting . the president's management agenda , which closely reflects gao's list of high - risk government programs , is bringing attention to troubled areas across the federal government and is taking steps to better assess the results that programs are getting with the resources they are given . the federal accounting standards advisory board is also making progress on many key financial reporting issues . in addition to these efforts , we have published frameworks for analyzing various social security reform proposals and for analyzing health care reform proposals .