and local government involvement . you asked us to examine the federal government's support of state and you asked us to examine the federal government's support of state and local efforts to restore gulf coast public infrastructure and facilities local efforts to restore gulf coast public infrastructure and facilities through the federal emergency management agency's ( fema ) public through the federal emergency management agency's ( fema ) public assistance ( pa ) grant program . the pa program funds both emergency assistance ( pa ) grant program . the pa program funds both emergency work projects , such as debris removal , and permanent work projects , such work projects , such as debris removal , and permanent work projects , such as the restoration of damaged buildings , roads , and public utilities . on the other hand , 321 projects funded for $5 million or more had a total value of $5.2 billion . of the four states affected by the 2005 gulf coast hurricanes , louisiana and mississippi have disbursed relatively the least amount of funding for projects ( 51 percent and 53 percent respectively ) . however , they are also the states with the largest amount of funding going toward permanent rebuilding projects , which can take several years to complete , and thus reimburse . for example , in louisiana , pa applicants have received 77 percent of the $3.2 billion made available to the state for emergency work , while they have only received 29 percent of the $3.8 billion made available to the state for permanent rebuilding . mississippi has a similar distribution of funds ( see fig . while there has been some concern about why more of these funds have not been distributed to applicants , there are at least two key reasons for this distribution of funds . since the bulk of pa program dollars are distributed as reimbursements to the applicant , the applicant typically does not receive full funding for projects until costs have been incurred — even though fema has already made these funds available to the state . most funds for emergency projects have already been passed along to applicants . however , permanent rebuilding projects can take several years to complete , so a significant portion of funds for these projects have not been passed on to applicants . fema officials noted that water lines were particularly difficult to assess because much of the damage was underground . fema conducted extensive inspections in order to make eligibility determinations for many of these projects , and these determinations took time to work through . in addition , disagreements between applicants and fema , as well as changes to project scope decisions contributed to slowing down project development . for example , although much of the new orleans water and sewer system sustained damage as a result of the disaster , fema and city officials had difficulty agreeing on the amount of damage due to the storm as opposed to that due to deferred maintenance . new orleans officials stated they had valid records on the condition of the city's water and sewer lines up to january 2005 — approximately 9 months before the hurricane katrina .