pub . 111-148 , §§ 3021 ( a ) , 10306 , 124 stat . 119 , 389 , 939 ( 2010 ) ( adding § 1115a to the social security act ) ; ( codified at 42 u.s.c . beginning in 2012 , cms contracted with 32 acos to provide services to medicare beneficiaries for a 3-year period as part of the pioneer aco model . in the first year of the model , pioneer acos provided services to approximately 670,000 beneficiaries . beneficiaries may continue to obtain medicare services from providers not participating in the model . there is debate among health policy analysts and other stakeholders about the potential for acos , including those in the pioneer aco model , to achieve significant savings for the medicare program . for example , some health policy analysts and other stakeholders believe that the pioneer aco model has the potential to achieve significant savings and improvements in quality over time , as demonstrated by early successes of certain pioneer acos . in contrast , others have expressed concern that some pioneer acos have increased medicare spending more than expected , and that the model may not be sustainable since , as of december 2014 , 13 of the original 32 pioneer acos had withdrawn . in addition , some health policy analysts have raised concerns that some acos may be restricting medicare beneficiaries' access to necessary services that are expensive , or avoiding beneficiaries with greater health care needs altogether , in order to reduce expenditures . cms is responsible for overseeing medicare beneficiaries' use of services in the pioneer aco model and acos' compliance with the model's quality - of - care standards , as broadly defined in the contract between cms and pioneer acos and in applicable regulation . under applicable law , cms is also responsible for evaluating the model's effect on expenditures and quality performance results and making the evaluation findings available to the public in a timely manner . you asked us to describe the results of the pioneer aco model and the oversight that cms provides of the acos participating in the model . in this report , we ( 1 ) describe the financial and quality performance results for the first two years of the pioneer aco model and ( 2 ) examine how cms oversees and evaluates the pioneer aco model . to describe the financial and quality performance results for the first two years of the pioneer aco model , we analyzed 2012 and 2013 cms data for each aco in the model . these data were the most recently available data at the time of our analysis . we used these data to determine the number of acos that had savings or losses shared with medicare and the average amount and range of shared savings or losses for each year , and whether the aco continued to participate in the model . we analyzed the average amount and range of payments that cms made to acos based on their shared savings and the average amount and range of payments that acos made to cms for their shared losses , for each year .