phase 1 has been completed . it involved establishing harmonized document requirements for trading houses to export minerals , including written declarations confirming the lack of involvement of illegal armed groups in their supply chains . according to an itri representative , itri smelting companies will only buy tin from drc trading houses that provide the required documentation . according to the same itri representative , phase 2 is in its preliminary stage . itri's intent is to develop a system to trace the origin of minerals from the mine site to the exporter ( i.e. , a trading house in goma or bukavu ) and to develop chain of custody data . according to the itri representative , itri is currently trying to put this system in place and has set up two pilot traceability projects , in north kivu and south kivu . the primary purpose of this system is to tag bags of minerals to identify their mine of origin , then for these tags to follow the bags of minerals up to the point of export . the itri representative said that phase 3 is just a proposal at this point , but its concept is to assess social and environmental factors at mine sites and to consider incentives and methods to improve these factors . the itri representative also stated that the initiative will eventually need an accurate and regularly updated list of mine sites under the influence of armed groups ; importantly , itri does not have the capacity to generate this information . the situation on the ground in eastern drc changes quickly , itri will need a list of specific mines considered free of the influence of armed groups so that these minerals can be legitimately exported . as part of its efforts to demilitarize and formalize the mining sector , the drc government has recently deployed mining officials to eastern drc and is planning a project with the world bank to increase the technical capacity of drc mining sector governance . working with the world bank and the united kingdom's department for international development , the drc government plans to implement project promines . the aim of the project is to build the capacity of drc mining officials and to encourage the mining sector to become more formal and transparent , including in eastern drc . according to a senior state official , this could be beneficial in eastern drc because it is vitally important to increase the capacity of drc mining officials to monitor the minerals trade in eastern drc . the german government's federal institute for geosciences and natural resources , through a cooperation agreement with the drc government , has launched a pilot mineral certification project for south kivu . this scheme will be similar to a pilot mineral certification scheme for small mines that german officials have launched in rwanda . in addition , the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) is drafting due diligence guidelines on supply chain management for companies extracting materials from conflict zones and fragile states .