omb circular no . a - 133 requires that federal awarding agencies ensure that award recipients complete and submit single audit reports within the earlier of 30 days after the receipt of the auditor's report or 9 months of the award recipient's fiscal year - end , unless a longer period for audit is agreed to in advance by the cognizant or oversight agency for audit . moreover , omb circular no . a - 133 directs federal agencies to take appropriate action using sanctions in cases where an award recipient is unable or unwilling to have an audit conducted in accordance with the circular's requirements . the sanctions may include withholding a percentage of federal awards until the audit is completed satisfactorily , withholding or disallowing overhead costs , suspending federal awards until the audit is conducted , or terminating the federal award . omb circular no . a - 133 also requires each award recipient to submit an audit reporting package to the fac for distribution to each federal agency responsible for programs for which the audit report identifies a single audit finding and for archival purposes . the reporting package is to include ( 1 ) the award recipient's financial statements and schedule of expenditures of federal awards ; ( 2 ) a summary schedule of prior audit findings , including the status of all single audit findings included in the prior audit's schedule of findings and questioned costs for federal awards ; ( 3 ) the auditor's report ( including an opinion on the award recipient's financial statements and schedule of expenditures of federal awards , reports on internal control and compliance with laws , regulations , and provisions of contracts or grant agreements , and a schedule of findings and questioned costs ) ; and ( 4 ) a corrective action plan . in addition , omb circular no . a - 133 requires federal awarding agencies to review award recipients' plans to correct single audit report findings and issue a written management decision on those plans within 6 months of receipt of the single audit report for each single audit finding . a management decision entails the federal awarding agency or pass - through entity evaluating the single audit report findings and the award recipient's corrective action plan and issuing a written decision on whether the federal awarding agency is satisfied with the corrective action plan and , if not , what corrective action is necessary . federal award recipients are required to submit their single audit reporting packages to the fac within the shorter of 30 days after receipt of the single audit report from the auditor or nine months after the end of the award recipient's fiscal year . federal awarding agencies are to ensure that each award recipient submits its single audit reporting package to the fac in accordance with these requirements . under the time frames provided by the single audit act and omb circular no . a - 133 , it may take up to 15 months for the award recipient to initiate corrective action for single audit findings .