gao - 03-482 . washington , d.c.: march 24 , 2003 . the soviet union dissolve . phase i upgrades were completed in august 1996 . after the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , doe began to work with the facility to develop a plan to further improve its security system . additional upgrades focused on the facility perimeter and included the installation of new fencing and exterior intrusion detection sensors . in addition , the department of state provided about $0.6 million in fiscal year 2002 through its nonproliferation and disarmament fund to supply cameras and lighting for the facility's perimeter . all phase ii upgrades were completed in september 2002 . a commissioning ceremony was held in october 2002 . in 2006 , doe announced the removal of 63 kilograms of heu in the form of spent nuclear fuel from the facility . the heu spent fuel was returned to russia through doe's global threat reduction initiative . doe plans to continue to assist the institute of nuclear physics with extended warranties and training to sustain its mpc&a systems in fiscal year 2007 . the foton facility has a small research reactor containing less than 5 kilograms of heu . mpc&a upgrades at the site began in january 2005 and were completed in may 2005 . physical security upgrades at the foton facility focused on the research reactor building and included such things as intrusion detection sensors , improved access controls , and a central alarm station . doe plans to continue to assist the foton facility with extended warranties to sustain its mpc&a systems in fiscal year 2007 . in addition to doe's efforts to provide security upgrades at sites with weapons - usable nuclear material and warheads in russia and other countries , the department implements other crosscutting efforts to support the efforts of its mpc&a program , such as assistance for transportation security , equipment for protective forces at nuclear facilities , and efforts to consolidate nuclear material into fewer buildings and sites . according to doe officials , these efforts support doe's goal of improving security of vulnerable stockpiles of weapons - usable nuclear material by contributing to the overall security systems at nuclear materials sites in russia and other countries . as table 4 shows , through the end of fiscal year 2006 , doe spent about $493.9 million on these efforts . doe's material consolidation and conversion project supports the transfer of heu from russian sites where it is no longer needed in order to secure locations within russia for eventual conversion to low - enriched uranium . according to doe , consolidation and conversion efforts significantly reduce the requirements and costs of securing material . for example , in 2006 , doe announced the completion of a 2-year cooperative effort to remove heu from the krylov shipbuilding research institute , a russian research facility located near st. petersburg . doe teams worked with their russian counterparts to validate the inventory of nuclear material and confirm that it was securely packaged for transport . doe paid for the heu to be shipped to another facility in russia where it will be converted ( downblended ) to low - enriched uranium , which will eliminate it as a proliferation concern .