( recommendation 3 ) . but we found that the clause was not included in all relevant contracts in our review . based on our review of a generalizable sample of contracts , we estimate that 98 percent of contracts would be expected to include a whistleblower clause at the time new contracts were awarded in applicable contracts in 2016 , and 2 percent would not . within our sample , 4 contracts did not have a whistleblower reprisal clause . after we shared our contract file review findings with nasa officials , they modified 3 of the 4 contracts to include the missing required whistleblower clause . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees and members . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . however , it does not specify what a major modification is under this statute , and the statute itself does not define “major.” according to nasa procurement officials at headquarters and at two nasa centers , it is at the discretion of the nasa centers' offices of procurement and contracting officers to decide if a clause is inserted into modifications , and whether they are considered major . procurement officials and the contracting officers we spoke with told us that there is no definition of major modifications in the law , regulation , or nasa headquarters or center policies or guidance . nasa procurement officials said this is because it could be different for each contract and the contracting officer makes the determination based upon the facts related to the situation . nevertheless , without communicating the factors to consider when determining whether a modification is major and whether that contract should or should not include the clause , nasa and the centers' procurement officials are at risk of potential inconsistent incorporation of the clause among applicable contracts . one attorney in nasa's general counsel's office said there may be costs associated with asking a contractor to insert new clauses — such as the whistleblower clause — into an existing contract during a major modification because it would require a bilateral negotiation between the contractor and the agency . however , one contractor we spoke with said that there would be no cost to adding the clause and that doing so would not be an issue because the whistleblower clause is consistent with the internal whistleblower policies and practices of the institution . further , he said that the institution he represents would be hesitant to argue against inclusion of the nfs clause in its contracts with nasa . internal control standards require that an entity should internally communicate necessary quality information in order to meet requirements of the mission . these 3 areas of potential confusion related to nasa's current guidance could result in different application of the law , unless they are clarified . figure 1 depicts the disclosure process and the complaint process .