gao - 03-1169t . to view the full product , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . trade with the european union: recent trends and electronic commerce issues . gao / t - nsiad - 00-46 . www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? for more information , contact linda koontz at ( 202 ) 512-6240 or koontzl@gao.gov . provide a data repository of standardized core human resource data to replace the paper official personnel file , with an official electronic record , enabling the electronic exchange of information between agencies during an employee's government career . support development of the federal workforce through simplified , one - stop access to high - quality internet - based training products and services . improve federal payroll operations by consolidating 22 existing federal payroll system providers ; simplifying and standardizing policies and procedures ; and better integrating federal payroll , human resources , and finance functions . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: i appreciate the opportunity to participate in the subcommittee's hearing on the progress of , and challenges to , implementing the electronic government ( e - government ) initiatives that are being led by the office of personnel management ( opm ) . generally speaking , e - government refers to the use of information technology ( it ) , including web - based internet applications , to enhance the access to and delivery of government information and service to citizens , business partners , and employees , and to improve the internal efficiency and effectiveness of the federal government . a variety of actions have been taken in recent years to enhance the government's ability to realize the potential of e - government , culminating in the enactment of the e - government act of 2002 , which includes provisions to promote the use of the internet to provide government services electronically , strengthen agency information security , and manage the federal government's growing it human capital needs . the president has embraced e - government as one of five priorities in his management agenda for making the federal government more focused on citizens and results . under the leadership of the office of management and budget ( omb ) , a set of high - profile initiatives was identified to lead the drive toward e - government transformation . these initiatives — now numbering 25 — have ambitious goals , including eliminating redundant , nonintegrated business operations and systems and improving service to citizens by an order of magnitude . achieving these results , according to omb , could produce billions of dollars in savings from improved operational efficiency . however , to realize such savings , it will be critically important that these initiatives are well managed as the government undertakes the challenging task of turning good ideas into real - world results . opm , the president's agent and advisor for human capital matters , is charged with overseeing the management of the federal government's most important asset — its people .