supervision . ice is to provide supervision to state and local law enforcement agencies participating in the 287 ( g ) program . however , as mentioned earlier in this report , ice has not identified what responsibilities are required of ice agents directing and supervising local officers under the 287 ( g ) program , and comments about program supervision from ice officers at headquarters and in field offices , as well as officers from participating agencies , differ widely . therefore , we are unable to provide more detail as to this 287 ( g ) resource provided by ice . in addition to the resources provided by ice , state and local law enforcement agencies also provide resources to implement the 287 ( g ) program . for example , state and local law enforcement agencies provide officers , space for equipment , and funding for any other expenses not specifically covered by ice , such as office supplies and vehicles . of the 29 state and local participating agencies we interviewed , 11 were able to provide estimates for some of their costs associated with participating in the 287 ( g ) program ; however , the data they provided was not consistent . therefore , it was not feasible to total these costs . those law enforcement agencies able to identify costs may be able to recover some of these expenses through an intergovernmental service agreement , or through doj's scaap grant process . when we asked state and local law enforcement participating agencies whether they received federal reimbursement from any source for costs associated with the 287 ( g ) program ( eg , detention or transportation ) , 18 of the 29 reported that they did not . six participating state and local agencies said they received scaap funding for some of these costs , and another five said they received federal reimbursements for some costs related to detention , transportation , and hospitalization . the rapid growth of the 287 ( g ) program has presented resource challenges that ice has begun to address . for example , 11 of the 29 participating agencies we contacted told us of equipment - related problems . specifically , two of these agencies did not have equipment to carry out the 287 ( g ) program for several months after their staff had received training on how to use it , and they had concerns that refresher training would be needed , while another agency received more equipment than it needed . ice has worked with participating agencies to address the problems with program equipment distribution . ice headquarters and field staff also told us that their resources to supervise activities of program participants are being stretched to their maximum capacities to manage the increased growth of the program . to address these issues , ice has detailed agents from oi and dro to meet supervisory and other program requirements . ice is also considering other ways to address the challenges presented by program growth . as discussed earlier in this report , the 287 ( g ) program is 1 of 13 ice programs to partner with state and local law enforcement agencies under access .