jordan . we visited a wastewater treatment facility under construction in northern jordan and sites with household water cisterns on the outskirts of amman . according to usaid officials , the recycled wastewater from the treatment facility in northern jordan would be used for agricultural irrigation , thus increasing the availability of potable water for household needs . this project highlights usaid's focus on water conservation in an arid region . at another site , a municipality had installed water meters to track usage and improve water use collection fees . in addition , we visited other sites where homeowners had received water cisterns as part of rainwater catchment systems for household use . the beneficiaries told us that , because local aquifers are being depleted rapidly due to population increases , the water cisterns have become increasingly important for providing household water . the photos below show a water meter for an urban household and a family's water cistern funded by usaid . kenya . we visited several sites in kenya where usaid is conducting a wide variety of water and sanitation activities . in kibera , an urban slum near nairobi — the second largest slum in africa — usaid funds have been used to install community water taps and public shower and latrine facilities . in contrast , we visited a sparsely populated area in the arid mwingi district , east of the capital nairobi , where usaid funds have been used to construct basic sand dams in river beds . the sand dam captures rainwater and reduces the rate at which rainfall runs off , thereby raising the water table and increasing water availability for households and livestock during several months of the dry season . the photos below show a water tap in kibera and a sand dam in mwingi district , kenya . sudan . in southern sudan , we visited several types of water and sanitation activities in the city of juba . at one of the sites , a facility for loading treated water onto tanker trucks was under construction . according to usaid officials , when this facility becomes operational , tanker trucks will deliver clean water to residents instead of the raw , contaminated river water that tanker trucks currently deliver . at another site , we observed a staff member of a usaid - funded ngo demonstrate proper hygiene and water - purification techniques to women and children at a neighborhood meeting . several of the women who live in the neighborhood told us that their health and the health of their children had significantly improved since they began applying the techniques that were demonstrated . usaid / sudan officials confirmed that improvements had been achieved . the photos below show a water - loading station under construction and an instructor demonstrating water purification techniques . proportion of population with access to improved sanitation percentages of countries' populations with access to an improved source of drinking water and improved sanitation facilities are according to 2008 data from the un world health organization and the un children's fund ( who / unicef ) joint monitoring programme for water supply and sanitation .