we provided a draft of this report to the department of state for comment . state's functional bureaus also provide remote support . we performed our work from june 2005 until april 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the following are gao's comments on the department of state's letter dated april 13 , 2006 . we are conducting a separate review of the consolidation of state and usaid support activities at overseas posts . we conducted interviews with 20 of 22 posts that were tasked to complete the rightsizing review in the fall 2005 cycle: asuncion , baku , bandar seri begawan , bucharest , bujumbura , colombo , harare , jakarta , karachi , kiev , krakow , maputo , n'djamena , pretoria , reykjavik , rome , santo domingo , st. petersburg , taipei , and tunis . the structured interview contained open - and closed - ended questions about guidance , timing , the review process , rightsizing considerations , headquarters' involvement and feedback , and the impact of the review on the post . we encourage state to develop performance measures and customer feedback mechanisms in its operational plan for all posts providing and receiving remote support , and not only for selected posts , such as those that receive support from the florida regional center . the interview instrument included questions regarding whether or not post management staff were both aware of and using regional support services . other gao contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix iii . to describe the department of state's ( state ) progress in providing administrative support from remote locations , we reviewed documents from the office of rightsizing and the office of global support services and innovation , including its operational plan for rightsizing and regionalization . we spoke with officials at state's various regional and functional bureaus in washington , d.c. , to discuss the efforts each bureau has taken to provide administrative support to overseas posts , whether from regional service centers overseas , from the united states , or from other posts through partnering . we did not perform an evaluative audit of the regional support provided by functional bureaus , consular affairs , or the model for overseas management initiative because those operations either have been recently inspected by the office of the inspector general or did not fit into the scope of our work . to assess some of the regulatory challenges that state faces in expanding regional support , we reviewed foreign affairs regulations for carrying out administrative functions overseas . this included a review of regulations on what functions locally employed staff can carry out in the areas of procurement and payments . we also reviewed the regulations pertaining to the use of original documentation in processing payments and state's proposal to waive that regulation . to identify the potential advantages of providing support remotely , we met with ambassadors , deputy chiefs of mission , management officers , and other u.s. embassy staff , including locally employed staff at various posts that receive remote support from either the florida regional center or the frankfurt regional support center .