ssa agreed with our recommendations . however , the agency suggested that the report be revised to clarify that its procedures for assessing the accuracy and reliability of foreign data ( such as birth certificates ) for totalized beneficiaries are the same as those for foreign beneficiaries under non - totalized claims . ssa was concerned that , as drafted , our report may give the incorrect impression that totalization claims introduce new elements of risk to the social security program . ssa noted that its program operations manual system contains detailed procedures and guidelines that are used in evaluating all foreign evidence . we have revised the report to note that ssa's processes for verifying foreign data are the same for both totalized and non - totalized beneficiaries . ssa also commented on our observation that it regularly accepts critical documentation from foreign countries without independently verifying the accuracy of such information . in its comments , ssa stated that in cases where years of pre - agreement experience and an examination of the other country's system of records provides assurance that the data is reliable , ssa and the other country have agreed to use each other's verification of certain eligibility factors . ssa also noted that each agreement includes a provision that makes clear that ssa remains the final judge of the probative value of any evidence it receives from any source . we acknowledge ssa's concern in this area . however , our prior work and this report show that the agency has generally accepted such data without independent verification for all 20 countries with existing agreements . therefore , we continue to believe that our description of the current process is accurate , and that the agency may still be vulnerable to inaccurate data from foreign countries . ssa was also concerned that our report may give the impression that the agency does little to verify the accuracy of information used to make benefit decisions and that cost - effective options were readily available . ssa noted its validation surveys and other efforts as evidence that they are taking steps to deter fraud . the agency also stated that more intrusive verification steps would be costly and may not produce net savings to the social security trust funds . we acknowledge ssa's efforts , but continue to believe more can be done to ensure the reliability of data . this includes making further enhancements to its validation surveys . our report describes how validation surveys are currently being used to detect fraud , and points out that the agency's own data show that these surveys are generally cost - effective . moreover , as indicated in our second recommendation , we encourage ssa to enhance the scope of its validation surveys only to the extent that such options are cost - effective . unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days after the date of this report . ( see fig . 1 ) in addition to managing and updating the agreements that are already in place , ssa continues to negotiate additional agreements with other countries . ssa has pending totalization agreements with mexico and japan .