no documentation was required . parent was approved 12 days after completing a brief phone interview and submitting fabricated pay stubs and an employment verification letter . dshs failed to detect the ssn of a deceased individual used by the parent and the incorrect ssns used by the children . officials told us that they are not required to verify beneficiaries' ssns . dshs initially denied the fictitious provider's application because the provider's name and ssn did not match . provider resubmitted using a different first name , ssn , driver's license photograph and birth date , but the same last name , address and phone number . even though dshs had previously rejected a similar provider using the same address , and both applications claimed only one person lived there , dshs failed to investigate the second application further . the application was approved within 7 days . provider successfully billed for 16 school holidays for each school - aged child during a month of only 22 school days . dshs officials stated that any overbilling of holiday hours would be caught during random audits that are conducted monthly on some providers . however , no audit was conducted in this case . parent was approved for assistance after a 30 minute in - person interview where she presented photocopies of false social security cards , birth certificates , a driver's license , and a death certificate for her spouse . department of social services ( dss ) failed to detect the ssn of a deceased person used by the parent and the incorrect ssns used by the children . dss accepted a fabricated letter as proof that the applicant did not receive survivor benefits for her deceased spouse . provider passed the background check , even though she had submitted an ssn that did not match her name . this creates a risk that someone with a criminal background could steal an identity to qualify for child care payments . state officials told us they are not legally permitted to verify ssns , even for relative child care providers . provider received payment for 2 months of child care . we ceased proactive tests and returned assistance checks after media reports of county budget cuts in the child care assistance program . parent was approved for assistance 4 weeks after applying by mail using photocopies of fraudulent social security cards , birth certificates , a utility bill , pay stubs , and a marriage certificate . caseworker initially did not approve the application , which contained fraudulent social security cards showing the same ssn for the parent and one of her children . however , the caseworker accepted the parent's explanation that the social security administration had issued her the wrong social security card and approved her application when she submitted a card bearing a different ssn . provider passed the background check , even though he had submitted the ssn of a deceased person . this creates a risk that someone with a criminal background could steal an identity to qualify for child care payments . state officials told us they are not legally permitted to verify ssns , even for relative child care providers .