348 , div . osha provided written comments and stated that it generally agreed with gao's recommendation . osha said it will take steps to establish processes to monitor grantee compliance with stevens amendment requirements , to include reviewing what assistance the agency can provide to grantees on how to calculate funding percentages . osha further stated that it has begun updating its grant and cooperative agreement instructions to include the stevens amendment language verbatim , rather than paraphrasing the language , and is adding guidance to grant monitoring guidelines to assist osha's regional offices in reviewing compliance with the stevens amendment . dol subagencies ilab , bls , eta , and odep also provided technical comments , which we incorporated into the report where appropriate . in its written comments , hhs stated that it concurs with our recommendation and would implement the recommendation to the fullest extent feasible . hhs officials said they would direct all operating divisions to design a process for implementing and monitoring the stevens amendment and would update hhs grants policy to reflect this new process . hhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated into the report where appropriate . education provided written comments stating that it did not concur with our recommendation , but would consider enhancing its existing approach to compliance with the stevens amendment . we reiterate our recommendation that education should design and implement a process to manage and administer grantees' compliance with the stevens amendment , including determining to what extent to provide guidance to grantees on calculations . education had three concerns regarding the recommendation . first , education said that our recommendation is not based on any evidence of noncompliance with the stevens amendment by education grantees . as noted in our report , we found that education lacks information regarding whether its grantees are , or are not , complying with the requirements of the stevens amendment . as indicated in this report , education officials told us that they do not collect documentation from grantees to monitor their compliance with the stevens amendment , nor do they analyze information regarding the extent of grantee compliance with the stevens amendment . as a consequence , education does not know the extent to which its grantees are or are not complying with the statutory requirements of the stevens amendment . the combined amount of grant funding that went to state and local governments from these three departments in federal fiscal year 2017 amounted to approximately $504 billion , or almost 75 percent of the $675 billion total distributed by all federal grant - making agencies to state and local governments that year . hhs had the largest amount of grant outlays to state and local governments with about $455 billion ( 67.4 percent of the total ) , education distributed about $42 billion ( 6.2 percent ) , while labor distributed about $7 billion ( 1.1 percent ) . generally , agencies or their subdivisions provided grantees with the exact text of the stevens amendment , paraphrased its language , or in some cases referred grantees to other guidance containing the stevens amendment .