program website . the spina bifida program website includes links to the program handbook , the policy manual — which provides additional details on coverage and exclusions for specific services — and other program documents such as guidance on how to submit claims . vha officials told us they consider the program website to be the primary means of outreach with beneficiaries . phone or mail contact to provide updates on covered services . vha has recently shared changes to its spina bifida program with beneficiaries through telephone calls , and vha officials told us they plan to share updates made between handbook printings through mailings to beneficiaries . specifically , beginning in november 2013 , vha's call center placed phone calls to enrolled spina bifida beneficiaries to gauge their interest in obtaining case management services.march 2014 , the call center successfully made contact with 579 beneficiaries ( 47 percent of those enrolled ) and 129 of them expressed interest in obtaining case management services . according to vha , as of in addition to asking about case management services , vha officials told us that during these calls , they also provided clarification that the program covers home care and custodial care services . after the program regulations are updated to reflect the june 2013 opinion from va's general counsel regarding coverage of these services , the program handbook will be updated and mailed out to enrolled beneficiaries , according to vha officials . officials told us that they also plan to follow up with a letter in may 2014 to provide clarification on the program's coverage for home care and custodial care services , as well as case management . vha has conducted limited outreach with key stakeholder organizations , and representatives of these organizations told us that this has contributed to lack of awareness among some individuals who may be eligible to receive health care benefits under the spina bifida program . each claim's explanation of benefits document provides contact information for cbopc and the mailing address for requests for reconsideration . vha updates the business rules used by its automated claims processing system in accordance with changes to the applicable laws and regulations that govern coverage of specific services . vha officials told us that these updates are not made until the rulemaking process is complete and applicable rules have been published in the federal register , a process that can take years . in the interim , officials said affected claims — such as those for home care services provided in an assisted - living facility , which vha recently clarified as covered — would be processed manually to ensure they are not incorrectly denied by the automated system . from fiscal years 2009 through 2013 , total payments for spina bifida claims increased by 43 percent — from about $19.4 million to about $27.8 million . ( see table 1. ) the number of beneficiaries who had claims paid increased by 10 percent , from 803 to 883 , and the number of paid claims increased by 45 percent , from 58,560 to 84,702 .