crnas . according to the aana , registered nurses with a bachelor of science in nursing and at least 1 year of experience in an acute setting can pursue certification in nurse anesthesia . graduates of accredited schools of nurse anesthesia , which provide 24 to 36 months of training , must pass a national examination to receive their certification as crnas . other nonphysician providers , such as nps or pas . to become nps , registered nurses undertake advanced clinical training and complete a master's program — lasting 1½ to 3 years — or a doctoral program . pas typically undertake roughly 2 years of master's - level training . both nps and pas must be nationally certified . providers must be licensed by the states in which they practice and adhere to state requirements . physician and pa licensure is administered by state boards of medicine , while nursing licensure is administered by state boards of nursing . furthermore , all providers are governed by state laws . for example , nps may or may not be allowed to practice independently or prescribe medications depending on the state in which they practice , and pas are generally allowed to prescribe medications , but must practice under the supervision of a physician . these laws can take precedence over other location - or payer - specific policies , such as hospital - based privileging . although cms has not issued a national coverage determination ( ncd ) for chronic pain management , some macs have established local coverage determinations ( lcd ) for chronic pain procedures . typically , these lcds do not address which types of providers may bill medicare for the services , but rather stipulate certain coverage or billing rules . for example , for procedures that may be given to a beneficiary in a series , an lcd may limit payment to no more than three procedures within a year . lcds also contain instructions for providers on how to bill medicare using various cpt codes and modifiers . a given procedure may have several cpt codes that indicate where on the body the procedure takes place or whether additional levels of a procedure were performed . for instance , paravertebral facet joint injections would be billed using one cpt code to indicate a cervical or thoracic location , and another cpt code to indicate a lumbar or sacral location — as well as “add - on” codes to specify when injections occurred on multiple levels of the spine . cms uses a physician fee schedule to determine the amounts paid to providers for each cpt code billed . nonphysician providers of chronic pain procedures vary in the percentage of the physician fee schedule they receive . other physicians . physicians — including those in specialty and primary care — without certification in pain medicine have comprehensive medical knowledge through their medical school , as well as residency training that can last from at least 3 to 7 years . although board certification is optional , most physicians take an exam to become certified in a medical specialty .