debt ceiling options . gao / aimd - 96-20r . washington , d.c.: december 7 , 1995 . civil service fund: improved controls needed over investments . gao / afmd - 87-17 . washington , d.c.: may 7 , 1987 . treasury's management of social security trust funds during the debt ceiling crises . gao / hrd - 86-45 . washington , d.c.: december 5 , 1985 . a new approach to the public debt legislation should be considered . fgmsd - 79-58 . washington , d.c.: september 7 , 1979 . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . several examples follow . in opm's comments on our report on the actions taken during the 1985 debt ceiling crisis , it stated that the civil service fund “should be ‘made whole' when available funds are not properly invested . this is especially important for situations . when the lost interest as the result of debt ceiling limitations.” section 6002 of the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1986 added subsections ( j ) , ( k ) , and ( l ) to section 8348 of title 5 , united states code , ( 1 ) to authorize the secretary to suspend investment of amounts in the civil service fund in government obligations and to redeem prior to maturity government obligations held by the civil service fund when necessary to avoid exceeding the debt ceiling and ( 2 ) to authorize the secretary to make the fund whole after the debt issuance suspension period . the joint explanatory statement of the committee of conference accompanying the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1986 states that the amendment requires the secretary “to make the fund whole for any earnings lost as a result of the suspension or disinvestment by a combination of special cash payment actions.” treasury's july 30 , 2003 , letter to the congress concerning the 2003 debt issuance suspension period stated that treasury has paid interest “totaling $100,822,854.44 , representing the amount that would have been earned , but for the debt issuance suspension period.” treasury also noted that this “represents the interest lost” by the civil service fund . it is also a long - standing practice for the congress and the president to provide the necessary authority to restore losses caused by unusual events .