improving assessments . having accurate information on a child or youth's physical and mental health needs is a factor in identifying what , if any , treatments and services may be needed , and the eight states we reviewed told us they had assessment processes in place . while we did not review the types or quality of the assessment processes in these states , two experts we spoke with raised concerns about the variation in types and quality of assessments performed nationwide . this is due in part to insufficient caseworker training and large workloads in states and localities generally , as we have also found in our previous work . more specifically , one of these experts said that some child welfare assessments may result in an incorrect diagnosis due to lack of understanding of trauma - based conditions and treatments . in this expert's opinion , children in congregate care were sometimes diagnosed with other conditions , such as bi - polar disorder , and were overmedicated to contain the issue rather than treat it . ( 2 ) what are the challenges with reducing congregate care placements and what efforts has hhs taken to help states reduce congregate care ? to gain an understanding of the usage of congregate care and efforts taken or under way to reduce these placements , we interviewed stakeholders from state and local child welfare agencies , congregate care provider organizations , as well national research and advocacy organizations . we interviewed state child welfare officials in eight states — colorado , connecticut , kansas , louisiana , maryland , minnesota , new jersey , and washington . for a more in - depth review , we conducted site visits in four of the eight states — connecticut , louisiana , maryland , and washington . in each state we visited , we interviewed state and local child welfare agency officials and congregate care providers . we interviewed a total of 14 providers and visited 7 localities representing a mix of rural and urban areas . we also toured several congregate care facilities in each of the four states for a better understanding of the types of congregate care facilities that are used in these states . we selected states to represent a mix of factors including: high and low share of foster children placed in congregate care , high and low rates of reduction in overall percentage of children placed in congregate care settings , and geographic dispersion . we did not assess the types , quality , or appropriateness of services provided by child welfare agencies or congregate care providers in each of the eight states . information from the eight states cannot be generalized nationwide . we also interviewed representatives from 12 national organizations who had expertise across multiple states based on their work researching child welfare issues , providing congregate care services , or advocating on behalf of children within the foster care system . we interviewed these experts to gain their perspective on the subject matter and considered recommendations from them especially to identify states that have had success in reducing the percentage of foster youth placed in congregate care settings .