below are descriptions of the eight companies featured in this report . this process repeats until a releasable product is completed . ibm representatives found that development models with longer sequential steps and a single deliverable are less useful than faster paced and smaller deliverables under shorter timeframes . companies may also use external demonstrations of maturing technologies to prove they work in realistic environments . is there a convincing long - term strategy for how to translate these investments into sustainable business success ? is there an adequate strategy for translating new technologies into winning offerings ? siemens executives reported that they understand that these factors directly impact their ability to grow and profit as a company , which is why the desire to remain technologically competitive drives corporate strategy decisions . siemens also creates forecasting tools called “pictures of the future” that provide graphical representations of how future technologies could be used by customers 7 to 15 years in the future . figure 4 provides an example of the elements that siemens includes in a picture of the future . according to siemens , it uses pictures of the future to assess societal , technological , and other trends to guide visionary concepts for potential new markets and customer needs ; consider existing product lines , technologies , and customer needs ; analyze the opportunities and risks for the company's core business ; identify what is required to allow the company to act upon potential future scenarios . most importantly , company representatives stated that these pictures help develop consensus within siemens regarding the technologies the company needs to develop to drive innovation and remain a market leader . after leading companies settle upon their corporate strategies for r&d investment , different units are charged with sponsoring — approving and funding — incremental and disruptive r&d projects . incremental r&d projects are typically sponsored by business units , who are also responsible for product development . disruptive r&d is often sponsored by a corporate research organization , which makes project investment decisions independently from the business units . figure 5 shows this division of r&d that we observed in the private sector . selected leading companies we reviewed align plans for developing new incremental technologies with plans for developing future products , which companies sometimes refer to as roadmapping . individual business units are responsible for product sales in a company and have their own executive management teams that are charged with generating profits from their product lines . business units sponsor incremental development projects intended to yield technologies to meet identified customer needs . incremental r&d generally adds new capabilities to current products or next generation versions of existing products ; therefore companies expect these to have lower risk of failure . depending on the industry , business units generally do not look beyond a 5-year timeframe when making decisions about these new technologies due to the unpredictable nature of the markets in which they operate . these leading companies document planned future products in product roadmaps , while the technologies that are to be integrated into those products are documented in technology roadmaps . by aligning these plans , business units can better identify and prioritize technology development investments .