gao - 13-303 . ex - im is not bound by federal banking regulator guidance , but it faces risk - office of the inspector general , export - import bank of the united states , report on portfolio risk and loss reserve allocation policies , oig - ins - 12-02 ( washington , d.c.: september 2012 ) . as a result , we consider this recommendation implemented and closed . in our may 2013 report , we found that ex - im expected that administrative resource constraints might prevent it from meeting its congressionally mandated target for small business export financing . the target is fixed to a percentage of the dollar value of ex - im's total authorizations . although ex - im has dedicated resources to support the mandate , as ex - im authorizations have grown , the corresponding growth in the value of the target has outpaced ex - im's increasing support . according to ex - im officials , processing small business transactions and bringing in new small business customers is resource - intensive . we concluded that it was important for ex - im to communicate to congress the effect of percentage - based mandates on its operations , as well as the potential impacts such mandates might have on ex - im's resources and operations . oversight and be consistent with federal internal control standards for effective external communication . we also found that ex - im had begun to implement stress testing and recommended that ex - im report its stress test scenarios and results to congress . ex - im began reporting its scenarios and results in quarterly reports to congress on default rates , beginning with the report for the fourth quarter of 2013 . in that report , ex - im described the stress test scenarios and provided some information about results . hence , we consider this recommendation implemented and closed . in our may 2013 report , we found that ex - im had not routinely reported the performance or risk ratings of its subportfolios for the congressional mandates on small business , sub - saharan africa , and renewable energy , though these transactions generally were more risky than ex - im's overall portfolio . we recommended that ex - im routinely report to congress the financial performance of subportfolios supporting congressional mandates . ex - im began reporting this information in its default rate report to congress for the quarter ending june 30 , 2013 . as a result , we consider this recommendation implemented and closed . gao - 13-620 . reorganized to improve efficiency . additionally , ex - im has agreed to implement , and in some cases has begun implementing , suggestions by the contractor to mitigate risks of future workload increases . as a result , we consider this recommendation implemented and closed . we recommended that ex - im provide congress with additional information on the resources associated with meeting its percentage - based mandates . ex - im agreed and told us it planned to provide information on resources associated with meeting such mandates in its fiscal year 2016 budget submission .