medication . va has also had long - standing problems collaborating with dod on managing medications during veterans' readjustments . as early as , 2002 , we found there was an increased risk for patient medication errors because va and dod had separate and uncoordinated information and formulary systems — lists of available medicines . we recommended that va and its partner improve its capabilities for sharing electronic information . va had agreed with our recommendations and in fiscal 2007 it had started to deploy a system to view patient medication and allergy information . however , in 2003 , we reported that va and dod providers and pharmacists were still unable to electronically access health information to aid in making medication decisions for veterans , such as verifying drug allergies and interactions . a decade later , in 2013 , we again found that va's and dod's efforts in managing servicemember medications during their transition of care were somewhat limited because not all dod military treatment facilities offered such transition assistance . we recommended that va and dod identify and apply best practices for managing servicemembers' medication needs during transitions of care . while both agencies agreed with our recommendations , va and dod did not identify any actions to address them . during our site visits , one veteran at a medical facility told us how medications that were prescribed by dod medical staff were not forwarded to va , resulting in him being prescribed different medications . as our previous work has found , medication management is critical to effective continuity of care for servicemembers transitioning out of the military because of the potential adverse health effects that could arise if not taken as intended . during our interviews with agency officials and discussions with veterans and other stakeholder groups , we heard a number of challenges that va faces in helping veterans during the readjustment experience . first , although va has an agreement with dod to let va know when servicemembers are leaving the military , some va officials told us it can be difficult to identify recently separated veterans , including those who may be experiencing readjustment difficulties , because they did not know who was leaving the military . second , at two of the sites we visited , veterans we spoke with told us they separated too quickly from the military without the time they needed to prepare for certain aspects of civilian life , such as finding a job , making sure they were financially stable , or becoming better acquainted with what va offered . third , we repeatedly heard from va official and veterans that some veterans may hesitate to use va services . for example , officials at one site we visited told us that some younger veterans do not want to be diagnosed as having ptsd because it will keep them from entering certain civilian careers , such as homeland security . officials at two of the sites we visited told us that some veterans try to manage their own issues or problems , instead of seeking assistance . at one of the sites we visited , veterans told us they hesitated to enroll in va services because they did not want to ask for help .