timing of information provided . officials from dod and groups representing military families told us that information on dod - subsidized child care is more likely to be absorbed if it is provided when military families need it . quantity of information received . dod officials and an organization representing military families told us that information on dod - subsidized child care programs is frequently provided at pre - deployment or other briefings , but because these briefings are often lengthy and cover multiple topics , servicemembers often do not retain information about child care . what are the out - of - pocket child care costs paid by military families who use dod - subsidized child care ? what are the barriers , if any , to obtaining dod - subsidized care , and what has dod done in response ? to address our objectives , we reviewed the child care fee policies set by dod and the services for school years 2009-2010 ( school year 2010 ) and 2010-2011 ( school year 2011 ) , including the ranges of allowable fees charged to families for on - installation care . some aspects of the services' fee policies , such as their methods of calculating subsidies for off - installation care , were not contained in written policies . we obtained this information through interviews with dod and service officials . officials from all four services told us that they provide information on these programs to these contacts , including the unit commander and other unit staff designated to provide this type of information to families . in selecting our sample , we stratified families by service ( air force , army , marine corps , and navy ) and either active duty or national guard and reserves ( combined group ) component . no prior data existed on the out - of - pocket child care costs of military families receiving subsidies that would allow us to calculate the variance in these costs , which we needed to determine our sample size . thus , we collected a presample of 157 files ( at least 36 from each service ) , calculated the out - of - pocket costs for those families , and then calculated the variance in costs for each service . we used the variance to determine the number of family files we would need to collect for the final sample in order to calculate the margin of error for each stratum to be no more than plus or minus $90 . to obtain the family files for both the presample and the final sample , we provided naccrra with the family identification numbers for the files we had randomly selected . when naccrra staff had pulled the paper files for these families , we went to their offices in person to verify the files they had pulled . naccrra staff then scanned the documentation we needed and sent it to us in pdf form . we requested only documentation pertaining to school year 2010 ( october 1 , 2009 through september 30 , 2010 ) .