ii ) . fda commented that , while the draft report noted internet pharmacy web sites purported or appeared to be from various countries , the draft did not demonstrate that the drug samples we received were actually sent from those countries , such as by discussing return addresses and postmarks on the samples . fda suggested we indicate the methods we used to determine the samples' origins . we modified the report to indicate that we determined the location of the internet pharmacy web sites from which we received drug samples based on information contained in the pharmacy web sites and the return addresses and postmarks on the packages we received . fda also commented that our finding that certain unapproved drugs were chemically equivalent to the brand name products we ordered was misleading . fda noted that chemical equivalence testing may not always determine whether a drug is comparable in all respects to the fda - approved drug and therefore fully therapeutically equivalent . we relied on manufacturers to determine whether the drug samples we received were comparable to their own fda - approved brand name version of the drug , and manufacturers conducted a range of tests to make this determination . nevertheless we modified the final report to note the potential limitations to chemical equivalence testing . fda also made several observations about the practices of internet pharmacies and provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . we also provided a draft of this report to dea for technical comments and to ensure information we reported did not compromise its ongoing investigations . the agency responded that it had no comments . finally , we provided segments of the draft report to the manufacturer of each drug sample we received . each manufacturer reviewed the segments of the draft report relating to its own product ( s ) , and provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce this report's contents , we plan no further distribution until 30 days after its issue date . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . you can print these documents in their entirety , including charts and other graphics . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . the list contains links to the full - text document files . to have gao e - mail this list to you every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to e - mail alerts” under the “order gao products” heading . internet pharmacies pose challenges for regulators . state boards of pharmacy in many states have reported difficulty identifying internet pharmacies located outside of their borders and have limited ability and authority to investigate and act against pharmacies that do not comply with state pharmacy laws when they are identified . in 2000 , nearly half of the state boards had identified consumer complaints against internet pharmacies or reported problems with internet pharmacies not complying with state pharmacy laws .