the plans are to be submitted twice a year . in addition , agencies are to submit quarterly updates that indicate the number of weaknesses for which corrective action was completed on time ( including testing ) , is ongoing and on track to be completed as originally scheduled , or has been delayed , as well as the number of new weaknesses discovered since the last update . the igs' reports were to be based on the results of their independent evaluations , including work performed throughout the reporting period ( such as financial statements or other audits ) . while omb asked the igs to respond to the same questions as the agencies , it also asked them to assess whether their agency had developed , implemented , and was managing an agencywide plan of actions and milestones . further , omb asked the igs to assess the certification and accreditation process at their agencies . omb did not request that the igs validate agency responses to the performance measures . instead , as part of their independent evaluations of a subset of agency systems , igs were asked to assess the reliability of the data for those systems that they evaluated . in the aftermath of september 11 , invigorating the nation's homeland security missions became one of the federal government's most significant challenges . the homeland security act of 2002 created dhs , combining 22 agencies into one department . dhs , with an estimated 170,000 employees , is the third largest government agency . not since the creation of dod more than 50 years ago had the government sought an integration and transformation of this magnitude . as previously noted , our study of best practices at leading organizations has shown that such organizations recognized that staff expertise needed to be updated frequently to keep security employees updated on changes in threats , vulnerabilities , software , security techniques , and security monitoring tools . gao designated implementing and transforming dhs as high risk in 2003 because dhs had to transform 22 agencies — several with major management challenges — into one department , and failure to effectively address its management challenges and program risks could have serious consequences for our national security . dhs presented substantial improvement in this performance measure , reporting that it had provided specialized training to more than 90 percent of its employees who have significant security responsibilities . not only was this a significant improvement over the 66 percent reported in 2003 , it also places dhs among the top ten agencies governmentwide for this performance measure . given the rapidly changing threats in information security , agencies need to keep their it security employees up - to - date on changes in technology . otherwise , agencies may face increased risk of security breaches . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .