information management . this subprogram is responsible for establishing and maintaining systems to collect and analyze nuclear security information . program development and international cooperation . this subprogram covers international nuclear security coordination and provides education and training programs . it also manages donor relations and the nuclear security fund . the nuclear security program is implemented by iaea's division of nuclear security ( dns ) , which is structured into four sections that correspond to the four subprograms . figure 3 shows the projects carried out by each section . other iaea offices coordinate with dns to carry out the agency's nuclear security activities . for example , iaea's department of nuclear energy collaborates with dns to convert reactors to run on low - enriched uranium , return nuclear materials resulting from the conversion to the country of origin , and assist with the disposition of disused radioactive sources . the agency's office of legal affairs supports dns by promoting universal adoption of the convention on the physical protection of nuclear material and its 2005 amendment and helping member states with legal and regulatory understanding of the convention and drafting review . under the four subprograms , iaea conducts a broad range of nuclear security activities including ( 1 ) developing nuclear security guidance ; ( 2 ) providing assistance to member states in areas such as establishing legal , regulatory , and technical nuclear security infrastructure , and converting reactors to operate on non - weapons usable materials ; ( 3 ) providing training and education ; and ( 4 ) coordinating international nuclear security efforts . iaea develops nuclear security guidance documents and encourages member states to adopt and implement the guidance to improve their nuclear security regimes . iaea's nuclear security guidance committee , established by the director general in 2012 , makes recommendations to iaea on what nuclear security guidance to develop and approves guidance publications . the nuclear security guidance committee is open to all member states . dns's four sections contribute to the development of guidance . for example , the information management section develops guidance relating to computer security at nuclear facilities , and the nuclear security of materials and associated facilities section develops guidance in the area of physical protection of nuclear materials and facilities . dns develops two main sets of guidance documents: the nuclear security series and codes of conduct . the nuclear security series , launched in 2006 , is continuously updated by iaea in cooperation with experts from member states . the series comprises four broad categories of publications: nuclear security fundamentals , which establish the fundamental objectives and essential elements of states' national nuclear security regimes . recommendations , which set out measures that states should take to achieve and maintain effective regimes . implementing guides , which provide guidance on implementing security measures . technical guidance , which provides detailed guidance on specific methodologies and techniques for implementing security measures .