( see fig . we found that not all agencies had developed improper payment estimates for all of the programs they identified as susceptible to significant improper payments . eight agencies did not report improper payment estimates for 18 risk - susceptible programs . ( see table 1. ) accurate claim decisions help ensure that va is paying disability benefits only to those eligible for such benefits and in the correct amounts . thus , it is critical that va follows its claims processes accurately and consistently . however , we previously reported problems with how va processed its claims to reasonably assure the accuracy of or eligibility for the disability benefits , increasing the risk of improper payments . in november 2014 , we reported that while va pays billions of dollars to millions of disabled veterans , there were problems with va's ability to ensure that claims were processed accurately and consistently by its regional offices . va measures the accuracy of disability compensation claim decisions mainly through its systematic technical accuracy review ( star ) . specifically , for each of the regional offices , completed claims are randomly sampled each month and the data are used to produce estimates of the accuracy of all completed claims . as we have previously reported , the federal government faces multiple challenges that hinder its efforts to determine the full extent of and reduce improper payments . these challenges include potentially inaccurate risk assessments , agencies that do not report improper payment estimates for risk - susceptible programs or report unreliable or understated estimates , and noncompliance issues . for fiscal year 2016 , va's reported improper payment estimate totaled $5.5 billion , an increase of about $500 million from the prior year . the reported va improper payment error rate was 4.5 percent of related program outlays for fiscal year 2016 , a slight increase from the 4.4 percent reported error rate for fiscal year 2015 . as shown in table 2 , va's community care and purchased long - term services and support programs accounted for the majority of va's estimated improper payments . specifically , for fiscal year 2016 , va's reported improper payment estimate for va's community care was approximately $3.6 billion ( about 65 percent of va's total reported improper payments estimate ) and for va's purchased long - term services and support was approximately $1.2 billion ( about 22 percent of va's total reported improper payments estimate ) . as shown in figures 5 and 6 , va's reported improper payment estimates have increased over the past 3 years , and the reported improper payment error rates have increased over the past 2 years . the significant increase in va's reported improper payment estimates and error rates primarily occurred , according to the va oig , because va changed its sample evaluation procedures in fiscal year 2015 , which resulted in more improper payments being identified . in response to a finding by the va oig , va began classifying every payment as improper when it made a payment that did not follow all applicable federal acquisition regulation ( far ) and veterans affairs acquisition regulation ( vaar ) provisions .