these comments were incorporated , where appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretaries of the departments of defense , energy , and homeland security ; the attorney general ; the administrator of the general services administration ; the director of the office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . : march 2006 ) . each of these components may rely on one or more supply chains . obtaining a full understanding of the sources of a given information system during initiation and development can also be extremely complex . according to the software engineering institute ( sei ) , the identity of each product or service provider may not be visible to others in the supply chain . typically , an acquirer ( such as a federal agency ) will only know about the participants directly connected to it in the supply chain . as a result , an acquirer will have little visibility into the supply chains of its suppliers . for example , a program office at a federal agency may rely on a prime contractor to acquire , develop , and maintain an information system . in turn , the prime contractor may obtain the equipment , software , and services that constitute the system through various means , including the reuse of existing equipment or legacy software ; outsourcing of system development to an additional supplier ; development of the capability in - house ; or acquisition of the capability directly from a supplier or commercial off - the - shelf - vendor , or through open - source means . in addition , the complexity of corporate structures , in which a parent company ( or its subsidiaries ) may own or control it companies that conduct business under different names in multiple countries , presents additional challenges to obtaining a full understanding of the source of an information system . according to nist , today's complex global economy and manufacturing practices make corporate ownership and control more ambiguous when assessing supply chain vulnerabilities . for example , foreign - based companies sometimes manufacture and assemble products and components in the united states , and u.s. - based companies sometimes manufacture products and components overseas , or domestically employ foreign workers . commercial providers of it use a global supply chain to design , develop , manufacture , and distribute hardware and software products throughout the world . many of the manufacturing inputs required for those products — whether physical materials or knowledge — are acquired from various sources around the globe . incident response and supply chain risk management analysis: the supply chain risk management program has been working in cooperation with us - cert to develop integrated analysis and response capabilities for supply chain incidents into its existing missions . dhs supply chain risk management product offerings: operational activities to support federal civilian department and agency efforts to manage information technology supply chain risk . these include assessment of agencies' supply chain risk management capabilities and support of ongoing or future acquisitions , as well as technical analysis of hardware and software .