impact on gdp . like its portrayal of the projected impact on per capita income , mcc's portrayal of the projected impact on gdp is not supported by the underlying data . in the compact and the 2006 congressional notification , mcc states that the compact will have a transformational effect on vanuatu's economy , causing gdp to “increase by an additional 3 percent a year.” given the gdp growth rate of about 3 percent that mcc expects in vanuatu without the compact , mcc's statement of a transformational effect suggests that the gdp growth rate will rise to about 6 percent . however , mcc's underlying data show that although vanuatu's gdp growth rate will rise to about 6 percent in 2007 , in subsequent years the gdp growth rate will revert to roughly the rate mcc assumes would occur without the compact , approximately 3 percent ( see fig . although mcc's data show that the compact will result in a higher level ( i.e. , dollar value ) of gdp , the data do not show a transformational increase to the gdp growth rate . impact on poverty . mcc's portrayal of the compact's projected impact on poverty does not identify the proportion of the financial benefits that will accrue to the rural poor . in the compact and the congressional notification , mcc states that the program is expected to benefit “approximately 65,000 poor , rural inhabitants living nearby and using the roads to access markets and social services.” in its underlying documentation , mcc expects 57 percent of the monetary benefits to accrue to other beneficiaries , including expatriate tourism services providers , transport providers , government , and local businesses ; 43 percent is expected to go to the local population , which mcc defines as “local producers , local consumers and inhabitants of remote communities” ( see fig . however , mcc does not establish the proportion of local - population benefits that will go to the 65,000 poor , rural beneficiaries . our analysis shows that risks related to construction costs , timing of benefits , project maintenance , induced benefits , and efficiency gains may lessen the vanuatu compact's projected impact on poverty reduction and economic growth . accounting for these risks could reduce the overall compact err . construction costs . however , although mcc has budgeted $6.2 million for institutional strengthening of the vanuatu pwd , mcc has no means of ensuring the maintenance of completed projects after the compact expires in 2011 ; the millennium challenge act limits compacts to 5 years . poor maintenance performance will reduce the benefits projected in the mcc compact . induced benefits . the compact's induced benefits depend on the response of vanuatu tourism providers and agricultural producers . however , constraints affecting these economic sectors may prevent the sector from expanding as mcc projects . limited response to the compact by tourism providers and agricultural producers would have a significant impact on compact benefits . efficiency gains . mcc counts efficiency gains — such as time saved because of better roads — as compact benefits .