house report no . 114-195 , which accompanied h.r . 3020 , departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies appropriations bill , 2016 , included a provision for gao to evaluate the process and coordination between hhs and treasury to prevent improper payments of ptc . the objectives of this report are to determine the extent to which ( 1 ) cms and irs assessed the susceptibility of their ptc programs to significant improper payments and , if the programs were deemed susceptible , whether cms and irs took actions required by the improper payments information act of 2002 , as amended ( ipia ) , and office of management and budget ( omb ) guidance ; ( 2 ) cms properly designed and implemented key control activities related to preventing and detecting improper payments of advance ptc ; and ( 3 ) irs properly designed and implemented key control activities related to preventing improper payments of ptc in processing federal income tax returns , detecting and recovering advance ptc overpayments made to issuers on behalf of policyholders , and reimbursing underpayments made to policyholders . further , for those key control activities that we determined were properly designed and implemented , we evaluated the extent to which such control activities were operating as designed . to address our first objective , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and guidance to identify the requirements that agencies must meet to identify programs that are susceptible to significant improper payments . we reviewed improper payment assessments that cms and irs conducted for fiscal year 2016 for their respective ptc program areas . we then analyzed those assessments against relevant ipia requirements and omb guidance to determine whether the agencies had evaluated the appropriate risk factors for improper payments and appropriately considered those factors in their susceptibility assessments . we also interviewed cms and irs officials on their plans to estimate and report improper payments for their ptc programs . to address our second objective , we first reviewed ppaca and its implementing regulations , relevant internal control standards , and leading practices for managing fraud risks in federal programs ( gao's fraud risk framework ) , and identified the relevant risks for which control activities are needed . to assess the design and implementation of key control activities related to ptc at cms and to identify any deficiencies , we focused on key control activities at cms related to the ffm for plan year 2016 . we selected cms's ffm because , at the time of our audit , it operated on behalf of about two - thirds of the states and about 75 percent of all enrollees receiving advance ptc . we evaluated the design and implementation of key control activities by reviewing cms policies , procedures , and other relevant documents , such as interagency agreements and standard operating procedures for eligibility support workers . we compared the key risks we identified with the key control activities we identified to evaluate whether cms's design of its control activities sufficiently addressed each key risk area .