( see fig . physician payment review commission , 1995 annual report to congress ( washington , d.c.: 1995 ) . system's perceived shortcomings , the congress took action in bba in 1997 to replace it with the sgr system . the sgr system , similar to the predecessor mvps system , relies on spending targets because earlier attempts to achieve fiscal discipline through limits on fee increases did not control the spending that resulted from volume and intensity growth . the sgr system uses a formula specified in statute to establish each year an allowed spending growth rate , a spending target , and a fee update . like mvps , the sgr system includes an allowance for volume and intensity increases but , unlike mvps , ties the allowance to a measure of the growth of the national economy . as noted , spending targets were established — first under mvps and later under the sgr system — because policymakers contended that the fee schedule alone would not have adequately constrained expenditure growth for physician services . the fee schedule limits payment for individual services but does not moderate spending growth resulting from volume and intensity increases . although the sgr system's spending target does not cap expenditures for physician services , it serves as a budgetary control by automatically lowering fee updates in response to excess spending due to volume and intensity growth . in addition , reduced fee updates serve as a signal to physicians collectively and to the congress that spending due to volume and intensity has increased more than allowed . an additional reason for spending targets was advanced by pprc in its 1995 report to the congress . pprc explained that spending targets were intended , in part , to create a collective incentive for physicians . specifically , the report stated that spending targets “provid the medical profession with a collective incentive to reduce inappropriate care by , for instance , developing and disseminating practice guidelines that promote cost - effective practice styles. every year , cms must estimate the allowed rate of increase in spending for physician services and use that rate to construct the annual spending target for the following calendar year . the sustainable growth rate is the product of the estimated percentage change in ( 1 ) input prices for physicians' services ; 27 , 28 ( 2 ) the average number of medicare beneficiaries in traditional ffs ; ( 3 ) national economic output , as measured by real ( inflation - adjusted ) gdp per capita ; and ( 4 ) expected expenditures for physician services resulting from changes in laws or regulations . cms's current estimate of the sustainable growth rate for 2005 is 4.6 percent , based on the agency's estimates of the four factors . ( see table 1. ) every fall , cms determines whether the fee update for the following calendar year must be adjusted to help align spending with targets . to do so , the agency compares actual spending , measured cumulatively since 1996 , to the cumulative value of the annual targets , measured over the same period .