there currently is no production in the beaufort sea . although there have been no sales to date under this provision of the act , mms is proposing royalty relief for a sale in the beaufort sea in 2007 . section 347 of the energy policy act also states that the secretary may reduce the royalty on leases within the naval petroleum reserve of alaska in order to encourage the greatest ultimate recovery of oil or gas or in the interest of conservation . although this authority already exists under the naval petroleum reserves production act of 1976 , as amended , the secretary must now consult with the state of alaska , the north slope borough , and any regional corporation whose lands may be affected . in order to meet u.s. energy demands , environmentally responsible development of our nation's oil and gas resources should be part of any national energy plan . development , however , should not mean that the american people forgo a reasonable rate of return for the extraction and sale of these resources , especially in light of the current and long - range fiscal challenges facing our nation , high oil and gas prices , and record industry profits . striking a balance between encouraging domestic production in order to meet the nation's increasing energy needs and ensuring a fair rate of return for the american people will be challenging . given the record of legal challenges and mistakes made in implementing royalty relief to date , we believe this balance must be struck in careful consideration of both the costs and benefits of all royalty relief . as the congress continues its oversight of these important issues , gao looks forward to supporting its efforts with additional information and analysis on royalty relief and related issues . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the committee may have at this time . this money is called a bonus bid . after the lease is awarded and production begins , the companies must also pay royalties to mms based on a percentage of the cash value of the oil and natural gas produced and sold . royalty rates for onshore leases are generally 12 and a half percent whereas offshore , they range from 12 and a half percent for water depths greater than 400 meters to 16 and two - thirds percent for water depths less than 400 meters . however , the secretary of the interior recently announced plans to raise the royalty rate to 16 and two - thirds percent for most future leases issued in waters deeper than 400 meters . mms also has the option of taking a percentage of the actual oil and natural gas produced , referred to as “taking royalties in kind,” and selling it themselves or using it for other purposes , such as filling the nation's strategic petroleum reserve . based on our work to date , the deep water royalty relief act ( dwrra ) will likely cost the federal government billions of dollars in forgone royalties , but precise estimates of the costs are not possible at this time for several reasons .