blm . blm manages more than 260 million acres of public lands located primarily in the western half of the united states . under the general mining act of 1872 ( mining act ) , an individual or corporation can establish a claim to any hardrock mineral on public land and may remove all hardrock minerals from the site . under the federal land policy and management act of 1976 , blm has developed and revised regulations and issued policies to prevent unnecessary or undue degradation of blm land from hardrock operations . blm issued regulations that took effect in 1981 that classified hardrock operations into three categories — casual use , notice - level operations , and plan - level operations — and required reclamation of the sites at the earliest feasible time . blm issued revised regulations that took effect in 2001 , to strengthen financial assurance requirements and modify the reclamation requirements , among other things . blm delegates primary responsibility for oversight of hardrock operations to its state and local field offices . in 2005 , doe considered an expansion of the program in the face of increased demand for uranium , and initiated an environmental assessment of the program under the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ) . doe subsequently issued a finding that the expansion would have no significant impact on the environment . environmental groups challenged this finding , and in 2011 a federal court prohibited further work on the leases as well as the issuance of new leases pending completion of a new environmental analysis . doe is in the process of developing a draft programmatic environmental impact statement that is expected to be released for public comment in late 2012 . according to doe documents , the lease program has approximately 13.5 million pounds of uranium left to mine . nrc . epa places some of the most contaminated sites on the national priority list , and resources from a federal trust fund , the superfund , are available to pay for long - term cleanup at these sites . in addition , under the uranium mill tailings radiation control act , epa has established standards for control of radioactive contamination to soil , air , and groundwater at certain uranium processing sites . nrc regulations make epa's groundwater protection standards generally applicable to uranium milling sites , including isr operations . states may play additional roles in regulating uranium operations on federal land . in general , states may have their own requirements governing the review of mining plans , environmental performance standards , reclamation , financial assurances , and inspection . for example , many states with uranium deposits require that an operator provide a financial assurance for the full cost of reclamation for a mining site . memorandums of understanding among the federal and state agencies aim to encourage coordination between states and federal agencies in overseeing mining operations . federal agencies must also comply with nepa . nepa requires federal agencies to analyze the likely environmental effects of proposed projects , which may include uranium mines , using an environmental assessment or , if the projects would likely significantly affect the environment , a more detailed environmental impact statement evaluating the proposed project and alternatives .