eradication . eradication seeks to reduce coca cultivation by destroying coca plants through either the aerial spraying of herbicides on the crops , or the manual spraying of herbicides or uprooting of the plants by personnel on the ground . interdiction . interdiction seeks to disrupt or dismantle drug trafficking organizations by investigating the operations of drug traffickers ; seizing drugs and their precursors , cash , and other assets ; destroying processing facilities ; blocking air , sea , and land drug trafficking routes ; and arresting and prosecuting drug traffickers . alternative development . “is the war on drugs working ? examining the colombian case using micro data.” the journal of development studies , vol . ince , m. , “filling the farc - shaped void.” the rusi journal , vol . jonsson , m. , e. brennan , and c. o'hara . “financing war or facilitating peace ? the impact of rebel drug trafficking on peace negotiations in colombia and myanmar.” studies in conflict & terrorism , vol . lópez , l. , j. castro , and a. españa . “los efectos globo en los cultivos de coca en la región andina ( 1990-2009 ) .” apuntes del cenes , vol . mcdermott , j. , “la nueva generación de narcotraficantes colombianos post - farc: ‘los invisibles'.” insight crime ( 2018 ) . mejía , d. , “plan colombia: an analysis of effectiveness and costs.” the brookings institution ( 2015 ) . mejía , d. , and p. restrepo . “the economics of the war on illegal drug production and trafficking.” journal of economic behavior and organization , vol . mejía , d. , p. restrepo , and s. rozo . “on the effects of enforcement on illegal markets: evidence from a quasi - experiment in colombia.” world bank group ( 2015 ) . muñoz - mora , j.c. , s. tobón , and j. d'anjou . “the role of land property rights in the war on illicit crops: evidence from colombia.” world development , vol . quintero , s. , and i. posada . “estrategias políticas para el tratamiento de las drogas ilegales en colombia.” revista facultad nacional de salud pública , vol . reyes , l. , “estimating the causal effect of forced eradication on coca cultivation in colombian municipalities.” world development , vol . rincón - ruiz , a. , h. correa , d. léon , and s. williams . “coca cultivation and crop eradication in colombia: the challenges of integrating rural reality into effective anti - drug policy.” international journal of drug policy , vol . rincón - ruiz , a. , u. pascual , and s. flantua . “examining spatially varying relationships between coca crops and associated factors in colombia , using geographically weight regression.” applied geography , vol . sánchez , m. , “cultivos ilícitos y confianza institucional en colombia.” politica y gobierno , vol . sandoval , l. , a. lopez , and c. cárdenas . “determinantes y caracteristicas de la oferta de cocaina en colombia ( 1989 – 2006 ) .” revista facultad de ciencias económicas: investigación y reflexión , vol .