( see fig . according to fns , most snap recipients are exempt from work requirements . for example , according to fns , almost two - thirds of snap recipients were children , elderly , or adults with a disability in an average month of fiscal year 2016 — groups that are generally exempt . further , adults who are already working at least 30 hours a week are also exempt from snap work requirements , and according to fns data , more than 31 percent of non - elderly adult snap recipients were employed in an average month of fiscal year 2016 . snap work registrants who are not participating in snap e&t programs may be participating in other activities to meet work requirements or eligible for other exemptions . fns officials told us that the state data reported to fns on snap e&t participants are the best and most recent data available on this group , yet they also have limitations , which we will continue to explore in our ongoing work . in recent years , the number and percentage of snap recipients and work registrants participating in snap e&t programs appears to have decreased , according to fns data . from fiscal year 2008 through fiscal year 2016 , the average monthly number of snap e&t participants decreased from about 256,000 to about 207,000 , or by 19 percent , according to state data on snap e&t participants reported to fns . ( see fig . however , over the same time period , the average monthly number of snap recipients appears to have increased from about 27.8 million to about 43.5 million , and work registrants appears to have increased from about 3 million to about 6.1 million , according to fns data . as a result , the percentage of total snap recipients participating in snap e&t programs decreased from about 0.9 to about 0.5 percent , and the percentage of snap work registrants participating in these programs decreased from approximately 8.1 percent to 3.4 percent , from fiscal year 2008 through fiscal year 2016 . available information suggests the characteristics of snap e&t participants are generally similar to those of snap work registrants who do not participate in these programs . a recent fns study , which surveyed snap e&t participants and snap work registrants who had not participated in snap e&t , found that members of the two groups had similar demographic characteristics , including age and gender , and received similar monthly snap benefit amounts . further , at the time they were surveyed , about one third of each group were employed , and their average wage rates were similar , at about $10 per hour . state snap agencies have broad flexibility in how they design their snap e&t programs , and the characteristics of these programs have changed in several ways over the last decade . for example , states have increasingly moved from mandatory to voluntary programs , focused on serving abawds , and partnered with state and local organizations to deliver services . according to fns data , states have increasingly moved from mandatory to voluntary snap e&t programs in recent years .