reg . 37 , 620 ( june 28 , 2011 ) . tier 1 capital of bank holding companies . it is expected that the federal reserve will address such items in 2012 . finally , the dodd - frank act also made changes that restricted the types of capital instruments that can be included in tier 1 . prior to the act , the general risk - based capital guidelines for bank holding companies allowed such institutions to include hybrid debt and equity instruments in tier 1 capital whereas such instruments did not count in the tier 1 capital of insured depository institutions . insured depository institution regulators ( federal reserve , fdic , and occ ) determined that such instruments did not have the ability to absorb losses as effectively as other forms of tier 1 capital . the specific requirements for the exclusion of hybrid debt or equity instruments from tier 1 capital vary according to the asset size and nature of the holding company . the elimination of the federal reserve's capital exemption for foreign - owned intermediate holding companies likely will result in exempt holding companies restructuring or taking other actions , but the overall effects of this change on competition among bank holding companies and cost and availability of credit are likely to be small for various reasons . first , our analysis of loan markets suggests that eliminating the exemption likely would have a limited effect on the price and quantity of credit available because the four banks most affected have relatively small shares of relatively competitive u.s. loan markets . second , our review of the academic literature and our econometric analysis suggest that changes in capital rules that could affect certain foreign - owned intermediate holding companies would have a limited effect on loan volumes , and the increase in the cost of credit likely will add minimally to the cumulative cost of new financial regulations . foreign parent banks may take a variety of actions , including restructuring , to comply with the new requirements , although most are waiting for final rules on capital requirements and other dodd - frank act – related provisions before making a decision . to date , banking and other financial regulators have not issued final rules implementing many of the dodd - frank act requirements . foreign bank officials we interviewed told us that they needed a better understanding of all the new regulatory provisions in the dodd - frank act before deciding what action to take . most of these bank officials told us they have been monitoring how regulators are implementing certain dodd - frank act provisions , and the final rules likely will have a great effect on their decisions . these provisions include the designation and orderly liquidation of systemically important financial institutions ( sifi ) and a prohibition on proprietary trading.provisions could have a major impact on her bank's u.s. operations . one foreign bank official told us that implementation of these additionally , questions about how the new basel iii accord and other global capital rules will be implemented and how they will interact with u.s. banking regulations have added to foreign banks' uncertainty about planning for compliance with the dodd - frank act .