( see fig . jcids is intended to encourage collaboration among the services , cocoms , and other dod organizations to identify joint solutions to capability gaps , and there are some cases where this has occurred . for example , the navy submitted a capability proposal through jcids to get a precision and landing system in place to avoid delays in delivering its aircraft carriers in development . the lead fcb reviewed the navy's proposal and recognized that it was similar to a need identified by the air force and determined that the air force's needs could be met under the same proposal . however , according to jcids officials , fcb , cocom , and other stakeholder reviews have had little influence in promoting joint solutions . past studies have also raised concerns that the services and the cocoms do not routinely collaborate to identify possible joint solutions . for example , in 2006 the army audit agency recommended that the army improve collaboration with the joint community early in the capabilities planning process to improve the quality of its capabilities documents and facilitate more timely reviews of proposals that are submitted into the jcids process . in january 2006 , the defense acquisition performance assessment panel concluded that jcids resulted in capabilities that did not meet warfighter needs in a timely manner and recommended that jcids be replaced with a cocom - led requirements process in which the services and defense agencies compete to provide solutions . the defense science board similarly reported that jcids has not provided for increased warfighter influence , but instead actually suppresses joint needs in favor of military service interests , and recommended an increase in the formal participation role of the cocoms in the jcids process . the center for strategic and international studies has also pointed out that while the services are responsible for supplying operationally capable armed forces , the cocoms are responsible for responding to threats and executing military operations . therefore , it recommended that the joint forces command take the lead in conducting capabilities development planning for the cocoms and become a formal member of the jroc . by continuing to rely on stovepiped solutions to address capability needs , dod may be losing opportunities to improve joint warfighting capabilities and reduce the duplication of capabilities in some areas . in january 2006 , we reported that military operations continue to be hampered by the inability of communication and weapon systems to operate effectively together on the battlefield . in may 2007 , we reported that while the military services have successfully planned and fielded a number of unmanned aerial vehicle systems over the past several years , dod has struggled to coordinate the development of these systems across the services and ensure that they complement one another and avoid duplicating capabilities . specifically , despite similarities in proposed capabilities between two key unmanned aerial vehicle systems — the air force's predator program and the army's warrior program — the army awarded a separate development contract to the same contractor producing the predator .