( app . i contains a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology. ) we performed our review from october 2001 through august 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies of this report to congressional committees with jurisdiction over farm programs , the secretary of agriculture , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) - 512-3841 . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . to compare the processing times for direct loans for hispanic farmers with those for non - hispanic farmers , we interviewed fsa officials at the national , state , and county level about the types of direct loans that fsa provides as well as the steps that are followed in the loan - making process . we also reviewed fsa regulations and procedures related to direct loan processing . because of completeness and reliability issues with fsa's direct loan data , we were not able to perform detailed analyses of loan processing times for hispanic and non - hispanic farmers using a download of fsa loan data . instead , we analyzed direct loan processing times using fsa reports based on historical data for fiscal years 2000 and 2001 . we calculated loan processing times from the date the farm loan application was complete to the date of the agency decision to approve or reject the loan application . we compared the average processing times for all complete applications from hispanic farmers to those from non - hispanic farmers . we also calculated loan approval rates using fsa historical loan data . we were unable to provide information about the loan amount requested and received by borrowers for comparison purposes because this data has not been tested by fsa for completeness and reliability . to identify usda's policies for staying foreclosures and to determine how they have been implemented , we interviewed officials from usda's office of civil rights , office of general counsel , fsa's civil rights staff , and fsa state offices . we reviewed policies and procedures for implementing stays of foreclosure , where available . in those instances where written guidance was not available , we relied on interviews with officials from usda's office of general counsel and written correspondence regarding the department's actions . in reviewing fsa's implementation of its stay of foreclosure policy in response to administrative complaints , we limited our work to the four states that received the largest number of hispanic loan applications during fiscal year 2001 — california , new mexico , texas , and washington .