iv. ) as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issue date . we will then send copies to the secretary of health and human services ; the attorney general ; the administrator of the health resources and services administration ; the directors of the centers for disease control and prevention , national institutes of health , office of justice programs , and federal bureau of investigation ; appropriate congressional committees ; and others who are interested . we will also make copies available to others on request . if you or your staff have any questions , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or janet heinrich , director , health care — public health issues , at ( 202 ) 512-7119 . additional gao contacts and the names of other staff members who made contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . to do our work , we interviewed and obtained information from officials at the department of health and human services' centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) , and national institutes of health , and the department of justice's office of justice programs ( ojp ) and federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) . we also interviewed representatives of and obtained information from the american college of obstetricians and gynecologists , institute of medicine , family violence prevention fund , national coalition against domestic violence , and national association of medical examiners ; several state domestic violence coalitions ; and researchers . to determine the availability of information on the prevalence and risk of violence against pregnant women , we reviewed literature on the prevalence and risk of violence to women during pregnancy . we identified 11 studies published since 1998 that contained prevalence estimates and assessed their methodologies to ensure the appropriateness of the data collection and analysis methods and the conclusions . we also interviewed cdc officials and reviewed data collected through cdc's pregnancy risk assessment monitoring system ( prams ) . to determine the availability of data on the number of pregnant women who are victims of homicide in the united states , we interviewed officials and collected and analyzed homicide statistics and reports from cdc , the fbi , and ojp's bureau of justice statistics . we also interviewed officials from state departments of health and vital statistics in illinois , maryland , new mexico , and new york to determine how they collect and use data on pregnant homicide victims . we selected these states because , in addition to collecting pregnancy data on their state death certificates , they are active in collecting and analyzing information from various sources to study maternal health issues . the states were not intended to be representative of all states . we also interviewed and obtained information from cdc and justice officials to identify federal initiatives that are under way to improve the availability of information on homicides of pregnant women .