see gao - 09-12 . community participation in nfip is voluntary . however , communities must join nfip and adopt fema - approved building standards and floodplain management strategies in order for their residents to purchase flood insurance through the program . the national flood insurance reform act of 1994 strengthened the mandatory purchase requirement for federally backed mortgages of properties located in special flood hazard areas ( sfha ) . the bunning - bereuter - blumenauer flood insurance reform act of 2004 established a pilot program to encourage owners of properties that continually suffer from repeated flood losses to take steps to reduce the risk of damage , known as mitigation . owners of these “repetitive loss” properties who do not mitigate the risks face higher premiums . finally , the biggert - waters act reauthorized the program through 2017 and removed subsidized rates for a number of insured properties , such as residential property that is not the primary residence , severe repetitive loss properties , business properties , and property that has incurred flood - related damage for which the cumulative amounts of payments equaled or exceeded the fair market value of the property . nfip studies and maps flood risks , assigning flood zone designations based on the risk level for flooding . the type of nfip policy and the subsequent rate a policyholder pays depend on several property characteristics . for example , whether the building was built before or after the development of the community's flood insurance rate map ( firm ) and where the building is located relative to the floodplain — the flood zone — can affect the type of policy and rate available to a policyholder . flood insurance rates are calculated for each flood zone . in most cases , insurance companies hire subcontractors — flood insurance vendors — to conduct some or all of the day - to - day processing and management of flood insurance policies . when flood losses occur , policyholders report them to their insurance agents , who notify the wyo insurance companies . the wyo companies review the claims and process approved claims for payment . fema reimburses the wyo insurance companies for the amount of the claims plus expenses for adjusting and processing the claims , using rates that fema establishes . the wyo program was established to increase the nfip policy base and the geographic distribution of policies , improve service to nfip policyholders through the infusion of insurance industry knowledge , and provide the insurance industry with direct operating experience with flood insurance . in the first year of the wyo program , 48 wyo insurance companies were responsible for about 50 percent of the more than 2 million policies in force . as of september 2012 , about 85 wyo insurance companies accounted for about 85 percent of the more than 5.5 million policies in force . potential policyholders can purchase flood insurance to cover both buildings and contents for residential and commercial properties . nfip's maximum coverage limit for residential policyholders is $250,000 per unit for building property and $100,000 per unit for contents .