to achieve u.s . available agency data show that u.s. officials experience delays in the issuance of both visas for travel to pakistan and visa extensions , which have affected the implementation and oversight of u.s. assistance to pakistan . agencies reported that these delays affect the implementation of u.s. programs in multiple ways — for example , creating staffing gaps for critical embassy positions and necessitating the cancellation of training to assist the pakistani government in areas such as antiterrorism and counternarcotics . our analysis of available agency data shows that u.s. officials have experienced delays in obtaining pakistani visas . according to the pakistani embassy , and as reported by state , the embassy's policy is to issue visas for u.s. officials within 6 weeks of their application date . we obtained data from components of dod , doj , state , and usaid on processing times for u.s. officials' applications for official or diplomatic our analysis of these pakistani visas in fiscal years 2010 through 2012.data shows that approximately 82 percent of visas for u.s. officials were issued within 6 weeks or less . however , about 18 percent of the visas took longer than 6 weeks to be issued , with approximately 3 percent taking 16 weeks or longer . while we acknowledge that interagency coordination can be challenging , officials from various agencies — including dod , dhs , doj , and usaid — told us they track or maintain information related to visa delays , which could facilitate state's efforts to obtain and report such information . moreover , our recommendation would not require state to “coordinate all u.s. government visa applications for pakistan,” but rather recommends that state consult with other agencies to obtain information these agencies already collect regarding visa delays to pakistan . in addition , we are encouraged that our report prompted state to develop new procedures to enhance its tracking of visa applications government - wide . we agree with state that certain visa applicants may experience longer wait times than other applicants , including , as we note in our report , those providing security and law enforcement assistance to pakistan . we believe that our recommendation is consistent with state identifying and reporting on which visa applicants experience longer wait times , and that such reporting could better inform congress . in commenting on our report , dod agreed with the report's findings and observations . dod also noted that pakistani officials experience delays obtaining visas to travel to the united states , which “feed the narrative that the pakistanis treat us no differently than we treat them,” undermining requests for process improvements . while dod notes that visa delays experienced by pakistani officials may affect processing of visas for u.s. officials , we could not verify whether this has been a contributing cause because the government of pakistan did not respond to our requests to discuss visa delays . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of state , and officials at dod , dhs , doj , and usaid . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .