we continue to believe these recommendations are warranted . ( please see the “agency comments and our evaluation” section of our report for more details on ssa's comments and our response. ) in summary , while ssa has undertaken important initiatives that have resulted in improvements to its processes , significant efforts remain for it to fully meet its goals for modernizing its it environment . ensuring that it is successful in meeting these goals will be difficult without the agency establishing effective tools for measuring progress and performance and without comprehensive strategic planning . ssa's realignment of the cio responsibilities provides an opportunity for effective management and oversight of the agency's systems modernization efforts ; however , this effectiveness may well be hindered without appropriate implementation of the realignment , including defined roles and responsibilities and updated oversight guidance . chairman johnson , ranking member becerra , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have at this time . if you have any questions regarding this statement , please contact valerie c. melvin , director , information management and technology resources issues , at ( 202 ) 512-6304 or melvinv@gao.gov . other individuals who made key contributions include christie motley , assistant director ; michael alexander ; david hong ; alina johnson ; lee mccracken ; and scott pettis . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the report contains a more detailed overview of the scope of our review and the methodology used . the work upon which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards from may 2011 to april 2012 . those standards require that we plan and perform audits to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions . according to ssa , in fiscal year 2011 , about 54 million people received benefits from the old age , survivors , and disability program , and over 8 million people received benefits from the supplemental security income program . collectively , about 155 million people work and pay social security taxes . the agency's fiscal year 2011 expenses totaled about $12.4 billion to support its programs . ssa relies extensively on it to administer its programs and support related activities . specifically , its systems are used to , among other things , handle millions of transactions on ssa's toll - free telephone number , maintain records for the millions of beneficiaries and recipients of ssa's programs , evaluate evidence and make determinations of eligibility for benefits , issue new and replacement social security cards , and process earnings items for crediting to workers' earnings records . however , as the agency's systems have aged , ssa has faced challenges in carrying out its increasing workload .