we disagree . logically , to meet the far requirement , sba must confirm the existence of an 8 ( a ) justification . our recommendations were intended to help sba's business opportunity specialists understand how to comply with the far requirement . in an email response , ofpp generally agreed with our recommendations and asked that we reflect that the administrator of ofpp should take the recommended actions in consultation with the far council . we agreed and made that change . ofpp further noted that , when planning the tribal consultations to implement the 8 ( a ) justification requirement , the far council also considered the president's memorandum of november 5 , 2009 , which underscores the administration's commitment to regular and meaningful consultation with tribal officials in policy decisions that have tribal implications . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of defense , the interior , and state ; the attorney general ; the administrators of the small business administration , the general services administration , and the office of federal procurement policy ; and interested congressional committees . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or by e - mail at mackinm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . the objectives of this review were to determine ( 1 ) the timeliness of actions taken to implement the 8 ( a ) justification requirement in the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) ; ( 2 ) the number of sole source 8 ( a ) contracts over $20 million that have been awarded since october 2009 and trends over time ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which agencies have implemented the new justification requirement . to assess the timeliness of the actions taken to incorporate the new justification requirement into the far , we reviewed the relevant interim and final rules published in the federal register . we also interviewed officials from the office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) , as the administrator of ofpp serves as chair of the federal acquisition regulatory council , which implements changes to the far . additionally , to confirm agency officials' statements to us that they did not include justifications in 8 ( a ) sole - source contracts awarded after the october 29 , 2009 , enactment of the law but before its march 16 , 2011 , implementation in the far , we selected a judgmental sample of five such contracts . we selected those with the highest reported values in the federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) at agencies already within the scope of our review , and verified the absence of justifications with agency contracting officials . as stated in the report , section 811 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2010 did not require agencies to implement the new justification requirement until it was implemented in the far .