gao - 13-522 . washington , d.c.: july 23 , 2013 . medicare program integrity: few payments in 2011 exceeded limits under one kind of prepayment control , but reassessing limits could be helpful . gao - 13-430 . washington , d.c.: may 9 , 2013 . only the racs conducted automated postpayment reviews . rac complex reviews are based on the number of additional documentation requests received and also include semiautomated reviews . while the number of postpayment reviews has increased significantly , the percentage of medicare claims reviewed after payment remains small . the 2.3 million reviews performed by these four types of contractors accounted for less than 1 percent of the more than 1 billion ffs claims paid annually . about 1.4 million of the reviews were complex reviews which required the submission of documentation for review . as a systematic matter , the increase in postpayment claims reviews is one factor causing backlogs and delays at the third level of the medicare appeals process . medicare providers and suppliers can appeal prepayment and postpayment claims determinations through the medicare appeals process , which offers four levels of administrative review followed by judicial review . the first two levels of appeals for ffs claims are managed by two cms contractors — the mac that processed the original claim and a qualified independent contractor , in that order . the third level of appeal is to an administrative law judge ( alj ) at the office of medicare hearings and appeals ( omha ) , a separate staff division within hhs . a part a or part b appeal filed with omha should generally be decided within 90 days of the appeal being filed . however , due to a backlog of cases , omha currently reports that the average time for appeals to be decided in fiscal year 2014 is 346 days . the number of appeals filed at the alj level increased from 59,601 in fiscal year 2011 to 384,651 in fiscal year 2013 , according to omha . omha's website currently says that new appeals will take about 28 months before they are put on an alj's hearing docket . omha has reported that part of the reason for the backlog in medicare appeals is the increase in postpayment contractor activities . we have been asked to examine the medicare appeals process , including the reasons for the appeals backlog and what hhs is doing to address it . we have made recommendations to cms in the past to improve the postpayment claims review process , and we continue to do work in this area . in october 2012 , we reported on cms's fraud prevention system ( fps ) , which uses predictive analytics to analyze medicare ffs claims . fps is intended to detect aberrant billing practices as quickly as possible so they can be investigated to determine whether the payments are proper . at the time , we recommended that cms integrate fps with medicare's payment - processing system to allow for the prevention of payments until suspect claims could be investigated by zpics .