supplemental inspections . when nrc identifies one or more escalated findings or a performance indicator exceeding the green threshold at a reactor , regional officials conduct supplemental inspections , which expand the scope beyond baseline inspection procedures and focus on diagnosing the cause of the finding . there are three levels of supplemental inspections that increase in breadth and depth of analysis , depending on the number and type of performance problems identified . the first and lowest level of supplemental inspection assesses the licensee's corrective actions to ensure they were sufficient in both correcting the problem and addressing the root and contributing causes to prevent recurrence . the second level of supplemental inspection has an increased scope that includes independently assessing the extent of the condition for both the specific and any broader performance problems . the third and highest level of supplemental inspection is more comprehensive and includes determining whether the reactor can continue to operate and whether additional regulatory actions are necessary . the highest level of supplemental inspection is usually conducted by a multidisciplinary team of nrc inspectors and may take place over several months . also , as a part of this inspection , nrc inspectors assess the adequacy of the licensee's overall programs for identifying , evaluating , and correcting performance issues . reactive inspections . nrc conducts reactive inspections of licensee performance when specific events occur that are of particular interest to nrc because of their potential safety significance or because of potential generic safety concerns important to multiple licensees . reactive inspections determine the cause of the event and assess the licensee's response to the event . reactive inspections have three levels that are normally determined by an event's safety , or risk significance . according to nrc officials , recent reactive inspections have focused on issues such as an automatic reactor shutdown following a loss of offsite power , and a flaw discovered in a weld on a reactor component . to conduct reactive inspections , a team of experts is formed and an inspection charter issued that describes the scope of the inspection efforts . nrc inspectors assess all of the findings that result from physical inspections to determine if any of the three cross - cutting areas contributed to a performance problem . if regional officials determine that one of the cross - cutting areas contributed to a finding , nrc assigns what it calls a cross - cutting aspect within that area to the finding . more than one cross - cutting aspect may be assigned to a finding , but this does not occur often , according to nrc officials . every 6 months , nrc regional officials analyze all findings issued at each plant during the prior 12- month assessment period . in general , if a nuclear plant has four findings with the same cross - cutting aspect assigned during the previous year , and nrc is concerned about the licensee's progress in addressing them , nrc determines that the nuclear plant has what nrc calls a substantive cross - cutting issue .