we approached these simulations from two perspectives . first , we simulated how much trust fund debt would need to be forgiven based on various coal tax rates . second , we simulated the average tax collected per ton needed to balance the trust fund by 2050 , based on certain debt forgiveness options . the simulated options are not intended to be exhaustive and we are not endorsing any particular combination of options . our first set of options using the moderate case simulations are based on the current coal tax rates of $1.10 per ton of underground - mined coal and $0.55 per ton of surface - mined coal , and show the amount of debt forgiveness in fiscal year 2019 needed to balance the trust fund by fiscal year 2050 based on certain tax rates ( see fig . specifically , our moderate case simulations show the following: increasing current coal tax rates by 25 percent could balance the trust fund by 2050 and would likely require no debt forgiveness . for this option , the simulated coal tax revenue would likely be sufficient to cover simulated trust fund expenditures , including combined benefit payments and administrative costs , as well as debt repayments . however , this option would place the burden solely on the coal industry that would be paying higher taxes at a time when coal production has been declining . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review . additionally , we interviewed officials from dol's office of workers' compensation programs and mine safety and health administration ; the department of the treasury's offices of federal program finance and tax analysis ; the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) national institute for occupational safety and health and the health resources and services administration , which funds black - lung - related grant programs ; the national mining association ( an organization that represents the mining industry ) ; and the united mine workers of america ( an organization that represents coal miners ) . to address our second objective , we simulated the extent to which trust fund debt may change through 2050 and how various options may affect future trust fund finances . our simulations are based on various assumptions and simulate trust fund revenues and expenditures from fiscal years 2016 through 2050 . to develop these simulations , we used actual and projection data from ( 1 ) dol for fiscal years 2015 through 2040 ; ( 2 ) treasury's office of tax analysis for fiscal years 2011 through 2015 ; ( 3 ) the department of energy's energy information administration ( eia ) for calendar years 2015 through 2050 ; and ( 4 ) the office of management and budget ( omb ) for fiscal year 2017 . we ran each simulation multiple times using different sets of assumptions about the number of future black lung beneficiaries and future coal production . doing so provided a range of estimates about the trust fund's future borrowing needs and provided insight on the sensitivity of its overall financial position relative to its various revenues and expenditures . in this report , we generally present the results of a moderate set of assumptions for each simulation .