the mous generally specify responsibilities for the state and bie . for example , states may be responsible for including bie schools in relevant training , informing bie of changes to the state's definition of ayp , and scoring the bie assessments . the mous also delineate responsibilities of bie such as ensuring that staff are properly trained and that the assessments are administered according to state protocols . however , california state officials told us they had neither signed an mou nor given bie access to the state assessments because they feared a breach in test security . they noted that such a breach in security could undermine the validity of the test , in which the state had invested millions of dollars to develop . california officials stated that several entities , including private schools , had requested permission to administer the test and that their approach was to administer the test only to public schools in california . state officials were willing to make an exception for bie schools to administer the assessment , but requested a $1 million bond as security . bie and education officials told us that they were trying to work with the state to resolve the issue . education officials told us that they were hopeful that a solution , such as having bie students assessed at public schools , could be worked out . officials in other states also told us that they have delayed or rescinded mous because tribal groups indicated that they had not been consulted about the terms of the agreements ( see table 2 ) . these schools were continuing to administer the standardized tests they had used in prior years . officials from all four schools told us that their schools had adopted the academic content standards of their respective states . bie uses mous with states to delineate the terms of bie - funded schools' access to the states' assessment systems ; however , it had not completed mous with 12 of the 23 states , including 5 we visited — arizona , california , florida , mississippi , and new mexico . the 12 states without signed mous enroll about two - thirds of the students in bie schools , but bie officials told us that they did not actively pursue mous with these states , in part because most states were allowing bie schools to access state assessments and scoring arrangements without such agreements . for example , state officials in washington told us that when they received the request to sign the mou , they contacted tribal groups and realized that the tribal groups had been informed of the mou , but not consulted regarding its details . after consulting with tribal groups , washington state officials modified the proposed mou and signed it . in addition , bie does not currently have a valid mou with new mexico because the governor of new mexico suspended the state's mou with bie shortly after signing it , in part because tribal groups indicated that they had not been consulted about the terms of the mou .