wireless . land - based , or terrestrial , wireless broadband connects a home or business to the internet using a radio link . some wireless services are provided over unlicensed radio spectrum and others over spectrum that has been licensed to particular companies . in licensed bands , some companies are offering fixed wireless broadband throughout cities . also , mobile telephone carriers — such as the large companies that provide traditional cell phone service — have begun offering broadband mobile wireless internet service over licensed spectrum — a service that allows subscribers to access the internet with their mobile phones or laptops in areas throughout cities where their provider supports the service . a variety of broadband - access technologies and services also are provided on unlicensed spectrum — that is , spectrum that is not specifically under license for a particular provider's network . for example , wireless internet service providers may offer broadband access in particular areas by establishing a network of subscriber stations , each with its own antenna that relays signals throughout a neighborhood and has a common interface to the internet . subscribers place necessary reception equipment outside their homes that transmits and receives signals from the nearest antenna . also , wireless fidelity ( wi - fi ) networks — which provide broadband service in so - called “hot spots,” or areas within a radius of up to 300 feet — can be found in cafes , hotels , airports , and offices . hot spots generally use a short - range technology that provides speeds up to 54 mbps . some technologies , such as worldwide interoperability for microwave access ( known as wimax ) , can operate on either licensed or unlicensed bands , and can provide broadband service up to approximately 30 miles . fiber . this technology , also known as fiber optic , is a newer technology for providing broadband service . fiber optic technology converts electrical signals carrying data to light and sends the light through transparent glass fibers about the diameter of a human hair . fiber can transmit data at speeds far exceeding current dsl or cable modem speeds , typically by tens or even hundreds of megabits per second . fiber optic technology may be provided in several ways , including fiber to a customer's home or business or to a location somewhere between the provider's facilities and the customer . in the latter case , the last part of the connection to the customer's premises may be provided over cable , copper loop , or radio technology . to assist in the preparation of this report , in 2000 , fcc adopted a semiannual reporting requirement for facilities - based broadband internet service providers . in november 2004 , fcc modified its rules on filing this information , and the revised rules went into effect for the companies' second filing in 2005 . specifically , fcc removed existing reporting thresholds , and companies were required to report their total state subscribership by technology . in 2006 , we reported that the approach fcc then used to collect data on broadband deployment , which counted broadband service providers with subscribers at the zip code level , resulted in inadequate information about broadband deployment .