report no . montana . according to the blm montana exchange lead , because the state office foresees considerable exchange opportunities with the state of montana , the development of a state exchange strategy , which was completed in 2004 , was “imperative.” the strategy established a prescreening process for exchanges to ensure that blm resources , including staff and funding , are allocated to exchanges with the greatest benefits . new mexico . the 2004 state office strategy states that because land management goals had been established at the field office level , some priority transactions from a statewide perspective were passed over . to address this problem , the strategy established statewide priorities for land transactions , among other things . it also created a statewide land tenure steering committee to review all land transactions in the state , including exchanges . the state director issued the committee's charter in 2005 to clarify how the committee will function . according to blm survey respondents in the remaining six states , two states — idaho and oregon — had not started a strategy ; one — wyoming — did not know the strategy's status ; and three — colorado , nevada , and utah — said they did not need a strategy because they rely on land use plans to make decisions . independent of actions taken in response to the blm workgroup , in 2003 , a congressional committee directed the secretaries of the interior and agriculture to develop jointly a long - term national plan outlining the acreage goals and conservation objectives for federal land acquisition . in response , the agencies , including blm and the forest service , issued a national land acquisition plan in february 2005 . while this plan does provide information on the various agencies' goals , objectives , and land acquisition strategies , among other things , it does not appear to offer a specific strategy on making exchange and other land transaction decisions on a national basis . in fact , the report states that blm's national land tenure strategy , which is under development , will focus on a better balance between land exchanges and disposal actions , acknowledging that such a plan will offer more detailed planning with regard to exchanges . like blm , the forest service does not have a national land tenure strategy . according to the forest service exchange lead , the agency relies on its agencywide strategic plan and policies to guide land exchange decisions . the forest service's policy manual does recognize the importance of planning for land transactions by requiring the regions and forests to prepare documents that can adequately guide the long - range ( 5 to 10 year ) landownership adjustment program . these planning documents , which supplement required forest plans , include , among other things , more detailed guidance for making land exchange decisions and are required if a region delegates certain responsibilities to forest staff , such as signing off on key exchange documents . although these plans are required , only one of the nine regions reported having a regional - level plan , and the official from that region reported that the plan , completed in 2005 , needs to be revised .