delays in processing correspondence . in examining documentation at one contractor , cms reviewers identified a significant backlog of correspondence . according to cms's estimate , there were over 2,400 pieces of mail awaiting action — including checks and correspondence from employers , insurers , and other contractors . the oldest correspondence awaiting action was more than 2 years old — well beyond cms's requirement that contractors match incoming mail with established cases and respond to such correspondence within 45 days . recognizing the need to improve the coordination of its msp recovery efforts , cms contracted for the development of a new recovery system — the recovery management and accounting system ( remas ) — in 1998 . the purpose of remas is to improve the identification , tracking , and recovery of mistaken payments . remas was designed to enhance the msp recovery process by automating some tasks performed manually and by reducing the time required to collect msp debt . as of may 2004 , cms has deployed the liability insurance and workers' compensation component of remas to nine contractors . remas is designed to receive and evaluate leads from cwf electronically , a function that is now performed in separate steps by cms staff and individual claims administration contractors . these leads consist of information suggesting that a beneficiary has other coverage that should be primary . cms officials claim that remas will streamline other functions as well . for example , when new information on a beneficiary's msp status is added to cwf , remas is expected to determine , on a daily basis , whether mistaken payments were made on his or her behalf . currently , the contractors review the occurrence of mistaken payments at varying intervals ranging from quarterly to semiannually . once remas determines that medicare has paid claims that were the primary responsibility of another insurer , it will generate a case that can be assigned to any contractor for recovery . it will no longer be necessary for the contractor that processed the mistakenly paid claims to perform recovery activities . cms officials told us that they believe that remas will have several advantages over the current process . first , efficiencies gained through remas would enable contractors to pursue msp debt that involves amounts less than the current $1,000 threshold , resulting in additional recoveries . second , remas could facilitate the consolidation of msp debt recovery efforts among a handful of contractors , as each contractor would have access to all paid claims . cms officials indicated that remas would enable them to reduce administrative costs , provide contractors with a more consistent and predictable workload , and simplify contractor oversight activities . ( see app . ii for more information comparing remas to the present recovery system ) . although cms has spent $7 million on the development of this system , which has now spanned 6 years , remas's implementation is progressing slowly . it remains in the early implementation stages — testing on eghp cases started in june 2004 . several critical tasks related to remas's implementation have taken several years to complete . to date , only the initial software testing and validation for the liability and workers' compensation components have been completed .