this is included in our recommendation . in technical comments on our draft report , imaac operations staff at llnl stressed that improvements to plume modeling information and predictions are best achieved by establishing trusted working relationships with federal , state , and local agency operations centers and deployed assets . doc also stated that the inference in our report that imaac will be providing a single dispersion solution is misleading . imaac , as a federal entity , provides a recommendation to the local incident commander and the commander decides what information to use . this stems from the basis that all events are local in nature . doc stated that it believed that the report should also highlight the need to promote an aggressive program of educating first responder and local incident commanders in the use of dispersion models . ( 2 ) what has dhs done with regard to developing and adopting performance standards for cbrn detection equipment and testing this equipment to verify its performance ? ( 3 ) what are the limitations of plume models first responders can use to track the dispersion of an airborne release of cbrn materials , including toxic industrial chemicals ( tic ) and toxic industrial materials ( tim ) , in an urban environment ? and ( 4 ) what information is available to first responders for determining the effects of exposure to cbrn materials on populations in urban areas ? to assess the limitations of cbrn detection equipment available for first responders' use , we interviewed federal program officials from the science and technology ( s&t ) directorate of dhs and its homeland security advanced research projects agency , from the department of defense ( dod ) defense threat reduction agency ( dtra ) and joint program executive office for chemical and biological defense , and from the department of energy's ( doe ) lawrence livermore national laboratory ( llnl ) , los alamos national laboratory ( lanl ) , and oak ridge national laboratory ( ornl ) . we reviewed dhs , dod , and doe detection programs in place and being developed , as well as these agencies' studies on cbrn detection systems . we attended conferences and workshops on cbrn detection technologies . to obtain information on detection equipment standards and the testing of cbrn detection equipment for first responders , we met with program officials from dhs's responder knowledge base ( rkb ) and the department of commerce's ( doc ) national institute of standards and technology's ( nist ) office of law enforcement standards ( oles ) . we also interviewed local responders in connecticut , new jersey , and washington regarding their acquisition of cbrn detection equipment . we chose these states because of their participation in dhs - sponsored top officials ( topoff ) national counterterrorism exercises . in addition , we interviewed members of the interagency board for equipment standardization and interoperability ( iab ) . iab , made up of local , state , and federal first responders , is designed to establish and coordinate local , state , and federal standardization , interoperability , compatibility , and responder health and safety to prepare for , train and respond to , mitigate , and recover from any cbrn incident .