the united states and the world . most of venezuela's crude oil that is not consumed domestically in most of venezuela's crude oil that is not consumed domestically in venezuela is exported to the united states . the united states is a natural venezuela is exported to the united states . the united states is a natural market for venezuelan oil because it is so close — about 5 days by tanker to market for venezuelan oil because it is so close — about 5 days by tanker to the u.s. gulf coast compared to about 30 to 40 days for supplies coming the u.s. gulf coast compared to about 30 to 40 days for supplies coming from the middle east . moreover , venezuela's national oil company , from the middle east . both in the united states and in venezuela , we spoke with numerous former pdvsa employees , executives , and directors , and oil company officials . we also collected , evaluated the reliability of , and analyzed data on venezuelan production , consumption , and exports of oil and petroleum products . the sources of our data include u.s. government agencies , especially the eia ; the venezuelan government and pdvsa ; and other international and private sources . we deemed these data to be reliable for the purposes of addressing our objectives . finally , we reviewed pdvsa's plan to expand oil production , and collected oil industry officials' and experts' views on the likely implementation of that plan . regarding the second objective , we reviewed studies of oil disruptions , including studies of the impacts of the venezuelan strike . we also analyzed current conditions in the world oil market to evaluate what might occur if a similar disruption occurred today . further , we evaluated the potential impacts of several different scenarios involving reductions in venezuela's oil production or exports to the united states — ( 1 ) a sudden and severe drop in venezuelan oil exports from the world market , ( 2 ) a sudden diversion of oil from the united states to other markets through an embargo , and ( 3 ) the closure by venezuela of its wholly - owned u.s. - based refineries . regarding the first scenario , we asked a doe contractor at the oak ridge national laboratory to use an economic oil - disruption model to analyze the impacts of a hypothetical venezuelan oil disruption on world oil prices and on the u.s. gross domestic product ( gdp ) . for this analysis we constructed a hypothetical disruption scenario similar to the one that actually occurred during the venezuelan oil strike in the winter of 2002 – 2003 , but using assumptions regarding market and economic conditions closer to those that prevailed at the time of the analysis ( late 2005 ) . we also analyzed data from private entities and met with numerous industry experts in venezuela and the united states ; officials in the departments of state and commerce ; doe officials ; and officials in the international energy agency to determine the impact of potential oil supply disruptions .