( see fig . after the initial star rating is determined by sail measures each year , vha officials can make changes to the rating if a medical center meets certain conditions . for example , sail documentation states that a medical center that initially received a 5-star rating will be reduced to a 4- star rating if it has a high mortality rate . in addition , vha officials told us they can decide to increase a 1-star medical center's rating to a 2-star rating if the medical center outperforms the bottom 10 percent of u.s. hospitals in certain criteria as measured by external systems such as the centers for medicare & medicaid services' hospital compare website . we found that the percentage of medical centers that received a final 1- star rating ranged from 4 percent to 10 percent from fiscal years 2013 through 2018 . vha officials publish the final annual star ratings for each medical center both internally and externally . see figure 2 for the number of medical centers that received each final star rating for fiscal years 2013 through 2018 . although the specific medical centers within each star - rating category could change from year to year , we found that the fiscal year 2018 star ratings for 110 of the 127 medical centers ( 87 percent ) that received star ratings in fiscal year 2013 did not differ by more than 1 star from their fiscal year 2013 star rating . for example , eight of the 10 1-star medical centers in fiscal year 2013 received either a 1- or 2-star rating in fiscal year 2018 . ( see fig . in addition , 44 of the 127 medical centers had the same rating in fiscal year 2018 as they did in fiscal year 2013 . at the end of the 6-year period of our review , only one medical center differed by more than 2 stars from its fiscal year 2013 star rating , decreasing from 5 stars to 2 . vha officials told us they use sail tools on vha's intranet when conducting site visits to medical centers and for other performance management efforts . the sail system includes several performance management tools that present data in greater detail than sail's quarterly data release and enable officials to identify areas for improvement . vha , network , and medical center officials we interviewed mentioned three in particular: opportunity matrix – this matrix shows how a medical center ranks compared to others on all sail performance measures based on quarterly data . each performance measure is labeled by quintile , with the first quintile comprising the top 20 percent of medical centers and the fifth quintile comprising the bottom 20 percent . officials told us they use this tool to focus improvement efforts by examining specific measures for which a medical center needs improvement . geometric control charts – these charts , referred to as g - charts , allow officials to monitor on a daily basis what vha considers to be rare occurrences . for example , one g - chart allows vha to monitor patient safety indicators that contain information on occurrences of specific medical conditions , such as cardiac arrest , pneumonia , and sepsis .