most segments of iss cannot be delivered by any other vehicle . for example , the columbia disaster in 2003 put iss assembly on hiatus as nasa ceased shuttle launches for 2½ years while it investigated the safety of the fleet . during this period , the russian soyuz became the means of transportation for crewmembers traveling to and returning from the iss . in a major space policy address on january 14 , 2004 , president bush announced his “vision for u.s. space exploration” ( vision ) and directed nasa to focus its future human space exploration activities on a return to the moon as prelude to future human missions to mars and beyond . as part of the vision , nasa is developing new crew and cargo vehicles , with the first crew vehicle currently scheduled to be available in 2015 . the president also directed nasa to retire the space shuttle after completion of the iss , which is planned for the end of the decade . based on that directive , nasa officials told us that they developed a manifest consisting of 17 shuttle launches to support iss assembly and supply between 2005 and 2010 . nine of these have taken place . in response to the president's vision , nasa formally set september 30 , 2010 , as the date that the shuttle program will cease because agency officials believe that continuing the program beyond that date will slow development of the agency's new vehicles — specifically , the agency budget cannot support both programs at costs of $2.5 billion to $4 billion above current budget . as shown in table 1 , the shuttle program costs nasa several billion dollars annually and projected funding is phased out in fiscal year 2011 . nasa officials told us that rpk received $37 million in funding , but then forfeited the remainder of its share because it did not meet certain financial development milestones . when nasa began to redistribute these forfeited funds , rpk filed a bid protest with gao , which gao denied . nasa officials then moved forward and awarded $170 million to orbital sciences corporation in february 2008 . nasa officials acted quickly to award the forfeited money and expect that spacex will have cargo capability available in 2010 ( by the time the shuttle is retired ) and crew capability in 2012 . while space x has been meeting key milestones in the development of its vehicle , some officials at the johnson space center were skeptical that cots would be available on the current projected schedule . additionally , the international space station independent safety task force ( iistf ) reported that design , development and certification of the new cots program was just beginning and that “if similar to other new program development activities , it most likely will take much longer than expected and will cost more than anticipated.” in our opinion , the schedule is optimistic when compared to other government and commercial space programs we have studied . we will be studying the cots program and schedules in more detail in response to a request of members of congress .