iii . as part of our review , we discussed education's processes for hiring and training staff with office of human resources ( ohr ) and principal office officials . education last issued a hiring plan in 2009 that outlined specific hiring goals and related initiatives , including attracting more diverse candidates using special initiatives , as appropriate , such as the office of personnel management's pathways program , to hire entry level staff . the pathways program is a streamlined developmental program meant to encourage careers in federal service by offering meaningful training and career development for students and recent graduates . these programs can reduce the time it takes to recruit and hire staff , according to ohr officials . ohr officials said they are currently reviewing the effectiveness of education's strategy to recruit , hire , and retain staff — including grant staff — and plan to issue an updated hiring plan in late 2017 . as part of this review , ohr officials said they will assess education's efforts to recruit diverse candidates , and review the job series that comprise the department's grant workforce to ensure job descriptions match the duties currently being performed by staff in those roles . education's current job series for grant staff identifies specific skills grant staff need to manage discretionary grants , and education offers training aimed at helping staff perform these duties effectively . the skills needed to manage discretionary grants according to education officials include , for example , ( 1 ) knowledge of education theories , principles , processes , and practices ; ( 2 ) proficiency in application of fact - finding and investigative techniques ; ( 3 ) analytical ability ; ( 4 ) oral and written communication ; ( 5 ) development of presentations and reports ; and ( 6 ) knowledge of specific program and grant information . education officials said they aim to hire staff with these skills and then train them on the specifics of grants management through mentoring and on - boarding programs , as well as on - the - job and optional training . officials from our three selected principal offices said they all have established mentoring or on - boarding programs for new grant staff . in fiscal year 2012 , education began offering an optional foundational curriculum of grant management courses that , upon completion , lead to a grant management certificate , according to rms officials . these officials said the curriculum consists of eight courses ( delivered over 15 nonconsecutive days ) covering topics such as grants monitoring , financial principles , ethics , and administrative requirements , among other things . they said the program is offered each year to cohorts of about 35 grant staff from across the department , and that since its inception , 228 of the department's roughly 656 grant staff members had completed it . grant staff can also choose to take a variety of other training opportunities that are offered department - wide or by principal offices on topics such as cost analysis and budget review . according to rms officials , only certain grant staff are required to receive grant specific training , which is delivered in the form of an annual briefing .