ii ) . to implement u.s. statute , the diplomatic security training directorate trains or helps train diplomatic security's 1,943 law enforcement agents and investigators , 340 technical security specialist engineers and technicians , 101 couriers , and a growing number of new security protective specialists , as well as other u.s. government personnel , and runs several specialized programs designed to enhance diplomatic security's capabilities . in fiscal year 2010 , dstc conducted 342 sessions of its 61 courses and trained 4,739 students . at the end of each phase , a report is produced for a dstc training advisor to approve , before the process progresses to the next phase . the seven phases are proposal phase: dstc staff analyzes the request for development or revision to a training course and makes recommendations to senior management on whether to proceed . analysis phase: dstc staff examines the audience , identifies job tasks and job performance measures , selects the instructional setting , and validates cost estimates . a task list is developed to guide initial course development , which involves subject matter experts in verifying the job tasks . design phase: dstc staff determines the training objectives , lists course prerequisites , identifies needed learning objectives , and establishes the appropriate performance tests . development phase: dstc staff develops the appropriate instructional materials , reviews and selects existing course materials , and develops the necessary coursework . implementation phase: a pilot course is created and taught by an approved instructor to a targeted audience . the pilot course is tested and observed by both subject matter experts and instructional design staff . evaluation phase: dstc staff and the students evaluate the effectiveness of the training . dstc conducts three types of evaluations: 1. tier - 1 evaluations of the training and the instructors by the students shortly after taking the course , 2. tier - 2 evaluations to check extent of knowledge and skills transfer to the students during the course , and 3. tier - 3 evaluations of the students' ability to apply the training on the job 6 to 12 months after training depending on when the skills are used . according to dstc officials , tier - 1 and tier - 3 evaluations are generally made up of survey questions with some short answers , while tier - 2 evaluations involve testing students through either a practical or written exam , or both . revision: courses go through the revision process at least every 5 years , prompted and guided in part by evaluations and feedback from students , supervisors , and other stakeholders . dstc applies its training framework to all courses , not just the courses for which it seeks accreditation through the fleta process . we previously reported that agencies need to ensure that they have the flexibility and capability to quickly incorporate changes into training and development efforts when needed . according to dstc , its training framework allows for flexibility and supports frequent evaluation , giving diplomatic security the ability to respond to changes in its mission and its customers' requirements .