ad hoc mode . this type of wireless structure allows wireless devices that are near one another to easily interconnect . in ad hoc mode , wireless - enabled devices can share network functionality without the use of an access point or a wired network connection ( see fig . after approval of the initial ieee 802.11 standard in 1997 , ieee released several 802.11 amendments to increase wlan network speeds to be more comparable to that of wired networks . the 802.11 standard and these subsequent amendments include security features known collectively as wired equivalent privacy ( wep ) . however , configurations that use wep have significant security flaws . to address these flaws , ieee released the 802.11i security standard in 2004 , which specifies security components that work together with 802.11 transmission standards . the ieee 802.11i security standard supports wireless connections that provide moderate to high levels of assurance against wlan security threats through the use of different cryptographic techniques . while ieee was developing 802.11i , the wi - fi alliance developed the wi - fi protected access ( wpa ) security certification as an interim means to improve security over wep . the protocols used under the wpa certification address vulnerabilities of wep , but the certification does not require support for strong encryption . in conjunction with the ratification of the 802.11i security standard in 2004 , the wi - fi alliance introduced wpa2 — the interoperability certification for 802.11i . the wpa2 certification extends the security capabilities offered by wpa to include all requirements of the 802.11i standard . both wpa and wpa2 offer two modes of operation: personal and enterprise . wpa2-personal protects unauthorized network access by using a preshared password as a key for network setup and access , while wpa2-enterprise verifies network users through an authentication server . in most cases , wpa2-enterprise is recommended to eliminate the continuous process of generating , deploying , and replacing outdated passwords . although wpa2-enterprise - certified products provide more security protections than wep and wpa , recent reports revealed that wireless networks protected with wpa2-enterprise encryption can also be susceptible to attacks . most recently , in 2009 , ieee ratified the 802.11w - 2009 standard , which further increases the overall security of 802.11 – based networks . specifically , 802.11w - 2009 provides improved protection for wlans by defining additional encryption security features to help prevent incidents such as denial of service attacks against wlans . wireless personal area networks provide wireless connectivity to devices such as telephone headsets or computer keyboards within close proximity . bluetooth is commonly used to establish these types of networks . several versions of the bluetooth standard have been adopted by the bluetooth special interest group . each bluetooth device must operate in one of the four security modes defined by the bluetooth standard . each version of bluetooth supports some , but not all , of these modes . wireless cellular networks cellular networks are managed by service providers who provide coverage based on dividing a large geographical service area into smaller areas of coverage called cells .