customer interviews . conducting interviews with customers can provide a way to get very detailed information about their specific needs and problems . like focus groups , this tool is used by leading customer service organizations to probe survey respondents as to why they answered survey questions a certain way . focus groups . organizations use focus groups to get better information from customers than survey results provide . in these groups , customers are probed about why they answered survey questions the way they did . dla has used focus groups to get detailed feedback on a single topic , but as noted previously , the number of individuals making up the focus groups was too small to draw agency - wide conclusions . at&t universal card services ( now part of citigroup ) conducts multiple focus groups per year to discuss a wide range of topics . furthermore , while dla's representatives provide headquarters with monthly written reports on customer support , best practice organizations have taken this a step further by using electronic feedback mechanisms . research shows that best practice organizations have their customer service representatives gather ideas , perceptions , and opinions from customers and report them electronically through a corporate intranet system . these data are then coded and distributed throughout the organization , thereby centrally integrating the feedback information . figure 3 shows an example of how multiple approaches can be linked , as illustrated by at&t universal card services' use of a “customer listening post” team . while high - quality service to its customers is an overall goal , dla lacks the information necessary to systematically assess the quality of service it is providing its customers with . indications are that customers , while satisfied in some areas , are dissatisfied in others . the failure to address areas of dissatisfaction means opportunities to improve supply readiness are being missed . dla is in the process of developing a program to improve its customer service relationships , but it currently does not have in place an effective mechanism that systematically gathers and integrates information on customer service views so that solutions can be identified to better meet their needs . the agency's current practices do not always surface these concerns , or more importantly , provide information on why they exist or how they can be corrected . to its credit , dla is undertaking a number of initiatives to improve the effectiveness of its customer relationship improvement efforts . however , these initiatives do not completely address the limitations of its current approaches for obtaining customer feedback because dla ( 1 ) has not yet fully determined who its customers are or how best to serve their needs ; ( 2 ) has not established the means to determine the underlying causes for customer dissatisfaction in order to fully achieve its strategic goal of providing customers with the most efficient and effective worldwide logistics support ; and ( 3 ) lacks a centralized , customer - driven integrated framework in which to solicit feedback from its customers . also , customer mail - out surveys are insufficient for identifying the causes of customer dissatisfaction .