tsa standardized processes . between 2012 and 2016 , tsa deployed standardization teams , called standardization effort teams , to help ensure more consistency among inspectors when conducting air carrier inspections and airport assessments , and to identify and develop best practices in areas such as training , among others . for example , in 2016 , a team developed a tool to facilitate performance evaluations of inspectors . tsa assesses the overall vulnerability level at each foreign airport using a rating system , ranging from a category “1,” which represents full compliance with icao standards , to a “4” or “5,” which involve more serious or egregious issues . based on our analysis of tsa's foreign airport assessment data , we found that compliance with icao standards varied by region . for example , our analysis showed that some regions of the world had a higher percentage of airports in vulnerability categories 4 and 5 . our analysis also showed that there are differences in compliance across the icao standards . specific information related to tsa's airport assessment results is deemed sensitive security information . according to tsa officials , it is difficult to draw conclusions about the cumulative foreign airport assessment results — such as whether the results are generally positive or negative — because the primary concern is not whether security deficiencies are identified , but whether foreign countries are capable and willing to address security deficiencies . specifically , there is considerable regional variation in the level of compliance because some foreign countries face challenges due to lack of resources or technical knowledge , among other factors . alternative security procedures are reviewed by the iir , who submits them to tsa headquarters and field officials for final review and approval . tsa has taken a number of steps to strengthen its analytical processes and better understand the impact of the foreign airport assessment and air carrier inspection programs . according to ogs officials , the establishment and evolution of the arm directorate has facilitated better data analysis and enhanced decision making pertaining to capacity development . specifically , tsa now conducts regional strategy meetings , produces regional risk reports , and approves requests for assistance based on risk . ogs conducts regional strategy meetings . since fiscal year 2012 , ogs has held strategy meetings to address aviation security threats and vulnerabilities within each region . during these meetings , ogs officials examine trend data for both airport assessments and air carrier inspections , including vulnerability ratings over a multi - year period , identify common areas of non - compliance , and develop capacity building approaches customized to each region . according to agency documentation , these meetings led ogs to recognize that each geographic region faces its own particular challenges and risks and requires unique mitigation approaches , such as at the country or airport level . arm develops regional risk reports . for instance , we found that the open standards and recommended practices findings tool ( osft ) — a database for tracking the resolution status of identified foreign airport deficiencies — has gaps and its system for categorization does not result in sufficient specificity of information related to security deficiencies' root causes and corrective actions .