iii. ) after determining that about 74,000 servicemembers in our population of interest did not have questionnaires in dod's central repository based on our first query , we asked the military services whether these servicemembers had pdhra questionnaires that could be identified in the services' own databases . with the help of the services , we found that approximately 7,000 servicemembers — or about 9 percent of the 74,000 servicemembers — had questionnaires in their respective military services' databases , but not in dod's central repository . the number of questionnaires identified in the military services' databases that were not in the central repository varied by military service — ranging from over 300 questionnaires for air force and navy servicemembers to about 3,000 for army and marine corps servicemembers . on september 4 , 2009 , we queried dod's central repository again to update our april 2009 data and determine whether any progress had been made in reporting questionnaires to the central repository . on this second query — 15 months after the last servicemembers in our population of interest returned from deployment — we found that dod's central repository was missing the same percentage of pdhra questionnaires as had been missing in april . as a result of our september 2009 query , we still found pdhra questionnaires for only 77 percent of the approximately 319,000 servicemembers in our original population of interest . while we identified slightly more questionnaires than we identified in our april query , we were still unable to identify questionnaires in the central repository for about 72,000 servicemembers . ( see table 1. ) the absence of 72,000 pdhra questionnaires from dod's central repository for servicemembers who should have filled them out hinders dod's deployment health quality assurance program from effectively assessing the military services' compliance with pdhra requirements . the program , which dod established to assess whether dod's deployment health assessments are conducted as required , relies in part on the presence of pdhra questionnaires in the central repository . these questionnaires document the extent to which servicemembers were given the opportunity to fill out the questionnaire , as required under dod policy . dod officials specifically cited the importance of this documentation for helping the quality assurance program ensure that servicemembers have the opportunity to have their health concerns identified and addressed . however , the absence of questionnaires from the central repository for servicemembers who should have filled them out suggests either that not all of these servicemembers filled out the questionnaire or that questionnaires were filled out , but were not incorporated into dod's central repository . when questionnaires for servicemembers from our population of interest are not in the central repository , dod does not have reasonable assurance that all members of this vulnerable population of active component , reserve , and national guard servicemembers that deployed to iraq or afghanistan were administered the pdhra questionnaire , which is intended to help identify deployment - related health concerns that emerge over time and facilitate the opportunity for servicemembers to address these concerns . dod's reserve health readiness program ( rhrp ) office uses four methods to monitor lhi's administration of the pdhra to reserve component servicemembers .