gao - 16-413t . washington , d.c.: february 11 , 2016 . air travel and communicable diseases: comprehensive federal plan needed for u.s. aviation system's preparedness . gao - 16-127 . washington , d.c.: december 16 , 2015 . these are the same mosquitoes that spread dengue and chikungunya viruses . these mosquitoes typically lay eggs in and near standing water in containers like buckets , bowls , animal dishes , flower pots , and vases . they prefer to bite people , and live both indoors and outdoors . mosquitoes that spread dengue , chikungunya , and zika are aggressive daytime biters , but also bite at night . mosquitoes can become infected when they feed on a person already infected with the virus . according to the cdc , the zika virus is rarely transmitted from an infected mother to child , and there have been no reports of infants contracting the zika virus through breastfeeding . it is possible but rare that an infected mother would pass the virus to a newborn at delivery . however , an infected mother can pass the zika virus to her fetus during pregnancy . according to the cdc , it is possible for the zika virus to be spread by a man to his sexual partners . a few recent cases of zika virus transmission were reported through sexual contact . in december 2013 , during a zika virus outbreak in french polynesia , zika was isolated from the semen of a patient . in one known case of likely sexual transmission , the virus was spread before symptoms developed . the virus appears to be present in semen longer than in blood . sexual transmission of the disease — acquired outside of the united states — has been reported in the united states . as of february 23 , 2016 , the cdc and state public health departments are investigating 14 additional reports of possible sexual transmission of the virus , including several involving pregnant women . zika virus can also be transmitted through blood transfusion , according to u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) documents . while there have been no reports to date of zika virus entering the u.s. blood supply , the risk of blood transmission is considered high based on the most current scientific research of how zika virus and similar viruses ( i.e . flaviviruses ) are spread , as well as recent reports of transfusion - associated infection outside of the united states , according to the fda . cdc reports that there have been reports of possible blood transfusion transmission cases in brazil . during the french polynesian outbreak in 2013 , 2.8 percent of blood donors tested positive for zika . the maximum time the virus remains in the bloodstream is unknown , but scientists estimate that it is less than 28 days . on february 16 , 2016 , as a safety measure against the emerging zika virus outbreak , the fda issued new guidance recommending that blood donors be deferred for four weeks if they have been to areas with active zika virus transmission , potentially have been exposed to the virus , or have had a confirmed zika virus infection .