each of these components is an element of the integrated bmds . during calendar years 2006 and 2007 , mda is focusing block 2006 to enhance and field four bmds elements — gmd , aegis bmd , sensors , and c2bmc . block 2006 is not only expected to field additional assets , but it also continues the evolution of block 2004 by providing improved gmd interceptors , enhanced aegis bmd missiles , upgraded aegis bmd ships , a forward - based x - band transportable radar , and enhancements to the c2bmc software . the national defense authorization acts for fiscal years 2002 and 2005 mandate that we prepare annual assessments of mda's ongoing cost , schedule , testing , and performance progress . we issued our most recent report on march 15 , 2007 . my statement today will focus on the issues covered in that report , specifically: mda's progress toward developing the block 2006 configuration of the bmds , the flexibility granted to mda and its effect on oversight and accountability , and the status of mda's efforts to improve its quality processes . missile defense is important because at least 25 countries now possess or are acquiring sophisticated missile technology that could be used to attack the united states , deployed troops , friends , and allies . mda's mission is to develop and field an integrated , layered bmds capable of defending against enemy ballistic missiles launched from all ranges and during all phases of the missiles' flight . dod has spent and continues to spend large sums of money to defend against this threat . since the mid - 1980s , about $107 billion has been spent , and over the next 5 years , another $49 billion is expected to be invested . while the initial set of bmds assets was fielded during 2004-2005 , much of the technical and engineering foundation was laid by this prior investment . mda requests funds for each of these elements , with the exception of c2bmc and thaad , under separate budget line items . in addition , mda issues separate contracts for each of the nine elements . prior to beginning each new block , mda establishes and submits block goals to congress . these goals present the business case for the new block . mda presented its block 2006 goals to congress in march 2005 , shortly after submitting its fiscal year 2006 budget . at that time , mda told congress that the agency expected to field the following assets: up to 15 gmd interceptors , an interim upgrade of the thule early warning radar , a forward - based x - band radar , 19 aegis bmd missiles , 1 new aegis cruiser for the missile defense mission , 4 new aegis destroyers capable of providing long - range surveillance and tracking , and 8 aegis destroyers upgraded for the engagement mission . mda's cost goal for the development of the six elements that compose the block , the manufacture of assets being fielded , and logistical support for fielded assets was $19.3 billion . mda also notified congress of the block 2006 performance goals established for the bmds .