( see app . ii for further information on our calculations. ) as discussed previously , dod was not aware of , and consequently did not maintain data on , unused tickets and would therefore have to rely on the airlines to provide the relevant data needed to claim refunds . the inconsistent and incomplete responses we received from the airlines point to the difficulties in determining the total value of unused tickets . while the airlines readily provided us with at least 1 year of the data we requested , some airline representatives informed us that data on tickets purchased prior to the last 18 months have been moved to electronic archives , and retrieving data from these archives is costly and time - consuming . the process involves restoring from archives millions of records of tickets the airlines have issued before they can identify tickets purchased with the dod centrally billed accounts that are fully and partially unused . further , additional work would be necessary to determine the value of the unused portions of partially unused airline tickets . finally , the airlines stated that some ticket data were not maintained electronically and that generating information related to these tickets would involve manually sifting through the airlines' ticket coupons . however , unused tickets from these 5 airlines and the more than 85 other airlines that dod uses represent a potentially substantial government claim . millions of dollars of unused tickets have not been refunded because dod did not have a systematic process to identify and process unused tickets . effective internal controls are the first line of defense in safeguarding assets and preventing and detecting fraud , and are an integral part of an entity's accountability for government resources . however , we found that dod's flawed process relied extensively on dod personnel to report unused tickets to the travel offices . dod had not systematically implemented procedures to identify instances in which travelers failed to notify the commercial travel offices ( cto ) and their commands of unused tickets , or to ensure that refunds were processed once the ctos received notifications . although some units had instituted a process by fiscal year 2002 to more systematically identify instances of unused tickets , the process was not implemented dod - wide and could only be used to identify unused electronic — not paper — tickets . further , in locations where this process had been implemented , dod did not have systematic procedures to verify that the ctos identified all unused electronic tickets and processed these for refunds . because our preliminary assessment determined that current operations used to identify and process unused tickets were flawed , we did not statistically test current processes and controls . during fiscal years 2001 and 2002 , dod relied on travelers to report unused tickets to the ctos . dod travel regulations state that the traveler must notify the cto when a ticket is not used , and dod's financial management regulations further stipulates that it is the traveler's responsibility to return unused transportation tickets to the cto for a refund .