disposal . patent examiners dispose of a patent application by determining , among other things , if a patent will be granted — called allowance — or not . patent examiners receive credit , called counts , for each first action and disposal , and are assigned production goals on the basis of the number of production units — comprised of two counts — they are expected to achieve in a 2-week period . the counts in a production unit may be any combination of first actions and disposals . the production goals that are used today to measure patent examiner performance are based on the same assumptions that uspto established in the 1970s . at that time , production goals were determined based on the belief that it should take a patent examiner a certain amount of time to review a patent application and achieve two counts based on their experience ( as determined by their position in the agency ) and the type of patent they are reviewing . as a result , these goals vary depending upon the patent examiner's position based on the federal government's general schedule pay scale ( gs ) and the technology center in which the patent examiner works . for example , a gs - 12 patent examiner working on data processing applications is expected to achieve two counts in 31.6 hours , whereas a gs - 12 patent examiner working on plastic molding applications is expected to do so in 20.1 hours . gs - 7 patent examiners working on those types of applications , however , are expected to achieve two counts in 45.1 and 28.7 hours , respectively . patent examiner achievements are recorded biweekly , and , at the end of each fiscal year , those patent applications that have not been reviewed for first action are counted as part of uspto's inventory of unexamined applications , otherwise known as the patent application backlog . in each of the last 5 years , uspto has identified its annual hiring estimates primarily on the basis of available funding levels and its institutional capacity to train and supervise new patent examiners , and not on the basis of the number of patent examiners needed to reduce the existing backlog or review new patent applications . although this process is consistent with workforce planning strategies established by the office of personnel management ( opm ) and has enabled the agency to better match its hiring estimates to its institutional capacity , uspto's ability to reduce the patent application backlog simply through its hiring efforts is unlikely . specifically , uspto begins the process of identifying projected hiring estimates as part of creating its budget submission for the office of management and budget ( omb ) 18 months before the start of the hiring year in order to meet omb's submission timeline . after considering expected funding levels and available patent examiner workforce data , uspto considers its institutional capacity to supervise and train patent examiners .