( see fig . from calendar years 2000 through november 2017 , the u.s. patent and trademark office has granted va 82 patents for which va is the sole assignee , according to va officials . also , table 2 shows by university the breakdown of the 206 patents for which va shares ownership with an affiliate . john neumann , ( 202 ) 512-3841 or neumannj@gao.gov . we reviewed original agreements for five of the six universities in our sample . one of the universities in our sample , emory university , did not have an agreement with va as of january 2018 . we also reviewed a nonprobability sample of an additional three original agreements with other universities based on their licensing and commercialization activities , for a total of eight original agreements . in addition to the original agreements , we also reviewed the first eight new agreements that va negotiated with universities . in total , we reviewed 16 agreements — the 8 original agreements and 8 new ones to determine whether they contained requirements for disclosure and reporting to va. for objective two , we requested and reviewed annual reports from va for the eight universities whose original technology transfer agreements we reviewed . in addition , for our second recommendation , va said it will develop a standardized method that guides universities in fulfilling va's reporting requirements for the university technology transfer annual reports . we also examined relevant statutes and regulations . we compared va's procedures , policies , and internal and external communications to federal internal control standards for control activities and information and communication . we also interviewed officials from the va technology transfer office and the va office of the general counsel ; officials selected through a nonprobability sample of six va medical centers and their affiliated universities ; and two of the three members of a subcommittee of the national research advisory council that submitted a report to va on the department's technology transfer program in fiscal year 2017 . we conducted site visits at five of the six va medical centers — atlanta , georgia ; baltimore , maryland ; palo alto and san francisco , california ; and salt lake city , utah — for interviews with researchers who were inventors and with the associate chiefs of staff for research at each medical center , to whom we refer as the research administrators . we also met with officials of each of the universities affiliated with the respective medical centers — emory university ; the university of maryland at baltimore ; stanford university ; the university of california , particularly the university of california at san francisco ; and the university of utah . in addition , we conducted telephone interviews with researchers and the research administrator at the sixth va medical center in cleveland , ohio , and officials of the university affiliated with it , case western reserve university . we selected the medical centers and their respective university affiliates based on high levels of license activity or backlogs of disclosures , among other factors . researchers were not familiar with va's invention disclosure process because the process was not routine to them .