however , other market participants cited disadvantages . according to sec staff , data on the extent to which subpenny increments are used to quote securities across all u.s. equity markets are not routinely reported or readily available . however , a 2001 nasdaq report to sec that reviewed trading in stocks listed on its market showed that less than 15 percent of limit orders were submitted in subpennies after decimals were introduced . a vast majority of the subpenny limit orders cited in the 2001 nasdaq report were handled by a single ecn . sec staff also conducted a study of the use of subpennies in trading that took place between april 21 and 25 , 2003 , and found that subpenny trades accounted for about 13 percent of trades in nasdaq stocks , 10 percent of trades in american stock exchange stocks , and 1 percent of the trades in nyse stocks . these trade execution data , however , do not directly demonstrate the extent of subpenny quoting , because trades may be executed using the subpenny increment for other reasons . for example , some institutional investors may ask their broker - dealers to execute orders at the weighted average price at which a stock traded on a particular day . this weighted average price can be carried out to several decimal places . in addition , market participants noted subpenny quotes allow some traders to step ahead of others' orders for an economically insignificant amount . finally , they argued that this stepping ahead discourages other traders from submitting limit orders , which reduces overall transparency and liquidity in the markets . based on the work we have conducted to date and a limited review of some of the comments on sec's proposal to ban subpenny quoting , most market participants appear to support sec's proposed action . however , some organizations opposed to the ban said that it could reduce the ability of traders to offer better prices and stifle technological innovation and reduce market participants' incentive to invest in better systems . although some electronic trading systems supported the ban , other electronic trading systems indicated that the decision to use subpenny quotes should be left to market participants who , as technology advances , may increasingly find subpenny quotes more useful than they do today . we are also continuing to review the broader impacts of decimal pricing on markets , securities firms , and investors . as part of this work , we also plan to conduct original analysis using a database of trades and quotes occurring on u.s. markets to identify trends in quoted spreads , clustering of quotes and trades across certain prices , and other potential changes since decimal pricing was introduced . in 2000 , in response to calls from congress , sec directed u.s. stock and options markets to change from quoting equity securities and options in fractions of a dollar , such as 1 / 16th , to quoting in decimals . proponents of this change believed decimal pricing would make stock prices easier for investors to understand , align u.s. markets with other major stock markets of the world , and lower investors' trading costs by narrowing spreads to as little as one penny .