we found this support to be insufficient . we are sending electronic copies of this report to the secretary of transportation , the administrator of faa , and other interested parties . this report will be available at no cost on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions on matters discussed in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9471 or franzelj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . in addition to the contact named above , significant contributions to this report were made by jack warner ( assistant director ) , h. donald campbell , jay cherlow , gerald dillingham , fred evans , maxine hattery , ed laughlin , maureen luna - long , maren mcavoy , scott mcnulty , and meg mills . figure 1 illustrates the camera process . faa's cas is the source for the cost data used to develop a cost base for camera . cas captures cost data from faa's financial accounting system as those costs are recognized as expenses incurred in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles ( gaap ) . cas classifies costs by ato's four types of air traffic services — oceanic , en route , terminals , and flight services — by assigning direct costs and allocating overhead and other indirect costs to services and facilities that provide those services . camera classifies the cas data , as adjusted , into six cost pools , namely , oceanic , en route , large hubs , middle terminals , low - activity towers , and flight services . once the camera costs are classified into the six cost pools , the costs for distinct operations and capital projects within five of the pools ( excluding flight services ) are put into one of three tiers for assignment to users — turbine or piston . the three tiers of costs are 1. costs exclusively assigned to a single user group , either because the project in question principally benefits a single user group or because the other user group does not drive material or measurable incremental costs ( tier 1 ) ; 2. costs assigned to both user groups because the projects benefit both user groups and use by the secondary user group drives measurable incremental costs ( tier 2 ) ; and 3. overhead costs , costs indirectly related to the delivery of services , and other miscellaneous costs that could not be directly assigned to the user groups , which were allocated based on each user group's proportional share of the total costs assigned to the first two tiers ( tier 3 ) . once all costs are assigned by type of service , tier , and user group , total costs for turbine and piston user groups within each of the five service pools ( excluding flight services ) are further allocated to subgroups representing the types of aircraft operators — commercial , general aviation , and exempt — based on the proportion of each operator's share of total activity at facilities in the pool .