collections . states send delinquency notices to vendors for late , miscalculated , or underpaid collections . taxpayer services . states provide education efforts and taxpayer assistance to improve voluntary compliance . we previously reported that the following state functions are typically associated with administering sales taxes: identifying and registering vendors ; returns processing ; enforcement ; collections ; and taxpayer services ( see sidebar titled “sales tax administration activities” ) . if remote sellers were required to collect state taxes regardless of nexus , states may need to process an influx of new registration forms from out - of - state vendors . state revenue agency officials as well as representatives from the federation of tax administrators told us , however , that they did not anticipate that registering new out - of - state vendors and processing additional returns would pose major challenges to state agencies . they explained that state revenue agencies already process a large volume of registration changes annually as new businesses are created or existing businesses fail . as a result , they expected that new registrations from out - of - state sellers would not represent a significant strain on current resources . potential increases in new out - of - state vendor registrations could be lessened by states' small seller exemptions . some state proposals for increasing tax collections on remote sales have exempted smaller out - of - state sellers with annual sales less than a certain dollar amount , or annual transactions less than a certain number , into a state . recent small seller exemptions have set annual sales exemption thresholds ranging from $10,000 in washington state to $500,000 in massachusetts . one revenue agency official from alabama , which began enforcing a new remote - seller regulation in 2016 that has a $250,000 small seller exemption , told us that the approximately 100 newly registered out - of - state sellers is an extremely small share of the state's total 40,000 registered sellers . states may need additional resources to process new tax returns from out - of - state vendors and to verify out - of - state vendors' total taxable remote sales into a state . however , as tax administrators noted above with regard to new vendor registrations , any increase in out - of - state returns processing may be minimal when compared to the volume of routine in - state returns . when processing new out - of - state returns , states may need to decide whether to capture the same amount of data from out - of - state filers as they currently do for in - state filers in order to limit errors and required resources for follow - up . depending on whether and how some states choose to centralize registration and reporting for out - of - state vendors , some administrative costs and burdens associated with these functions might be reduced or mitigated .