the department of commerce concurred with the findings in this report . dod lacks a departmentwide definition of the term counterfeit . as arranged with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the army , navy , and air force ; the secretary of commerce ; the administrator of the office of federal procurement policy ; as well as other interested parties . in addition , the report will be made available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4906 . it was later determined that the subcontractor purchased these parts from a parts broker who was not authorized to distribute parts by the original component manufacturer . to date , all parts have been accounted for and secured from further use on any other products . microcircuits: a counterfeit microcircuit , which can be used on multiple mda systems , was identified on mda hardware . mda's visual inspection showed that the part was resurfaced and remarked , which prompted authenticity testing . tests revealed surface scratches , inconsistencies in the part marking , and evidence of tampering . these parts were purchased from a parts broker who was not authorized to distribute parts by the original component manufacturer . to further examine the processes that dod has in place to detect and prevent counterfeit parts from entering its supply chain , we conducted a case study of dod weapon programs and interviewed program officials as well as several logistics support providers . we selected a nongeneralizable sample of 16 dod weapon programs based on criteria including representation of the aerospace , ground vehicle , or missile defense sectors ; representation of the production and deployment or operations and support phase of the acquisition life cycle , and cross - representation of dod components — army , navy , air force , and the missile defense agency . gao also has ongoing work through its annual “assessments of selected weapon programs” for many of these programs , which allowed the team to build upon our prior work efforts and existing dod contacts . programs selected were: f - 15 eagle , f - 16 fighting falcon , f / a - 18e / f super hornet , f / a - 22 raptor , c - 5 galaxy , c - 130 hercules , ah - 64d apache , uh - 60 black hawk , e - 2 hawkeye , av - 8b harrier , sh - 60 sea hawk , v - 22 osprey , aegis cruiser , ground - based midcourse defense , high mobility multi - purpose wheeled vehicles ( hmmwv ) , and m1 abrams . we identified initiatives and practices used by industry associations and commercial companies in selected commercial supply chains ( electronics , automotive , aviation ) to mitigate the risk of procuring counterfeit parts .