flown by these aircraft . in 2008 , faa set a goal to reduce the fatal general aviation accident rate by 10 percent — from a baseline of 1.12 fatal accidents per 100,000 flight hours to 1 fatal accident per 100,000 flight hours — over 10 years , from 2009 to 2018 . this single long - term safety goal may mask problems in certain segments of the community . the goal stemmed from faa's desire to have a target for its general aviation safety improvement efforts that accounted for changes in flight activity over time . according to faa officials , they were looking for a goal that was achievable and represented an improved level of safety . faa did not meet the annual targets for the goal in 2009 and 2010 and , according to projections of flight activity , it does not appear faa will meet its target in 2011 . this is not a new phenomenon . as we reported about accidents occurring in 1998 , personal operations accounted for more than 75 percent of fatal general aviation accidents . from 1999 through 2011 , airplanes flying instructional operations were the second most often involved in accidents . however , instructional operations were also the operation with the smallest proportion of fatal accidents . according to our analysis , almost 38 percent of accidents that occurred during instructional flying involved hard landings or loss of control while the aircraft was on the ground . these types of events are less likely to cause fatalities than other types of events . it is also possible that the presence of a certified flight instructor onboard to share the management of the cockpit and other tasks may have contributed to the lower fatality rate for instructional operations . corporate operations , in which a professional pilot flies an aircraft owned by a business or corporation , was the least common type of operation to be involved in general aviation accidents . corporate operations accounted for less than 1 percent of fatal general aviation accidents and less than 0.5 percent of nonfatal accidents . from 2008 through 2011 , there were no fatal accidents involving corporate airplanes , giving corporate operations an accident record similar to that of commercial air carriers . again , this is not a new phenomenon . as we reported in 2001 , the low number of accidents involving corporate operations is attributable to a number of factors , including the pilot's training , experience , and participation in ongoing training to maintain and improve their skills , as well as the safety equipment that is typically installed on corporate aircraft . according to a representative of the nbaa , an organization representing companies that rely on general aviation aircraft to conduct business , most corporate operations also benefit from advanced technologies , including avionics that provide synthetic vision and terrain displays ; auto - throttle , which helps maintain airspeed ; and fuel gauges that are built to the standards required for commercial airliners . further , airplanes used for corporate purposes are often powered by turbine engines and may be subject to additional safety requirements . flying for corporate purposes can also differ from other types of flying .