data processing . we took steps in developing the questionnaire , collecting the data , and analyzing them to minimize such errors . for example , our pretesting and expert reviews of the questionnaire resulted in question changes that reduced the possibility of measurement error , and all data processing and analysis programming was verified by independent analysts . in addition , we followed up on some unlikely answers by recontacting sampled lenders or conducting followup research on them to edit erroneous answers and declare some firms ineligible for our survey , thereby reducing measurement and coverage error . to assess the risk of nonresponse bias , we compared the response rates of lenders across categories of two characteristics that might be related to our key variables — the effect of hera changes and other factors on the likelihood of continuation of hecm lending in the future . the two characteristics known for both respondents and nonrespondents were the number of years the lender had been offering hecms and the state in which the lender's home office is located , from which we could develop a measure of size of loan activity in each state by summing the number of loans made by lenders whose home offices were in a given state . we found no statistically significant association between these two characteristics and the likelihood of response . although this does not eliminate the possibility of nonresponse bias , we found no evidence of bias based on our analysis of this available data . to determine the effect of the hera provisions on hecm borrowers , we examined changes in the up - front mortgage insurance premium , origination fee , and loan funds available to borrowers . the up - front mortgage insurance premium is 2 percent of the maximum claim amount . hera did not change this rate , but because of hera's change to the hecm loan limit , some borrowers may be eligible for larger loans and therefore have higher maximum claim amounts . since the premium is calculated based on the maximum claim amount , these borrowers will pay a higher up - front mortgage insurance premium than they would have prior to hera . before hera , the origination fee was calculated as 2 percent of the maximum claim amount with a minimum fee of $2,000 . hera changed the calculation of the origination fee to 2 percent of the first $200,000 of the maximum claim amount plus 1 percent of the maximum claim amount over $200,000 , with a maximum fee of $6,000 . in implementing hera , hud also increased the minimum origination fee by $500 to $2,500 . we used two different approaches to assess the impact of the hera changes . first , we performed a mathematical analysis showing the difference between the up - front costs before and after hera . specifically , we derived equations for calculating pre - hera and post - hera up - front costs for borrowers with maximum claim amounts in different ranges ( $0 to $100,000 ; $100,000 to $125,000 ; $125,000 to $200,000 ; $200,000 to $400,000 ; and $400,000 to $625,500 ) .