we have seen positive outcomes from these efforts . consistent with our recommendations to other agencies , we have established stronger linkages between our recruitment efforts and our workforce needs identified through our annual workforce and strategic planning processes and in our annual workforce diversity plans . to accomplish this , we adopted a recruiting framework that has allowed us to better address our skill gaps and enhance the diversity of our workforce , such as hiring more hispanics , individuals with disabilities , and veterans . this framework was particularly critical this year , as we needed to identify how to address our needs despite significant fiscal constraints . using this framework , we made decisions to discontinue certain efforts or initiate new ones to meet our needs and better allocate our resources . for example , we customized our interactions with campuses so that we could devote the appropriate level and type of resources needed to meet our needs . while we continue to believe that developing and maintaining strong relationships with college and university campuses is critical , on - site visits are less necessary given workforce and technological changes . as a result , based on an analysis of our workforce needs , school characteristics ( eg , student demographics , academic programs , and proximity of the campus to gao offices ) , and our history with the campuses ( eg , number of applicants , applicant experience , and hires ) , our efforts now include a range of both on - site and virtual activities . the benefit of this approach is that we can adjust it at any time based on our needs . we also made critical decisions about how to best supplement our campus outreach efforts to support our workforce needs in the most cost - effective manner . we considered our costs to participate in various events , results from past participation , and the anticipated future benefits in order to set our future priorities about what organizations and events we would centrally support . for example , we supported participation in the careers and the disabled expo and the association of latinos in public finance and accounting conference to help enhance the diversity of our workforce as well as to attract candidates with needed skills . we also partnered with the hispanic association of colleges and universities , as well as the public policy and international affairs fellowship program , to hire 10 qualified student interns . we also determined how we could cost - efficiently use other approaches to meet our needs . as a result , we have advertised in those journals targeting individuals with disabilities , african - americans , or critical skill areas ( eg , economists ) to expand our outreach . we also utilized low - cost mechanisms such as electronically notifying hundreds of colleges and universities and relevant organizations about vacancies , revamping our external careers web site , and updating our recruitment materials to provide better information about gao's worklife , programs , and values . these efforts are important ways to inform any interested candidate about gao and available opportunities .