iii ) . on the basis of our discussions with knowledgeable dhs officials and the actions we took , we found that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of providing a general estimate of expenditures abroad for fiscal years 2008 through 2012 , with the additional information provided . the full - time - equivalent employees ( fte ) stationed abroad are monitored at dhs through its overseas personnel and activities locator , which is maintained by dhs office of operations coordination and planning . the locator is updated monthly with self - reported data from the components , which may capture some personnel on travel duty in additional to permanently deployed ftes . we collected these data for may 2013 , the most recent month for which dhs was able to provide the data during the period of our study . on the basis of discussions about the system and relevant control activities with the responsible officials , we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of reporting ftes abroad during the specified month in which they were collected . for the data we gathered on training and technical assistance activities for fiscal years 2008 through 2012 , we attempted to obtain the number of personnel and expenditures dedicated to staff who conducted training and technical assistance on a temporary basis , but some components were unable to provide data for multiple fiscal years , and we encountered numerous challenges , such as inconsistent data definitions and lack of confidence by dhs officials in the accuracy or completeness of the data . as a result , we did not include this information in our report . however , we determined that information the six dhs operational components in our review were able to provide was sufficiently reliable for the purpose of reporting the foreign nation whose officials received dhs - delivered training and technical assistance . we made this determination on the basis of checks for reasonableness and discussions with responsible dhs officials about the steps taken to help ensure accuracy of the data . to examine how dhs has contributed to u.s. missions' efforts to combat terrorism and the factors that have facilitated or hampered those contributions , we reviewed documentation about dhs's component activities abroad and state programs and activities on which dhs collaborates . we also relied on our interviews with agency officials and web - based surveys of deputy chiefs of mission ( dcm ) and dhs attachés in u.s. missions where dhs components were stationed in the embassy . click on the x to close . for a printer - friendly version , please see appendix ii , table 5 . participated in 1 activity ( 27 ) participated in 6-10 activities ( 40 ) participated in 2-5 activities ( 88 ) participated in 10+ training activities ( 23 ) table 3 provides additional detail about the types of training and technical assistance that each dhs component in our review provided in fiscal year 2012 to help combat terrorism abroad .