vi. ) we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense and appropriate congressional committees . the report is also available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or draperd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff members who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix vii . the remaining 130 areas had estimates that ranged from 18 to 50 percent , but because of their confidence intervals , were neither above nor below the 31 percent threshold.the geographic distribution of these three categories of areas . we identified 21 individual areas where the percentage of nonenrolled beneficiaries who experienced problems finding a civilian primary care provider who would accept tricare patients met or exceeded the national estimate . we then identified 50 additional areas where the percentage of nonenrolled beneficiaries who experienced these problems was less than the national estimate . the remaining 129 areas had estimates that ranged from 13 to 44 percent , but because of their confidence intervals , were neither above nor below the 25 percent threshold.categories of areas . we identified nine individual areas where the percentage of nonenrolled beneficiaries who experienced problems finding a civilian specialty care provider who would accept tricare patients met or exceeded the national estimate . we then identified 34 additional areas where the percentage of nonenrolled beneficiaries who experienced these problems was less than the national estimate . the remaining 144 areas had estimates that ranged from 14 to 47 percent , but because of their confidence intervals , were neither above nor below the 25 percent threshold.categories of areas . because of the low number of nonenrolled beneficiary responses to the questions about civilian mental health care , we are unable to identify specific geographic areas where nonenrolled beneficiaries have access problems to civilian mental health care providers . of the 215 areas surveyed in the 4-year beneficiary survey , only 5 areas had 30 or more respondents — tma's threshold for reporting beneficiary survey results — who indicated that they needed mental health care and received it from a civilian provider . additionally , for those 5 areas that did have at least 30 nonenrolled beneficiary responses , the margins of error were between 10 and 25 percentage points . the tricare management activity ( tma ) fielded its provider and beneficiary surveys to the same hospital service areas ( hsa ) each year with one exception . because of resource constraints , the 2011 fielding of the beneficiary survey did not include any hsas . however , 16 hsas were included in the 2011 fielding of the provider survey . because beneficiaries were not surveyed for these hsas , they are not included in our collective analysis of the beneficiary and civilian provider survey results . table 13 lists the 16 hsas that were surveyed in the 2011 civilian provider survey fielding and the estimated percentage of civilian providers who were accepting any new tricare patients .