all interviews were conducted in english . overall , we interviewed more than 190 administrators , faculty , and students , including the following: more than 70 administrators from 12 universities , including university presidents and other executive officials as well as staff from various offices such as those supporting student life and other student services , libraries , and information technology . more than 35 faculty members from seven universities , including more than 30 u.s. citizens , several chinese citizens , and one citizen from another country . the faculty members we interviewed included both those sent from the u.s. campus to teach at the institution in china on a temporary basis and those hired specifically to teach at the university institution in china . more than 95 students from six universities , including interviewing roughly an equal mix of u.s. and chinese citizens on campuses in china , and several students from other countries . our interviews with students included a mix of one - on - one interviews and discussion groups . in addition , nearly 40 of these students that we interviewed from two universities also completed a written questionnaire . we asked them to complete the questionnaire because we believed some students might be more willing to answer candidly on an anonymous questionnaire than during an oral interview . to maintain their anonymity and to encourage candid responses students were instructed not to write their names on the questionnaire . the questionnaire was in english , and students were asked to respond in english , as they were enrolled in courses taught in english . the questionnaire addressed the same general topics that were used to guide our student interviews and discussion groups . we analyzed responses to the written student questionnaires alongside our analysis of student interviews and discussion groups . in selecting universities to visit , we included both public and private universities ; universities with institutions in different locations within china ; universities that established institutions in china at different points in time ; and universities with institutions having varying student demographics , including several with predominantly chinese student bodies and several with a mixture of students from the united states , china , and other countries . we also planned to visit two additional institutions , but our visits were declined by , in one case , the chinese university partner and , in the other case , by the provincial ministry of education with jurisdiction over the institution . in addition to conducting interviews during our visits to these universities , we also reviewed campus facilities including classrooms , libraries , cafeterias , and dormitories . we noted any potential problems . we modified the questionnaire based on feedback from the pretests and internal gao review as appropriate . we sent the microsoft word form questionnaire and a cover email to the universities on february 26 , 2016 , and asked them to complete the questionnaire and email it back to us within 2 weeks . we closed the questionnaire on june 3 , 2016 . eleven universities provided detailed responses on the questionnaire form ; one university provided useful narrative responses but did not answer the questionnaire itself .