emergency procurement mechanism . in 2010 , pepfar established a funding mechanism called the emergency commodity fund , whose primary aim has been supporting emergency purchases of arv drugs when threats arise to the continuity of patient treatment or critical prevention programs . according to usaid , this funding mechanism has been used to assist five countries with emergency arv procurement when they faced problems with global fund grants . pepfar country operational plans for fiscal year 2012 reported that six other countries came close to experiencing shortages of arv drugs and other hiv - related commodities due to global fund delays . for example , the democratic republic of congo's ministry of health requested that the u.s. government ensure a buffer stock of arv drugs because the global fund , which was the source of a majority of the country's commodities , had become slow in processing grants and was experiencing difficulties forecasting drug supply and keeping arv drugs in stock . pepfar has also provided technical assistance to the global fund to improve its procurement system , with the goal of reducing the need for further emergency support from pepfar . according to usaid officials , in september 2012 , pepfar helped the global fund develop a proposal for its own emergency procurement mechanism . as of march 2013 , the global fund had not notified pepfar whether it had established this mechanism . as partner countries assume greater responsibility for managing supply chains , pepfar is moving from a direct supply role to a more advisory role . pepfar's long - term aim is to develop effective , reliable partner - country - owned and - operated supply chain systems at the national , regional , district , and local levels . at present , pepfar's role in supporting partner - country hiv program supply chains ranges from direct control of major supply chains to providing training and technical assistance . pepfar generally relinquishes control of the arv drugs once they reach a partner country's central warehouse ; from that point on , partner countries are responsible for ensuring that the drugs reach patients . pepfar determines the level and type of supply chain assistance primarily on the basis of each country's treatment program and supply chain capacity and the state of its hiv epidemic . for example , in some countries , pepfar may directly procure almost all arv drugs and centrally control supply chains through an implementing partner such as scms . in other countries , pepfar may provide no procurement support for arv drugs and only training and technical assistance for specific elements of the partner country's supply chains , which carry out all supply chain functions with funding from pepfar , other donors , and / or the partner - country government . pepfar country teams provide technical assistance to support public and private drug supply chains for medical supplies , including usaid - purchased commodities . in response to state's comments , we revised our recommendation to reflect that another , more flexible indicator besides the one ogac had already developed may also be appropriate .