additional verification . the coast guard may also require additional verification to ensure that an sms is functioning effectively — for example , to make sure that the company has sufficiently implemented appropriate corrective actions to address any identified deficiencies . this appendix provides summary information on the coast guard's process for evaluating safety management system ( sms ) deficiencies and corrective action options if a coast guard marine inspector identifies any sms - related deficiencies during a vessel inspection . in mid - 2018 , coast guard officials identified 10 key performance indicators to be used to evaluate the performance of recognized organizations ( ro ) . information on these 10 performance indicators is summarized below . 1: number of ro - issued statutory findings divided by the number of statutory surveys conducted ( eg , 100 findings / 10 surveys = 10 key performance indicators ) . 2: number of ro safety management certificate audit findings divided by the number of safety management certificate audits conducted 3: number of ro document of compliance audit findings divided by the number of document of compliance audits conducted ( includes all types of document of compliance audits ) . 4: number of ro associations to port state control detentions under the paris and tokyo memoranda of understanding , and coast guard port state control programs . ( 2 ) to what extent do domestic commercial vessels' sms plans identify the potential for specific shipboard emergencies and include applicable response procedures ? to determine how the coast guard verifies that domestic commercial vessels' sms plans comply with federal regulations and conducts related oversight of ros , we reviewed and analyzed relevant coast guard regulations , policies , and guidance to identify the key processes and standards to be used for ( 1 ) evaluating sms compliance during vessel inspections , ( 2 ) documenting any deficiencies and taking applicable enforcement actions , and ( 3 ) conducting oversight of ros responsible for sms certifications and associated audits . we also reviewed relevant criteria , such as the international safety management code , as well as related guidelines issued by the international maritime organization and the international association of classification societies . we also obtained information from the coast guard's marine information and safety law enforcement database to identify the total number of sms deficiencies cited for u.s. - flagged vessels since april 2018 ( when the coast guard reported it began to collect such data ) . in addition , we observed the coast guard performing two annual vessel inspections and conducting oversight of an ro during an annual company sms audit . these observations cannot be generalized across all vessel inspections , but they provided us with first - hand information on the procedures used and the standards applied by the ros . further , we interviewed relevant coast guard officials and representatives of two ros — the american bureau of shipping and dnv - gl — that , collectively , account for over 99 percent of the sms certificates issued to u.s. - flagged vessels on the coast guard's behalf .