register no . ward no . rank / grade. ) chronological record of medical care standard form 600 ( rev . 6-97 ) symptoms , diagnosis , treatment , treating organization ( sign each entry ) enviro nmental / occupat ional heal th work place exposure data ( continued ) medical record , individual reported no adverse contact ( i.e . bites ) . feral cats and dogs have als o been noted in the area . rats and mice have been a nuisance ; one rat bite was reported in the summer of 2003 . waste sites / was te disposal: hazar dous waste storage on bdab is limited to used and off - spec pol products , and small s pill cleanup residue . currently , proper handling , storage , and disposal of industrial waste generated on base ( mainly oil , fuel and hydraulic fluid ) are strictly enforced . airborne exposure to base personnel from stored waste is assessed as minimal to nonexistent . no obvious signs of significant past spills or tank leakage were noted when coalition forces occupied biap , although pol personnel did drain and remove several ex tant tanks . trash and garbage are containerized and routinely collected by contractors . latrines are pumped out by trucks and waste is disposed off - biap . nuclear , biological or chemical ( nbc ) weapon exposure: there has been no evidence of any use , storage , release , or ex posure of nbc agents to personnel at this site . agricultural emissions: surrounding land is moderately agricultural . many farms are within 1-2 miles of the perimeter fence , with numerous potentially flooded fields for rice cultivation . aerial photos previous to may 2003 revealed that much of biap , including parts of the af cantonment , were rice cultivation areas . while we haven t witnessed any significant application , herbicide / pesticide use probably routinely occurs just outside the base . however , airborne exposure to base personnel is assessed as minimal to nonexistent . depleted uranium ( du ) : du is a component of some aircraft present and / or transient on / through bdab . there is no evidence of du munitions having been expended at biap . therefore , there is no potential air borne exposure to du . exposure is classified as far below permissible exposure levels . hazardous materia ls: there are only a few permanent structures on bdab . both lead - based paint and potential as bestos - containing material have been tentatively identified in various locations on biap ; however , personnel are not performing activities that involve routine exposure , thereby minimizin g health risk . there were multiple sites where iraqi hazar dous materials caches were located ; however , personnel exposures were minimize d / eliminated by removing or limiting access to the materials . occupational exposure data and risk asse ssment: 1 . noise: aircraft , aircraft ground equipment , generators and other equipment produce hazar dous noise . workers routinely exposed to hazar dous noise are those working on or near the flight line and / or in selected industrial shops .