, mobile ) services . washington , d.c.: november 17 , 2010 . fcc created the connect america fund , which will ultimately replace the high - cost fund , to make both wireline and wireless broadband available in unserved areas . within the connect america fund , fcc established support for mobile voice and broadband services , recognizing that promoting universal availability of mobile services is a vital component of universal service . specifically , fcc established the mobility fund , which is the first universal service mechanism dedicated to ensuring availability of mobile voice and broadband services in areas where service is currently not available . in 2012 , fcc dedicated $300 million ( one - time ) for extending wireless coverage in unserved areas and $500 million annually for ongoing support for mobile voice and broadband service . establishing public interest obligations for all eligible carriers . previously , carriers were required to meet state public interest obligations and limited federal duties as eligible telecommunications carriers to receive usf support payments ; however , carriers were not required to meet any specific performance standards in exchange for receiving the funds . under the usf transformation order , fcc requires all carriers to offer broadband services in their supported service areas , meet certain broadband performance requirements , and report regularly on associated broadband performance measures . for instance , one of the broadband performance requirements is for carriers providing service to fixed locations to offer actual download speeds of at least 4 mbps and upload speeds of at least 1 mbps to broadband subscribers . in the usf transformation order , fcc changed its method for distributing funds to carriers to address some of the recognized program inefficiencies . according to fcc , these changes will allow it to reduce high - cost support for carriers providing only voice services and make funds available to carriers for the deployment of both voice and broadband - capable networks . however , for those carriers receiving a waiver , fcc has not yet determined if it would impose a ceiling on the amount of support a carrier could receive per line . we and omb have each issued a report in the last 7 years critical of fcc's management of the high - cost fund and in the usf transformation order , fcc has taken several steps to address these challenges . the management challenges we identified included a lack of performance goals and measures for the program and weak internal controls , resulting in fcc's limited ability to oversee the actions of carriers or the data they provide . in 2005 , omb criticized fcc's inability to measure the effect of the fund on subscribership in rural areas or to base funding decisions on any indication of measurable benefits . to address these challenges , fcc has ( 1 ) established performance goals and measures for the high - cost program , ( 2 ) improved its internal control mechanisms over the fund , and ( 3 ) directed usac to undertake additional oversight and management actions . in 2008 , we reported that fcc lacked specific performance goals or measures for the high - cost program .