( app . i describes our scope and methodology ; app . iii lists the documents reviewed ; app . iv contains the assessment instrument ; app . v describes the panel's assessment of the guidance ; and app . vii lists the panel members and their affiliations. ) generally , the congress authorizes the corps' water resources projects every 2 years through a water resources development act . after project authorization , the corps may request construction appropriations in order to initiate a project ; the congress might not appropriate construction funding for all authorized projects . the corps uses its construction funds to support both mitigation and construction activities . according to staff in the corps' civil works program , between the 1986 act and september 30 , 2001 , 217 water resources projects were authorized , 150 of these received construction appropriations , 103 of these 150 projects did not require a fish and wildlife mitigation plan , and 47 of the 150 projects required a plan . under the federal - aid highway program , the federal highway administration must ensure compliance with federal , state , and local environmental laws and regulations . the administration apportions funds to state transportation departments for planning and constructing the national highway infrastructure . state governments determine the priorities and distribute the funds . of the 47 civil works projects authorized since the 1986 act that required a fish and wildlife mitigation plan and that received construction appropriations , 28 projects completed less than 50 percent of the mitigation before project construction began , according to the corps . of the remaining 19 projects , 7 completed at least 50 percent of mitigation before initiating construction ; 2 had not started construction but had done some mitigation ; and 10 had not started construction or mitigation . as of september 30 , 2001 , 16 of the 34 projects where construction had begun had completed 100 percent of the mitigation . the 1986 act requires the corps to initiate mitigation before or concurrent with construction , but it does not specify the amount of mitigation required — nor does any subsequent water resources development act . according to the corps , it may not complete 50 percent of the mitigation prior to initiating project construction for the following reasons: the proposed mitigation will occur in the construction area or when material excavated during construction is used to create the mitigation . for example , the corps creates wetlands with material dredged from a navigation channel . mitigation activities may be scheduled concurrently with construction as a logical construction sequence . the corps considers “construction” to begin when it receives construction appropriations , not when it actually starts construction , even though months or years may pass between the two dates . therefore , since construction appropriations fund both mitigation and construction activities , mitigation cannot technically begin before construction begins . the panel of scientific experts rated as similar the overall quality of the national fish and wildlife mitigation guidance for the corps of engineers' civil works and regulatory programs as well as the federal highway administration's federal - aid highway program .