governing the granting of schedule a authorities . the civil service reform act of 1978 ( p.l . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of the treasury and the director , opm . we will also make copies available to others on request at that time . major contributors to this report were richard w. caradine , assistant director ; thomas c davies , jr. , project manager ; and john ripper , senior analyst . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact mr. davies or me at ( 202 ) 512-9490 . in order to determine the nature of and reasons for treasury's request for customs' schedule a appointment authority for 10 positions , we asked customs' officials to explain their justification for requesting the authority . we also reviewed the request letters and supporting documentation that the treasury department submitted to opm on behalf of customs . to determine opm's process for reviewing treasury's request , we interviewed opm officials , obtained and reviewed documents related to opm's review and justification for approving the request , and obtained and reviewed the pertinent laws and code of federal regulations ( c.f.r. ) to identify the circumstances surrounding the appointments customs made under the schedule a authority and whether customs used the authority appropriately , we obtained from opm and customs listings of all schedule a appointments made under the single - agency schedule a authority ( 5 c.f.r . opm's guidance governing selection of an appointee does not require competition for such appointments , but it does require the appointee to be qualified for the position . in compliance with these regulations , customs' appointing official determined that the individual's ksas met the qualifications necessary to perform the duties and responsibilities of the position and made the selection . opm conducts oversight of federal agencies' — including customs' — single - agency schedule a appointments and determines whether those appointments comply with schedule a authority . however , opm's sampling of customs' appointments did not include any of the appointments made under the schedule a authority . the occasional opm survey that addresses , in part , the continuing need for schedule a authority was last conducted at customs in 1998 , prior to opm's approval of customs' authority for 10 positions . only the review conducted at treasury's request addressed any of the nine positions . opm found the two positions to be within the scope of customs' authority . the civil service reform act of 1978 requires opm to carry out an oversight program to ensure that agencies exercise their personnel management authorities in accordance with merit system principles and with the law and regulations that implement those principles . opm's office of merit systems oversight and effectiveness ( omsoe ) performs periodic oversight reviews of each agency's human capital practices , including the use of excepted service appointment authorities .