their reasons varied . for example , five states reported that they would continue to use their own systems . a few elaborated that their own information systems allow more detailed analyses of state performance than the information to be collected through pbdmi . additionally , an almost equal number of states saw pbdmi as an effective tool to inform stakeholders as not . table 5 lists the extent to which state data providers expect pbdmi to enhance their analytical capacity in a variety of areas . as of june 3 , 2005 , only 9 states had submitted more than half of the requested 2003-2004 school year data , while 29 states had submitted less than 20 percent ( see fig . although pbdmi officials said they will wait until august 2005 for states to submit the 2003-2004 data , they also acknowledged that many states would not be able to provide significant portions . the lack of state data is particularly acute in some programmatic areas . for example , many states have been unable to provide data on homeless and migrant students or students with limited english proficiency . states told education officials early in the process that changes to state data collection processes , systems , and definitions would be needed to provide these types of information . we found that there were various reasons why states could not provide data . some states reported that they wanted better documentation from the department in areas such as clarifying established data definitions and file format specifications needed to transmit data . states needed to make major modifications to their existing data collection and reporting processes in order to provide new information required by pbdmi . states also reported that they would not provide certain data elements that were inapplicable , hard to collect , or available elsewhere . some also reported that there was still some confusion over multiple or unclear definitions . department officials said that many states had initially overestimated their capabilities and that the data states said would be available differed greatly from what they have produced thus far . states have also noted competing demands for their time and resources stemming from nclba . because pbdmi represents a significant change in the way the department of education conducts business , it can only be accompanied effectively and efficiently by a change in management practices . however , program offices still retain much discretion over what data they will collect , how they will define it , and whether or not pbdmi's data will meet their needs . while it is the initiative's responsibility to make sure it collects data that meets the program offices' requirements , pbdmi is also responsible for developing a data collection system focused on program performance and quality data . to the extent that programmatic differences , such as those over data definitions , inhibit pbdmi's goals there should be a clear process for reconciling those differences . if pbdmi truly represents a new way of doing business , education should be able to ensure that its organizational units go along . it is difficult to see pbdmi achieving its full potential without a clear process for furthering the initiative's goals .