( app . iii provides more detailed information on our methodology. ) we performed our work from april 2006 through may 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . for retirees aged 65 and older , medicare is typically the primary source of health insurance coverage . medicare covers nearly 43 million beneficiaries . the program covers hospital care as well as physician office visits and outpatient services and , effective january 1 , 2006 , prescription drugs . medicare beneficiaries may rely on private retiree health coverage through former employment or through individually purchased medicare supplemental insurance ( known as medigap ) to cover some or all of the costs medicare does not cover , such as deductibles , copayments , and coinsurance . for 2004 , the most recent data available , the medicare current beneficiary survey ( mcbs ) found that about one - third of medicare - eligible beneficiaries obtained supplemental coverage from a former employer or union . employment - based retiree health benefits are typically offered as a voluntary benefit to retirees , thereby giving sponsors of these benefits the option of decreasing or eliminating benefits . however , some sponsors may be prevented from making immediate changes to coverage because of union contracts , for example . benefit surveys have found that the percentage of employers offering retiree health benefits has decreased , beginning in the early 1990s . for example , according to a series of surveys conducted by mercer , the percentage of employers with 500 or more employees offering health insurance to medicare - eligible retirees declined from 44 percent in 1993 to 29 percent in 2006 , although this trend had leveled off from 2001 through 2006 . ( see app . i for more information on employment - based retiree health coverage. ) sponsors typically integrate their retiree health benefits with medicare once retirees reach age 65 , with medicare as the primary payer and the sponsor as the secondary payer . several types of integration occur between sponsors and medicare . for example , some sponsors coordinate through a carve out approach , in which the sponsor calculates its normal benefit and then subtracts ( or carves out ) the medicare benefit , generally leaving the retiree with out - of - pocket costs comparable to having the employment - based plan without medicare . another approach used by sponsors is full coordination of benefits , in which the plan pays the difference between the total health care charges and the medicare reimbursement amount , often providing retirees complete coverage and protection from out - of - pocket costs . the provision of employment - based retiree health benefits may vary depending on a variety of factors , including whether the sponsor is in the private or public sector , and by industry type . the 2006 kaiser family foundation and health research and educational trust ( hret ) survey , for example , showed that 82 percent of state and local government employers with 200 or more employees offered coverage to retirees , compared with 35 percent of employers with 200 or more employees across all employer industries that offered coverage to retirees .