( see app . i for more - detailed information on our methodology for assessing the extent to which certain part d sponsors implemented their fraud and abuse programs. ) to examine the extent to which cms oversees part d sponsors' programs to control fraud , waste , and abuse , we interviewed cms officials from the center for beneficiary choices ( cbc ) , the lead office for operational oversight , and the office of financial management ( ofm ) , the lead office for program and fiscal integrity . we also reviewed documentation from cms , including cms's part d oversight strategy , cbc's program audit strategies , contracts related to ofm's part d program integrity efforts , and technical assistance provided by cms that was specific to the fraud and abuse program requirement . in conducting our work , we focused on the extent of implementation of fraud and abuse programs rather than the effectiveness of the programs in detecting , correcting , and preventing fraud , waste , and abuse . we did not investigate actual occurrences of fraud , waste , and abuse ; however , we did ask for evidence of reported cases of potential fraud , waste , or abuse that had been investigated . we conducted this performance audit from october 2006 through june 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in 2003 , congress passed the mma , which created the medicare part d program . the mma requires that all part d sponsors have a program to control fraud , waste , and abuse . cms is responsible for safeguarding the part d program from fraud , waste , and abuse . in 2003 , congress passed the mma , which created a prescription drug benefit known as medicare part d. voluntary enrollment in the medicare part d program began november 15 , 2005 , and the benefit went into effect january 1 , 2006 . although the medicare part d program is overseen by cms , part d drug benefit plans are administered by private companies that apply to cms to participate in the program . when approved , these private companies contract with the federal government to be part d sponsors and market part d drug plans directly to medicare beneficiaries . the mma includes a requirement that all part d sponsors have a program to control fraud , waste , and abuse in part d ; cms regulations establish the requirements for comprehensive compliance plans for part d plan sponsors . to guide part d sponsors in designing a fraud and abuse program that addressed part d risks , in april 2006 , cms issued recommendations for part d sponsors' fraud and abuse programs based on input from various sources , including law enforcement and industry representatives .