defining the industries . how the industries are defined would significantly affect the number of workers who would become eligible for taa through an industry certification approach . our analysis defined industries according to industry classification systems used by government statistical agencies . however , some of these industry categories are broad and may encompass products that are not adversely affected by trade . on the other hand , certain products within an industry that , as a whole , does not show evidence of a trade impact may have been adversely affected by trade . for example , the men's footwear industry might not be classified as adversely trade - impacted because it did not have a 15 percent increase in the import share of the domestic market over a 1-year period , but it is possible that certain types of men's footwear , such as casual shoes or boots , could be adversely impacted by trade . more narrow definitions would reduce the possibility of certifying workers who are not adversely affected by trade , but doing so would cover fewer workers and could increase the administrative burden for labor because it might have to investigate more industries . notifying workers and initiating the delivery of services . notifying workers of their eligibility for taa has been a challenge and would continue to be under industry certification . under the current certification process , workers are linked to services through the petition process . the specific firm is identified on the petition application , and state and local workforce agencies work through the firm to reach workers in layoffs of all sizes . however , getting lists of employees affected by layoffs and contacting them is sometimes a challenge for states and would remain so under industry certification . for industry certification , however , there are no such procedures in place to notify all potentially eligible workers in certified industries . for large layoffs in a certified industry , state and local workforce agencies could potentially use some of the processes they currently have in place to connect with workers , but it is not apparent that there would be a built - in link to workers in small layoffs . in large layoffs , firms with 100 or more employees are generally required to provide 60-days advance notice to state and local workforce agencies , who then work with the firm to provide rapid response services and inform workers about the various services and benefits available , including taa . however , in smaller layoffs in certified industries , or when firms do not provide advance notice , workforce agencies would not know that the layoff has occurred and therefore would not be able to notify the workers of their eligibility for taa . verifying worker eligibility . verifying that a worker was laid off from a job in a certified industry to ensure that only workers eligible for taa receive taa benefits may be more of a challenge under industry certification than under the current system . for example , it may be difficult to identify the specific workers who made a product in the certified industry if their employer also makes products that are not covered under industry - wide certification .