what to do with that car ? donate it to the council of the blind ! donating a car is trouble free ; you get a tax write off , and do your part for a worthy cause . the california council of the blind has helped in the workplace since the thirties . simply call , we'll pick up that car , running or not , in most cases , plus boats - - even real estate can be donated for a write off . call our live operators for your free pick up now - - 800 xxx - xxxx . 800 xxx - xxxx , that's xxx - xxxx . table 4 details 54 specific vehicle donations identifying the amount of proceeds charities receive from donated vehicle sales relative to the amounts taxpayers claim as tax deductions for donated vehicles . information on this judgmental set of 54 vehicle donations were obtained from 4 charities in 4 states . the individual cases or cases in aggregate are for illustration only , and cannot be used to generalize vehicle donations overall . government and consumer organizations provide guidance to donors to assist them in making informed decisions about donating vehicles . guidance is also available to charities to assist them in selecting , hiring , and managing third - party agents . a partial list of resources is included in table 5 . leo barbour , carl barden , keira dembowski , michele fejfar , tre forlano , lemuel n. jackson , monica kelly , rosa leung , brittni milam - bell , amy rosewarne , sam scrutchins , addie spahr , and wendy turenne made key contributions to this report . such questions include: will the vehicle be fixed up and given to the poor and needy ? will it be resold and , if so , what share of the proceeds will the charity receive ? itemize deductions in order to receive a tax benefit from the donation . the decision to itemize should be determined by whether total itemized deductions are greater than the standard deduction . deduct only the fair market value of the vehicle . the fair market value takes into account many factors , including the vehicle's condition , and can be substantially different from the value listed in used car guides . document the charitable contribution deduction . irs publication 526 identifies requirements for the types of receipts taxpayers must obtain and the forms they must file . follow state law regarding the car titles and license plates . generally , the donor should ensure that the title of the vehicle is transferred to the charity's name by contacting the state department of motor vehicles , and keep a copy of the title transfer . donors are also advised to remove the vehicle's license plate if allowed by the state . some guidance is also available to charities with vehicle donation programs regarding accepting noncash contributions and hiring a third - party agent for fund - raising purposes . for example , irs publication 1771 , charitable contributions , substantiation , and disclosure requirements , explain federal law for organizations that receive tax - deductible contributions .