international academies . the ileas in hungary , thailand , and botswana offer opportunities for foreign prosecutors , police , and criminal investigators to interact with their u.s. counterparts . u.s. trainers share operational methods , investigative techniques , criminal trends , and current law enforcement issues with foreign law enforcement personnel . while fletc provides support for the efforts of all of the ileas , it has lead responsibility for the botswana academy and will also be responsible for a fourth academy planned for central america . fincen's mission is to ( 1 ) support law enforcement investigative efforts and foster interagency and global cooperation against domestic and international financial crimes ; and ( 2 ) provide u.s. policymakers with strategic analyses of domestic and worldwide money - laundering developments , trends , and patterns . within its overall mission , fincen's strategic plan identifies a number of strategic objectives , including preventing , detecting , and prosecuting money laundering and other financial crimes ; and establishing and strengthening mechanisms for the global exchange of information to combat money laundering and other financial crimes . regarding international cooperation , fincen is to work closely with other components of the u.s. government and its global partners to counter the threat of transnational crime to financial institutions and governments . fincen activities include , for example , the following: developing financial intelligence units . fincen supports the development of financial intelligence units in other nations to help facilitate the exchange of information in support of anti - money laundering investigations . these units — of which fincen is one model — have been established in various countries around the world to protect the banking community , detect criminal abuse of the financial system , and ensure adherence to laws against financial crime . implementing the national money laundering strategy . fincen supports treasury's initiatives highlighted in the 2000 national money laundering strategy . antiterrorism assistance . the antiterrorism training programs conducted by fletc and funded by the department of state's office of antiterrorism assistance provide technical assistance and training to foreign law enforcement in an effort to combat world terrorism . among other things , these initiatives include providing training and assistance to nations implementing counter - money laundering measures . fincen also plans to expand support of treasury initiatives concerning ( 1 ) efforts to identify those international jurisdictions that pose a money laundering threat to the united states and ( 2 ) expertise and analysis related to correspondent banking and offshore financial services . participating in the financial action task force . marshals service . justice's criminal division is responsible for developing , enforcing , and supervising the application of all federal criminal laws except for those specifically assigned to other divisions . fourteen offices or sections within the criminal division have responsibilities for international crime or other related activities , as table 4 indicates . all sensitive federal international criminal matters are coordinated through the criminal division . according to a criminal division deputy assistant attorney general , responding to international crime is an increasingly critical responsibility for the criminal division .