expanding board size . several stakeholders we interviewed supported expanding board size either permanently or temporarily so as to include more women . some stakeholders noted that expanding board size might make sense when a board is smaller , but expressed concern about challenges associated with managing large boards . evaluating board performance . another strategy we identified in our 2015 report to potentially help address low board turnover and in turn increase board diversity was conducting board evaluations . many stakeholders we interviewed generally agreed it is good practice to conduct evaluations of the full board or of individual directors , or to use a skills matrix to identify skills gaps . however , a few thought evaluation processes could be more robust . others said that board dynamics and culture can make it difficult to use evaluations as a tool to increase turnover by removing under - performing directors from boards . several stakeholders we interviewed discussed how it is important for boards to identify skills gaps and strategically address them when a board vacancy occurs , and one stakeholder said identifying such gaps could help boards think more proactively about finding diverse candidates . the national association of corporate directors has encouraged boards to use evaluations not only as a tool for assessing board director performance , but also as a means to assess board composition and gaps in skill sets . chairwoman waters , ranking member mchenry , and members of the committee , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact chelsa gurkin , acting director of education , workforce , and income security , at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or gurkinc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony include betty ward - zukerman ( assistant director ) , meredith moore ( analyst - in - charge ) , ellie klein , and chris woika . in addition , key support was provided by susan aschoff , james bennett , ben bolitzer , ted burik , michael erb , daniel garcia - diaz , monika gomez , kay kuhlman , sheila mccoy , anna maria ortiz , james rebbe , karen tremba , and walter vance . financial services industry: representation of minorities and women in management and practices to promote diversity , 2007-2015 . gao - 19-398t . washington , d.c.: february 27 , 2019 . federal home loan banks: steps have been taken to promote board diversity , but challenges remain . gao - 19-252 . washington , d.c.: february 14 , 2019 . diversity in the technology sector: federal agencies could improve oversight of equal employment opportunity requirements . gao - 18-69 . ( see fig . 5 ) in february 2019 , sec issued new guidance on its diversity disclosure requirements , which aims to clarify the agency's expectations for what information companies include in their disclosures .