courthouse . in fiscal year 2005 , congress appropriated $314.4 million for the construction of a new 41-courtroom building in los angeles , which congress designated to remain available until expended for construction of the previously authorized l.a . courthouse . including project time line , project options analysis , planning studies , proposals , and other budget data . toured l.a. federal court sites , including the spring street courthouse , the edward r. roybal federal building and courthouse , the federal building on los angeles street , and the planned courthouse site . interviewed l.a. district and magistrate judges and other court officials , the administrative office of the federal courts , the general services administration ( gsa ) , and the u.s . marshals service ( usms ) . what effects have any delays in the project had on its costs and court operations ? what options are available for the future of the project ? to determine the status of the construction of a new federal courthouse and the effects of any delays on project costs and court operations , we reviewed key documents dating from 1996 to present , including a project time line , project options analysis , planning studies , proposals , and other budget data . we toured the current l.a. federal court sites , including the spring street courthouse and the roybal building to observe the operational and security conditions of the facilities . in addition , we toured the federal building on los angeles street and the planned courthouse site . we also interviewed l.a. district and magistrate judges and other court officials , the administrative office of the u.s. courts , gsa , and the u.s . the administrative office of the u.s. courts indicated that additional details on the reasoning behind the decision to propose a 41- courtroom courthouse would be helpful . gsa officials said that the decision to propose a 41-courtroom courthouse was based on 80 percent of the federal judiciary's stated need at the time — 80 percent of 51 courtrooms is approximately 41 — and that the judiciary could fit within that space by sharing courtrooms . we added this information to the body of the report . we clarified the report in response to this comment . we did not do a detailed assessment of the possible 20-courtroom courthouse plan and , consequently , did not assess whether it provides space for future expansion . however , there may be design concepts that would leave sufficient room for expansion on the 3.7-acre site , which originally supported the 54-courtroom courthouse plan developed by gsa . our report does not make any statements related to the number of bankruptcy courtrooms required by the federal judiciary in los angeles , but does list the number of those courtrooms that gsa projects for each of the current options thus shows that the 20- courtroom courthouse option would provide 8 fewer bankruptcy courtrooms in los angeles than the other options currently being considered . assessing the validity of gsa's project budget and schedule were outside the scope of this report .