dod and sba reviewed a draft of this report . dod's director of small and disadvantaged business utilization told us that dod had no comments on the draft . small businesses won three of these five contracts . to identify trends in dod's contracting for construction and use of small business contractors , we analyzed data from dod's prime contract database for fiscal years 1997 through 2000 . using this database , we determined trends in total obligations on contracts for construction work by converting obligations into constant fiscal year 1999 dollars and using gross domestic product deflator indexes in the president's budget submission applicable to military outlays . in addition , we determined the shares of total obligations going to various classifications of business entities . we did not independently verify the accuracy of the information in dod's database . to assess the extent to which dod's contracting officers had combined construction requirements , we reviewed the laws and implementing regulations defining contract bundling and reviewed large contracts for construction awarded at selected contracting offices . using dod's prime contract database , we ranked dod's contracting offices in terms of total dollars awarded for general repair and construction work in fiscal year 1999 . ( data for fiscal year 2000 were not available at the time we were planning our work. ) the navy estimated the cost of the complex at $24.2 million . a large business received the contract , and the navy official responsible for monitoring small business contracting indicated that small businesses would have had difficulty undertaking a project of this size . the contracting officer told us that because these facilities were clustered on a compact site and were served by common cooling and mechanical systems , a single contract was awarded for constructing the entire complex . space at the construction site would not have accommodated multiple contractors . at the two locations we visited , contracting officers had submitted each of the contracts we reviewed to the appropriate sba representatives and received approval to proceed with their planned contracting approach . another six of the contracts we reviewed involved ordering construction projects under task - order contracts . in these cases , small businesses were able to participate . task - order contracts define the broad outlines of the government's needs and permit the government to place orders to acquire specific work over a fixed period within stated dollar limits . under fasa , agencies may award task - order contracts as part of initiatives to streamline federal procurement . to encourage competition , the congress established a preference for awarding task - order contracts to multiple contractors rather than to a single one and for providing each of the contractors an opportunity to be considered for specific orders . contracting officials told us that when contracting to construct a multiple - facility project , they have historically considered whether components of the project can be acquired through separate , smaller contracts suitable for award to small businesses . however , if an analysis of site and project characteristics indicated that a single contractor would be necessary in order for the work to be performed efficiently , a single contract would be awarded .