age of the well . presence of surface contamination . presence of vessels containing fluid ( eg , storage tanks ) . hydrogen sulfide ( hs ) concentration . proximity to surface water . proximity to water wells . contaminated water wells . unpaid royalties . blm receives a notice from onrr that royalties are due . costs higher than bond amount . as estimated by blm field staff , the total cost of plugging existing wells and reclaiming land exceeds the bond amount . taking these conditions into account , the policy gives broad discretion to blm field office staff to determine if a bond is adequate or should be increased . for example , if , while performing a bond adequacy review , blm field staff determine that the operator poses a risk because the cost of well plugging and reclamation exceeds the bond amount , blm can require an increase to the existing bond to cover the potential liabilities . the policy also allows blm field staff to reduce the amount of the bond if the potential federal liability is reduced , but not to a level below the regulatory minimums . when it has been determined that a bond amount is inadequate , blm policy states that the bond may be increased to any amount specified b blm staff . while the policy does not specify how the exact bond increase amount is determined , it stipulates that the bond amount should not be increased solely on the number of wells on the lease . moreover , the bond amount is not to , in any circumstances , exceed the total of the estimated cost of plugging and reclamation , the amount of uncollected royalties due and the amount of monies owed to the federal government due to outstanding violations . blm policy stresses that the judgment and ds to experience of its staff is paramount in deciding whether a bond nee be increased or is adequate . when blm field staff determine that a bond , increase is warranted , blm state office officials review the proposed increase and process or deny it . according to blm's 2006 and 2008 bond adequacy policies , blm is “mindful” of the need to maintain an acceptable risk level , yet to not place an undue financial burden on operators . industry officials told us that increasing bond amounts for small operators can be burdensome in that surety companies may be unwilling to provide small operators a surety bond without a financial audit of their business , which in some circumstances can cost the operator between $25,000 and $30,000 . as a result , these officials told us that small operators frequently rely on personal bonds to meet blm's bonding requirements , which in some circumstances can further tie - up their already limited financial resources and impair their ability to perform the required reclamation . further , blm officials told us that in recognition of the potential burden on small operators , they may work directly with a small operator to develop and implement a plan for having the operator reduce their risk instead of requesting a bond increase .