flight testing . the joint estimating team projects that flight testing will require more time and effort than the program office has built into its current schedule . continuing delays in delivering test aircraft are expected to hamper and further compress test schedules . in particular , the joint team projects that the two aircraft dedicated to carrier suitability tests will be late off the production line , thereby delaying test activities . it also projected that the jsf will require about 2,700 hours of flight testing for mission systems , significantly more than the 1,700 hours that the program office currently estimates . manufacturing production hours . the joint estimating team projects that production span times for the jsf will be longer than the program office estimates based on the program's performance to date and experience of recent programs , such as the f / a - 18 e / f and the f - 22a . the span time is an indicator of how long the manufacturing effort takes and when flight testing can begin . the program office assumes that span times will decrease over the course of the development contract . we note that span times typically increase during development , as was the case for both the b - 2 bomber and f - 22a programs . program officials believe that their estimate is more accurate and that providing extra funding to address future risks is premature and does not provide incentives for contractors to control costs . the program office attributes its lower cost estimate to several factors . first , the quantity , quality , and flexibility of the jsf laboratories should enable the program to reduce more risks in a laboratory environment , rather than through flight testing , which is considerably more expensive . in addition , the program's efforts to develop the final software system infrastructure early should reduce significant software problems later in the program , according to the program office . the program office also believes that costs will be lower because progress in several key development areas is either matching plans or is ahead of where legacy programs were at similar points of time in their development . for example , the program is currently reducing engineering staff as planned . the program is also producing software at a rate significantly higher than that of the f - 22a program and is at least 18 months ahead of where the f - 22a program was at a similar point in developing mission systems , according to program officials . officials told us that they intend to fund the fiscal year 2010 development budget based on the joint team's higher estimate . however , it is not clear at this stage which estimate will serve as the basis for future budget submissions . the program office and joint estimating team also projected procurement funding requirements for the 6-year period fiscal years 2010-2015 based on dod plans to accelerate procurement of operational aircraft . through this effort , dod wants to recapitalize tactical air forces sooner and mitigate projected fighter shortfalls in the future .