transportation . according to the ftr , coach - class service is to be utilized unless an agency determines that an exception is warranted . for example , an exception may be granted to allow a special agent to use business class accommodations when the protected individual is doing the same and security demands warrant it . in the case of presidential campaign travel , the secret service may also accompany protected individuals aboard chartered aircraft . the secret service reimburses campaign committees for the seats occupied by its special agents . in 1977 , we were asked to review the secret service's reimbursement method , and in that decision stated that gao did not object to the method used by the secret service as long as it was used consistently and the amount reimbursed did not exceed the first - class airfare . lodging and other use of hotel rooms . the secret service utilizes hotel rooms for various purposes when protecting a candidate . the purpose of the room dictates the authority the secret service relies on to authorize payment and the related requirements . hotel rooms used exclusively for special agent overnight sleeping facilities are governed by the ftr . the ftr allows agencies to pay for lodging based on per diem allowances set by gsa for the applicable location and date or the actual expenses of the travel . actual expense allowance , which can be in excess of the per diem rate , is permitted for a variety of reasons , such as costs escalating due to special events ( eg , sporting events or disasters ) or because of mission requirements . however , the maximum amount that an employee may be reimbursed under the actual expense allowance method is limited to 300 percent of the applicable per diem rate . the secret service also utilizes hotel rooms for operational purposes . for example , the secret service may use a room as a command center or reserve rooms adjacent to the protected individual to better secure the individual . in addition , to meet operational security demands , the secret service may require a certain number of special agents to stay in the particular hotel that the protected individual is staying and within certain proximity to the individual . the legal authorities the secret service relies on to pay for these kinds of rooms do not limit how much the agency can pay . the secret service's travel expenses for the 12 individuals protected during the 2016 presidential campaign totaled approximately $58 million , according to our analysis of secret service data . travel expenses included airfare , vehicle rentals , hotel rooms , meals and incidental expenses , and baggage charges for special agents accompanying protected individuals . the $58 million in travel expenses was used by the secret service to support 3,236 travel stops made by the 12 protected individuals throughout the presidential campaign . the breakdown of these expenses and number of travel stops by campaign committee and protected individual are shown in figure 2 below . of the $58 million the secret service incurred in 2016 presidential campaign travel expenses , $17.1 million was for reimbursements to the 4 campaign committees for 2,548 chartered aircraft flights .