but there are considerable challenges ahead . for example , as noted by the aerospace safety advisory panel in its most recent annual report , nasa now has the difficult task of training new employees and integrating them into organizations that are highly pressured by the shuttle's expanded flight rates associated with the international space station . as we stressed in our previous testimony , training alone may take as long as 2 years , while workload demands are higher than ever . the panel also emphasized that ( 1 ) stress levels among some employees are still a matter of concern ; ( 2 ) some critical areas , such as information technology and electrical / electronic engineering , are not yet fully staffed ; and ( 3 ) nasa is still contending with the retirements of senior employees . officials at johnson space center also cited critical skill shortages as a continuing problem . furthermore , nasa headquarters officials stated that the stress - related effects of the downsizing remain in the workforce . addressing these particular challenges , according to the aerospace safety advisory panel , will require immediate actions , such as expanded training at the centers , as well as a long - term workforce plan that will focus on retention , recruitment , training , and succession and career development needs . the workforce problems we identified during our review are not unique to nasa . as our january 2001 performance and accountability series reports made clear , serious federal human capital shortfalls are now eroding the ability of many federal agencies — and threatening the ability of others — to economically , efficiently , and effectively perform their missions . as the comptroller general recently stated in testimony , the problem lies not with federal employees themselves , but with the lack of effective leadership and management , along with the lack of a strategic approach to marshaling , managing , and maintaining the human capital needed for government to discharge its responsibilities and deliver on its promises.to highlight the urgency of this governmentwide challenge , in january 2001 , we added strategic human capital management to our list of federal programs and operations identified as high risk . our work has found human capital challenges across the federal government in several key areas . first , high - performing organizations establish a clear set of organizational intents — mission , vision , core values , goals and objectives , and strategies — and then integrate their human capital strategies to support these strategic and programmatic goals . however , under downsizing , budgetary , and other pressures , agencies have not consistently taken a strategic , results - oriented approach to human capital planning . second , agencies do not have the sustained commitment from leaders and managers needed to implement reforms . establishing a mentoring network for project managers . we will provide a more detailed assessment of the agency's progress in achieving its human capital goals as part of our review of nasa's fiscal year 2002 performance plan requested by senator fred thompson . alongside these initiatives , nasa is in the process of responding to a may 2001 directive from the office of management and budget on workforce planning and restructuring .