blm concurred with our recommendation . in response to our recommendation , in 2011 , blm developed its risk - based production inspection strategy , which classifies wells as either high - priority or low - priority for inspections based on multiple factors . in december 2010 , the interior inspector general identified weaknesses with the quality of inspections conducted by inspection and enforcement program personnel and made a number of recommendations . in july 2012 , blm issued a program oversight policy that , among other things , requires state offices to conduct periodic internal control reviews of the inspection and enforcement program at blm field offices with ongoing oil and gas activities . since 2011 , we have designated interior's management of federal oil and gas resources as a high - risk area vulnerable to fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement . in our february 2017 high - risk series update , we reported that interior has taken some actions to address production verification and human capital challenges by , for example , using special , higher salary rates to hire and retain key oil and gas staff such as blm inspectors . however , the agency's management of federal oil and gas resources remains an area vulnerable to fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement . in our 2017 high - risk series update , we added a new high - risk area on improving management of federal programs that serve tribes and their members . we reported that , among other things , interior's bureau of indian affairs mismanages indian energy resources held in trust and thereby limits opportunities for tribes and their members to use those resources to create economic benefits and improve the well - being of their communities . you asked us to examine blm's oil and gas inspection and enforcement program . this report ( 1 ) describes the distribution of oil and gas inspection and enforcement program workload and workforce among blm's field offices for the past 5 years and ( 2 ) examines the extent to which blm conducted internal control reviews in accordance with its july 2012 oversight policy . blm has taken some actions to address these weaknesses . specifically , the inspection and enforcement program manager said that blm headquarters did not consistently track and monitor the extent to which state offices completed field office internal control reviews . in addition , figure 3 shows a map of our categorization of blm's 33 field offices by their workload and workforce activity level . from fiscal years 2012 through 2016 , based on our review of blm documentation and interviews with agency officials , blm took both short and long - term actions to address this imbalance , such as temporarily re - assigning inspectors from some medium activity field offices to some highest activity offices . a specific example of how blm addressed this workload and workforce imbalance on a short term basis for this period concerns two of the highest activity offices ( hobbs and dickinson ) . these offices had fewer pet inspectors on board and fewer pet inspection work months than three medium - activity offices ( pinedale , rawlins , and vernal ) .