accurate . the twf estimates partially reflected the characteristics of accurate cost estimates . for example , nnsa's contractor partially followed the best practice for properly adjusting the estimates for inflation . regarding the construction estimate , nnsa's contractor developed the estimate using pricing data that were adjusted for inflation . however , the contractor did not then normalize the data to remove the effects of inflation . according to representatives from the contractor , they did not believe data normalization was an applicable step for the twf construction estimate because the data set was too small . according to cost - estimating best practices , data normalization is often necessary to ensure comparability of data sets because data can be gathered from a variety of sources and in different forms that need to be adjusted before being used . regarding the operations and maintenance estimate , nnsa's contractor did not properly adjust the estimate for inflation over the 50-year useful life of the twf . specifically , the contractor's representatives told us that they estimated the operations and maintenance costs to be $6 million annually from 2018 through 2068 , for a total of $300 million , but they did not use an inflation rate in these calculations . adjusting for inflation is an important step in developing an estimate because if the inflation amount is not correct , the estimate is not accurate . applying the wrong inflation rate will either result in a higher cost estimate or estimated costs that are not sufficient to keep pace with inflation . credible . the twf estimates partially reflected the characteristics of credible cost estimates . for example , nnsa followed the best practice to have an ice completed in january 2013 to validate the twf construction costs . however , because doe's project management order does not define the operations and maintenance costs as project costs , nnsa was not required to include these costs in the ice . by not including the twf operations and maintenance costs in the ice , nnsa managers may lack insight into these future costs . according to best practices , an ice can provide nnsa managers with additional insight into the twf's potential operations and maintenance costs — in part , because ices frequently use different methods and are less burdened with organizational bias . therefore , according to best practices , an ice can be used as a benchmark to assess the reasonableness of the contractor's proposed operations and maintenance costs , improving nnsa management's ability to make sound investment decisions , and accurately assess the contractor's performance . moreover , because doe's project management order does not require it , nnsa's contractor did not follow the best practice to complete a sensitivity analysis to quantify the extent to which either the construction or operations and maintenance cost estimates could vary because of changes in key assumptions and ground rules . such an analysis is a best practice because uncertainty cannot be avoided and , therefore , it is necessary to identify the cost elements that represent the most risk and , if possible , quantify them .