reg . 5632 ( february 3 , 2012 ) ( codified at 29 c.f.r . pt . 2550 ) and amendment relating to reasonable contract or arrangement under section 408 ( b ) ( 2 ) – fee disclosure / web page , 77 fed . reg . 41,678 ( july 16 , 2012 ) ( codified at 29 c.f.r . pt . to plan sponsors and said they are considering addressing this issue as part of a joint dol , irs , and pbgc initiative to revise the form . stakeholders identified various challenges to consistently reporting information on service provider compensation . without consistent information , comparability across plans is limited and , therefore , identifying questionable fees may be difficult . fourteen of 31 respondents indicated that unclear definitions of eligible indirect compensation , reportable indirect compensation , and direct compensation created a very or extremely significant challenge . private sector pensions: federal agencies should collect data and coordinate oversight of multiple employer plans . gao - 12-665 . washington , d.c.: september 13 , 2012 . 401 ( k ) plans: increased educational outreach and broader oversight may help reduce plan fees . gao - 12-325 . washington , d.c.: april 24 , 2012 . e - filing tax returns: penalty authority and digitizing more paper return data could increase benefits . gao - 12-33 . washington , d.c.: october 5 , 2011 . 401 ( k ) plans: improved regulation could better protect participants from conflicts of interest . gao - 11-119 . washington , d.c.: january 28 , 2011 . private pensions: additional changes could improve employee benefit plan financial reporting . gao - 10-54 . according to a 2013 letter from the american society of pension professionals & actuaries ( asppa ) submitted to dol , asppa members noted that there have been conflicting interpretations of the instructions for schedule c. for example , one disclosure might reflect certain compensation and expenses of a mutual fund as reportable on one line of schedule c , while another disclosure for the same type of payments might be reportable on a different line of schedule c. this uncertainty results in the same types of information being reported inconsistently , as most preparers are not inclined to challenge where the disclosure should appear and , therefore , preparers typically report the information as it is provided to them . while this satisfies the plan's disclosure obligations , it produces incomparable and less reliable data . adding to inconsistencies in fee reporting is ten continuing confusion with the rules on soft dollar disclosure.respondents indicated confusion about the rules on soft dollar disclosure was a very or extremely significant challenge . dol officials said that it published frequently asked questions ( faq ) in 2009 and 2010 respectively , which included clarification on the reporting of soft dollar compensation , but some respondents indicated confusion and inconsistencies still exist . stakeholders also identified challenges with collecting compensation information from service providers . eleven of 15 representatives of plan sponsors and their service providers responding to our survey indicated that receiving service provider fee information in differing formats is extremely or very challenging .