gao - 13-591 . washington , d.c.: june 28 , 2013 . cuba democracy assistance: usaid's program is improved , but state could better monitor its implementing partners . gao - 13-285 . washington , d.c.: january 25 , 2013 . we provided a draft of this report to state for its review and comment . state provided written comments , which we have reprinted in appendix iii , as well as technical comments , which we incorporated , as appropriate . state provided additional information about its efforts to establish policies and guidance to provide a supportive environment for administering and overseeing grants . in particular , state noted that , in addition to the policies and guidance described in our report , the department has implemented processes regarding grant - making authority and certification for grants officials and has cooperated with the office of management and budget on governmentwide foreign assistance management issues . state concurred with our recommendations to develop processes for ensuring that bureaus and missions conduct appropriate risk assessments and that grants officials complete required documentation . specifically , state indicated that it will modify risk assessment guidance to include suggestions from our report , provide additional training focused on risk assessment , and specifically evaluate compliance with risk assessment requirements in state's own assessments of internal controls at bureaus and posts . state also indicated that it will increase the emphasis on file documentation and expand the extent of file reviews during these assessments at bureaus and posts to help ensure that grants officials complete required documentation for all grants . in addition , state concurred with our recommendation to follow up systematically on recommendations from state's internal reviews of its grants management . specifically , it said that it will require formal responses to recommendations from its grant management assessments at bureaus and posts , to include recommendation implementation status updates . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committee and the secretary of state . in addition , the report is available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3149 or gootnickd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . our objectives were to examine ( 1 ) the policies and guidance that the department of state ( state ) has established to administer and oversee grants and cooperative agreements , and ( 2 ) the extent to which the implementation of those policies and guidance provides reasonable assurance that funds are being used as intended . to define grants and cooperative agreements ( grants ) and to describe the roles and responsibilities of those involved in managing state's grants and the key activities grants officials must conduct during each phase , we reviewed state's grants policy directives ( gpd ) and state's required grants officials training , and interviewed state officials .