voluntary guidance to industry . in 2012 , fda finalized guidance that lays out a strategy for phasing out the use of medically important antibiotics for growth promotion or feed efficiency , and for bringing other uses under veterinary oversight . specifically , in guidance for industry #209 , fda outlined and recommended adoption of two principles for judicious use of antibiotics in food animals: ( 1 ) limit medically important antibiotics to uses that are considered necessary for assuring animal health , such as to prevent , control , and treat diseases , and ( 2 ) limit antibiotic uses to those that include veterinary oversight . in 2013 , to help ensure implementation of its strategy , fda issued guidance for industry #213 , which asked animal drug companies to voluntarily stop labeling antibiotics for growth promotion or feed efficiency within 3 years . the guidance also recommended more veterinary oversight . specifically , fda ( 1 ) asked drug companies to voluntarily revise labels of medically important antibiotics to remove the use for growth promotion and feed efficiency ; ( 2 ) outlined procedures for adding , where appropriate , scientifically supported uses for disease treatment , control , or prevention ; and ( 3 ) recommended that companies change the means of sale or dispensation from over - the - counter to require veterinary oversight — either through a veterinary feed directive for antimicrobials administered through feed or through a prescription for antimicrobials administered through water — by december 31 , 2016 . according to fda , as of january 3 , 2017 , all applications for medically important antimicrobials , including antibiotics , for use in the feed or water for food animals have been aligned with the judicious use principles as recommended in guidance for industry #213 , or their approvals have been voluntarily withdrawn . as a result of these actions , these products cannot be used for production purposes ( eg , growth promotion ) and may only be used under the authorization of a licensed veterinarian , according to fda . agencies respond to colistin resistance in may 2016 , the u.s. department of defense identified the first person in the united states to be carrying e.coli bacteria with a gene that makes bacteria resistant to colistin . the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) also found colistin - resistant e. coli in samples collected from the intestines of two pigs . according to the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , these discoveries are of concern because colistin is used as a last - resort drug to treat patients with multidrug - resistant infections . finding colistin - resistant bacteria in the united states is important because in 2015 scientists in china first reported that colistin resistance can be transferred across bacteria via a specific gene . hhs and usda are continuing to search for evidence of colistin - resistant bacteria in the united states through the national antimicrobial resistance monitoring system , according to the hhs website . fda's action partially addressed our 2011 recommendation to provide sales data by food animal group and indication for use .