however , the charter has not been completed . we were not requested to review the uniform program for special forces . the services' decision - making processes for developing new uniforms are fragmented and vary in their effectiveness . the marine corps used a decision process that followed the two key elements that we identified as essential to produce a successful acquisition outcome , and produced a combat uniform that the marine corps officials have found effective . however , the army and air force did not follow the two key elements , and they found that their new uniforms did not meet specific mission requirements . dod said that ( usd ) at&l will place additional emphasis on the importance of following guidance related to the defense acquisition system and the joint capabilities integration and development system through oversight by the joint clothing and textiles governance board . if dod completes the joint clothing and textiles government board charter clearly outlining the roles , responsibilities , and authorities of the board to include oversight of the services' uniform development process , then the action proposed by the department may satisfy the intent of the recommendation . however , dod did not specifically identify how the joint clothing and textiles governance board plans to provide consistent , long - term oversight to ensure the military services use policies and procedures to guide their development activities in the future . as we discuss in our report , without additional guidance from dod on the use of clear policies and procedures for a knowledge - based approach to developing effective uniforms , some services may continue to lack assurance that they have a disciplined process that is capable of delivering uniforms that meet warfighter requirements . dod concurred with our recommendation that the secretary of defense direct the secretaries of the military departments to identify and implement actions necessary to enable the joint clothing and textiles governance board to develop and issue joint criteria for uniforms prior to the development or acquisition of any new camouflage uniform and establishing a timeline for developing joint standards . one important action includes the completion of the board's charter outlining the roles , responsibilities , and authorities of the board . dod stated that the military departments participate in the joint clothing and textiles governance board's efforts to develop joint criteria for camouflage uniforms by providing appropriate research and development and functional expertise . dod stated that draft joint criteria for camouflage uniforms have been developed and are going through the dod approval process , which dod estimated will be completed in the 2nd quarter of fiscal year 2013 . finally , dod stated that once approved , the joint criteria will be used prior to the development or acquisition of new camouflage uniforms . while we are encouraged to learn that dod has draft joint criteria moving through the approval process , the development of the joint criteria has been an ongoing effort for several years — initially to be completed by february 2011 , then in december 2012 , according to dod's status report to congressional committees , and now no later than march 2013 , in response to our recommendation .