tax expenditures should be part of that reassessment . spending channeled through the tax code results in forgone federal revenue that summed to an estimated $844 billion in 2007 and has approximated the size of total discretionary spending in some years . yet , little is known about the performance of credits , deductions , and other tax preferences , statutorily defined as tax expenditures , which are often aimed at policy goals similar to those of federal spending programs . because tax expenditures represent a significant investment of resources , and in some program areas are the main tool used to accomplish federal goals , this is a significant gap in the information available to decision makers . while some progress has been made in recent years , agencies still all too often lack the basic management capabilities needed to address current and emerging demands . as a result , any new administration will face challenges in implementing its policy and program agendas because of shortcomings in agencies' management capabilities . accordingly , our transition effort will synthesize our wide range of work and identify the key management challenges unique to individual departments and major agencies . additionally , our transition work will emphasize five key themes common to virtually every government agency . select a senior leadership team that has the experience needed to run large , complex organizations: it is vitally important that leadership skills , abilities , and experience be among the key criteria the new president uses to select his leadership teams in the agencies . the senate's interest in leveraging its role in confirmation hearings as evidenced by senator voinovich's request to us to suggest management - related confirmation questions and your interest in hearings such as this one will send a strong message that nominees should have the requisite skills to deal effectively with the broad array of complex management challenges they will face . it is also critical that they work effectively with career executives and agency staff . given that management improvements and transformations can take years to achieve , steps are needed to ensure a continuous focus on those efforts . agencies need to develop executive succession and transition - planning strategies that seek to sustain commitment as individual leaders depart and new ones arrive . for example , in creating a chief management officer ( cmo ) position for dhs , congress has required the dhs cmo to develop a transition and succession plan to guide the transition of management functions with a new administration . more broadly speaking , though , the creation of a chief operating officer ( coo ) / cmo position in selected federal agencies can help elevate , integrate , and institutionalize responsibility for key management functions and transformation efforts and provide continuity of leadership over a long term . i am pleased to be here today to contribute to your hearing on the upcoming transition . as agreed with the subcommittee , i will discuss the preparations under way at the government accountability office ( gao ) to meet our responsibilities under the presidential transition act to assist the incoming administration as well as the 111th congress . the 2009 presidential transition will be a unique and critical period for the united states .