many supervisors said they have never done so . we heard at some focus groups with supervisors that supervisors assess whether a teleworking employee's performance has declined through performance reviews and monitoring work flow . we have previously reported that day - to - day performance management activities like those discussed below can help marginal staff improve performance . the act requires that teleworkers and nonteleworkers be treated the same for the purposes of work requirements , performance appraisals , and promotions , among other managerial decisions . we heard from agency officials and in ten of our eleven focus groups with teleworkers and supervisors that telework status did not affect performance expectations . this has led to less confusion about what agencies should do . education and labor officials said that opm's announcements of unscheduled telework and unscheduled leave have created difficulties for them . the electronic system will generate annual reminders to employees to renew their telework agreements . further , teleworkers cited personal benefits that they believed improved their performance . for example , we heard at all of our focus groups with teleworkers that employees often felt more productive , were able to concentrate on their work better , and experienced fewer interruptions when they teleworked . supervisors in our focus groups described numerous strategies and resources they use to supervise and stay connected with their employees , including teleworking employees . for example , some supervisors required all employees to work in the office on a certain day so everyone could participate at weekly staff meetings in person . supervisors in one focus group said they monitor employees' work tasks online , regardless of telework status . figure 5 shows the strategies and resources supervisors discussed using to manage teleworking employees . because employees are not always collocated with their supervisors , these strategies can also be used for managing across locations , whether the employee is teleworking or not . for example , an employee is allowed to telework as soon as a supervisor signs the agreement . however , if the agreement is not forwarded on to the poc , it is not included in the telework data the poc transmits to the telework coordinator and tmo . thus it may not be included in the telework data used by senior department leadership for decision - making and reporting purposes . further , labor officials said that they began collecting information on scheduled telework hours quarterly beginning in october 2015 , but they did not yet routinely use the data because they are known to not reflect actual telework hours . additionally , labor officials said that many employees have situational telework agreements and use them to telework fairly regularly . such situational telework would not be part of the scheduled telework hours reported . these officials also said they are working towards improving telework data quality to use more data to manage and expand the telework program . because employees may adjust their telework agreement throughout the year , labor's manual process may prevent the agency from being able to have accurate real - time data on the total number of employees authorized to telework or accurate expectations for levels of scheduled telework .