payment . cms action: implement cms action: implement npi program , which assigns npi program , which assigns a unique identification number that a unique identification number that is required for claims payment to is required for claims payment to health care providers . health care providers . cms action: consolidate and cms action: consolidate and transition the edc , which are transition the edc , which are data centers that house medicare data centers that house medicare claims processing software claims processing software systems , reducing the total systems , reducing the total number from more than 20 number from more than 20 different facilities to 2. different facilities to 2 . higlas is a major cms initiative to modernize medicare's accounting and financial management systems by creating a single , integrated financial accounting system to be used by cms and all medicare contractors . cms began planning the transition to higlas in 2001 to satisfy the objectives of the federal financial management improvement act and the joint financial management improvement program , but implementation was delayed until the mac implementation began in 2005 . in particular , the concurrent mac and npi implementations led to provider enrollment workload backlogs and , subsequently , claims payment and processing challenges , as providers were not paid until provider enrollment applications were processed . according to cms , three of the six macs we studied inherited a backlog of unprocessed provider enrollment applications from the legacy contractors ( see table 2 ) , which led to claims payment delays . cms officials told us they were aware that the mandated deadline for legacy contractors and macs to enroll providers in the npi program overlapped with the mac transition schedule in five jurisdictions , but acknowledged that they did not initially understand the full effect that the overlap with the npi implementation would have on the mac transitions . to a lesser extent , cms reported other mac operational challenges implementing the edcs and higlas in conjunction with the macs . according to cms officials , implementing the edcs in conjunction with the macs was challenging , in part because each legacy contractor had unique claims - processing system features that either had to be consolidated in the broader mac jurisdictions or discontinued . for example , a legacy contractor may have configured its claims - processing system with 150 to 200 unique computer applications , each with specialized functions . cms reported establishing a workgroup that was responsible for reviewing these unique claims - processing system applications and determining whether or not the application would be transferred to the edc for use by the new mac . cms officials said implementing higlas in conjunction with the macs was most problematic in mac jurisdictions where some legacy contractors had transitioned to higlas prior to the mac transition and others had not . for example , in one case a mac had to maintain two financial management systems temporarily until the entire jurisdiction was converted to higlas . cms's higlas timeline initially required legacy contractors to convert data into higlas format just before cutover to the mac .