the comments are included in appendix ii of this report . in concurring with our recommendation to complete a corrosion baseline study as soon as possible , dod noted that , as part of the long - term strategic plan , it would continue its efforts to evaluate corrosion costs . however , dod did not indicate when it would complete the overall , departmentwide baseline study of corrosion costs that we believe is essential for establishing cost - effective resource priorities and tracking progress towards reducing corrosion and its impacts on equipment and infrastructure . we continue to believe that this baseline study should be completed as soon as possible . the officials said they expect to have firm estimates by december 2004 . in a separate study during the preparation of the strategy , however , dod's corrosion task force developed a preliminary schedule of funding requirements for corrosion reduction efforts . these estimates projected that dod and the military services would need a total of about $1.9 billion in departmentwide corrosion prevention and mitigation resources for fiscal years 2004 through 2009 . dod corrosion officials said that the task force's figures represent an initial attempt to estimate dod's and the military service's funding needs . table 1 shows the task force's estimated funding requirements for corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts for both military equipment and infrastructure for the period from fiscal year 2004 through fiscal year 2009 . the task force's estimates indicated that the services would need about $74.4 million in fiscal year 2004 for corrosion prevention and mitigation projects , but this funding has not been allocated or obligated . the task force identified 93 projects that had high potential returns on investment and were ready to be undertaken immediately . these projects included , for example , the installation of sensors to monitor fuel tanks and pipes for corrosion and the use of corrosion - inhibiting lubricants for avionics equipment on military aircraft . we recognize that the authority to manage the activities of non - major weapons systems and infrastructure programs lies , for the most part , with the military services and that is why our recommendation is directed to the secretaries of the services . as a result , we would expect the secretaries to implement the recommendation by establishing policy guidance appropriate to their respective services . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense ; the director , office of management and budget ; and other interested congressional committees . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-8365 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . key contributors to this report were lawson gist , jr. , allen westheimer , hector wong , nancy benco , and katherine lenane . a detailed description of our scope and methodology is provided in appendix i . dod acquires , operates , and maintains a vast array of physical assets , ranging from aircraft , ships , and land vehicles to buildings , ports , and other facilities .