dhs concurred with all three of our recommendations . dhs concurred with our first recommendation ( 1 ) that s&t develop a mechanism to ensure that tes documents its approval of operational test agents , ( 2 ) the extent that the test agents meet the requirements in the t&e directive , and ( 3 ) the criteria that tes uses in reviewing these test agents for major acquisition programs . specifically , dhs stated that the director of tes issued a memorandum to test area managers and tes staff regarding the operational test agent approval process which describes the responsibilities , considerations for selection , and the process necessary to select an operational test agent . in addition , dhs stated that tes is drafting memos approving operational test agents using the new test agent approval process . dhs also concurred with our second recommendation that s&t develop a mechanism to ensure that tes documents ( 1 ) its required review of component acquisition documents required by the t&e directive , ( 2 ) the extent that these documents meet the requirements in the t&e directive , and ( 3 ) the criteria that tes uses in reviewing these documents . dhs stated that the director of tes issued a memorandum to test area managers and tes staff detailing the role of tes in the document review process and the process that tes staff should follow for submitting their comments to these documents . finally , dhs concurred with our third recommendation that s&t arrange for an independent assessment of asp's operational test results . dhs stated that the asp program is under review and does not have an operational test scheduled . however , tes is investigating the option of using a separate test agent to conduct operational testing of asp , which would allow tes to perform the independent assessment and fulfill its independent oversight role as outlined in dhs policy . such actions , if taken , will fulfill the intent of this recommendation . dhs also provided technical comments on the report , which we incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees and the secretary of homeland security . the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9627 or at maurerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . an effort to develop nd deploy technologie to llow custom nd border protection to detect ncler or rdiologicl mteri from conveynce , such as trck , entering the united ste t lnd nd port of entry .