fsa has acknowledged the need to refer codebtors . its action plan includes time frames for developing and testing the systems enhancements deemed necessary for recording and reviewing relevant information needed for referring debts to treasury's offset program , including the codebtor's name , address , and taxpayer identification number . based on our review of documents provided by fsa , the agency has established a codebtor code for its system and has begun to input codebtor information . according to fsa , as of our fieldwork completion date , 254 loans with codebtors totaling about $8.3 million had been identified for initiating the due process required for referral to treasury's offset program in december 2002 . given that the vast majority of the agency's direct farm loans have codebtors , fsa has a substantial challenge ahead to obtain the required information to refer all eligible debt for codebtors to treasury's offset program . as we noted at the december 2001 hearing , data provided by fsa officials showed that about $400 million of new delinquent debt became eligible for treasury's offset program during calendar year 2000 . although fsa officials acknowledged that debts became eligible relatively evenly throughout the year , debts eligible for offset were being referred to treasury only once annually , during december . as a result , a large portion of the $400 million of debt likely was not promptly referred when it became eligible . fsa agreed that quarterly referrals could enhance possible collection of delinquent debts by getting them to treasury earlier . after the hearing , we recommended that the secretary of agriculture direct the administrator of fsa to monitor effective completion of the planned automated system modifications to refer eligible debt to treasury's offset program on a quarterly , rather than annual , basis . fsa plans to make quarterly referrals to treasury's offset program and intends to make the first such referral in december 2002 . in august 2002 , fsa issued guidance to the field offices for review of eligible debts for the december 2002 referral . in september 2002 , fsa informed its field offices that quarterly referrals are now required , and the agency has determined that the same due process notification and referral process that has been used annually will be used quarterly , except under a shorter time frame . at the december 2001 hearing , we pointed out that fsa had paid out about $293 million in losses for guaranteed farm loans since fiscal year 1996 , but like rhs , fsa had missed opportunities to potentially collect millions of dollars related to guaranteed loan losses because they were not treated as federal debt . we also noted while performing work at fsa that the agency had revised its guaranteed loan application applicable to guaranteed loans made after july 20 , 2001 , to include a section specifying that amounts fsa pays to a lender as a result of a loss on a guaranteed loan constitute a federal debt .