gao - 05-926 . washington , d.c.: september 29 , 2005 . we are not making new recommendations in this report . however , this report's analysis provides additional support for past recommendations to develop realistic cost estimates and to create a comprehensive assessment plan to measure achievement of desired benefits . we provided a draft of this report to dod for comment . army officials provided oral comments on the draft indicating that dod concurred with our report . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; and the secretary of the army . the report is also available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 404 ) 679-1816 or pendletonj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . to determine the extent that the army addressed legislative requirements to report information regarding key equipment and personnel needs for its reorganized modular force , three analysts independently reviewed the army's fiscal year 2013 modularity report and compared the report to the legislative requirements . a fourth analyst adjudicated the differences in cases of dispute and determined a final categorization . the analysts used an evaluation tool that listed the legislative requirements and categorized the extent to which the army's report included information required for each reporting element from the mandate . the categories were “addressed,” “addressed in part,” and “not addressed.” “addressed” meant the report thoroughly addressed all components of the requirement . “addressed in part” meant that one or more , but not all , components of the requirement were addressed , or that all components of the requirement were addressed , but the information provided was insufficient to answer the requirement fully due to limitations in the data or information provided . “not addressed” meant that the report did not address any part of the requirement . to gain a full understanding of the method and data the army used to prepare the report , clarify the significance of the information presented in the report , and obtain additional information that addressed the legislative reporting requirements , we met with army officials knowledgeable about compiling information for the report , about key enabler personnel and equipment , and about equipment reset , doctrine , and force structure changes . specifically we met with army officials from the offices of the deputy chiefs of staff for personnel ( g - 1 ) , logistics ( g - 4 ) , operations and plans ( g - 3 / 5 / 7 ) , and programs ( g - 8 ) ; training and doctrine command ; army national guard ; and army reserve who provided data for the army's fiscal year 2013 modularity report .