financial incentives . usps is also offering a financial incentive to mailers . specifically , those who adopt full service intelligent mail® will receive a postage discount , in addition to other worksharing discounts . service performance measurement capability . intelligent mail® is expected to allow usps to gather more comprehensive and detailed service performance information and measure it against established performance standards , which is intended to help keep usps accountable to its stakeholders . this feature was also intended to enable usps to meet requirements in the postal accountability and enhancement act of 2006. concept , known as workring , generlly involveilerualifying for redced poge rte y performing certin ctivitie such as prepring nd barcoding mil o it corted y usps automted eqipment . the full service program directors — the senior vice president of intelligent mail and address quality and the chief information officer — head the program . their responsibilities include reviewing deliverables and conducting governance meetings that focus on the status of the program , issues , and risks . the program management office activities are performed by a contractor , accenture , who reports directly to the program directors . the responsibilities for the contractor include program status reporting , communications management , scope and release management , issue and risk management , and selective quality deliverable audits . the marketing technology and channel management group is the business organization responsible for business mail acceptance process re - engineering and field deployment activities , including field preparedness , developing test plans , newsletters , and training and awareness . the sales and marketing portfolio is the it organization responsible for development , integration , and systems deployment activities . ct , the gency nd the contrctor gree on price nd the contrctor assumell reponility for ll co nd the resulting profit or loss . in may 2009 , we issued a report that described the intelligent mail® program and stated that key management actions were not taken , such as developing a comprehensive strategic plan ; preparing information about the program's costs , including its anticipated savings or cost reductions ; and establishing a risk mitigation plan . in addition , we highlighted commercial mailers' concerns about the implementation of the program . specifically , the mailers stated that usps communication efforts were insufficient ; usps and mailers may not be ready for implementation given usps's short time frame to simultaneously design , develop , test , and implement the intelligent mail® program ; and the program's pricing and benefits may not be sufficient to encourage mailers to participate . as such , we recommended that usps develop a comprehensive intelligent mail® strategic plan , as well as develop a plan that addresses how usps will mitigate program - level risks . in its response to our recommendations , usps agreed to develop a comprehensive intelligent mail® strategy , including all planned phases and the associated functions and systems , program goals , and measures of success ; and a plan that addresses how it will mitigate risks .