resident satisfaction . one example of an indicator of resident satisfaction is whether a project has met target occupancy rates established in the project's business agreements . an osd official and private partner representatives told us they use occupancy as an indicator of satisfaction based on the assumption that residents would move if they were dissatisfied with their home's condition . however , based on our focus groups , this may not be a reliable assumption . although most residents are not required to live in military housing , residents in each of our 15 focus groups indicated a variety of reasons for choosing to live in privatized housing , many of which did not have to do with their satisfaction with the quality or condition of their homes . for example , residents in our focus groups cited other factors influencing their decision to live in privatized housing , such as living in close proximity to military medical or educational services for children or other family members that are part of the military's exceptional family member program , a lack of safe and affordable housing in the surrounding community , and access to quality schools . osd and military department officials have recognized that the current indicators for measuring performance do not consistently focus on or prioritize the private partners' performance with maintaining housing units and ensuring resident satisfaction . for example , army officials told us they are no longer using occupancy rates as an indicator of resident satisfaction and have taken steps to standardize performance indicators across all army projects , while still allowing for flexibility at the installation level to modify the weight of indicators to provide incentives reflective of the specific needs of the installation . limitations to the current indicators may hinder the military departments' ability to accurately determine private partner performance . however , osd and military department officials told us they have not yet reevaluated the specific indicators used to determine whether a private partner has met a specific metric because doing so will require negotiation with each of the private partners for each project . nonetheless , without reviewing the specific indicators used to award performance incentives , osd and the military departments do not have assurance that the information the military departments are using to award these incentives reflects the actual condition of the housing . the housing projects' business agreements typically include a requirement for the private partner to maintain a records management system to record , among other things , maintenance work requested and conducted on each housing unit . according to private partner officials , each company uses commercial property management software platforms for activities such as initiating maintenance work orders and dispatching maintenance technicians . some private partner representatives stated that while data from the work order tracking systems are primarily used to prioritize and triage maintenance work , the data were never intended to monitor the overall condition of privatized housing units .