these indices are generally reasonable . both the population and economic indices are calculated from data derived from reliable sources that are also publicly available , providing additional transparency for the model . for example , according to dhs officials , the fiscal year 2008 analysis used gross metropolitan product ( gmp ) estimates prepared by the consulting firm global insight for the united states conference of mayors and the council for the new american city that were published in january 2007 , and reported on the gmp for 2005 . we did our work from september 2007 and february 2008 , in accordance with generally accepted government accounting standards ( gagas ) . dhs has adopted a process of “continuous improvement” to its methods for estimating risk and measuring applicants' effectiveness . inherent uncertainty is associated with estimating risk of terrorist attack , requiring the application of policy and analytic judgments . the use of sensitivity analysis can help to gauge what effects key sources of uncertainty have on outcomes . sensitivity of the risk model as a result of its changes to the model . gao's analysis of the fy 2007 model:it takes sizable changes to the weights of these indices used to quantify risk to change the areas that compose the tier 1 list . for those urban areas ranked near the bottom of tier 2 list , very small changes in the weights for the indices used to quantify risk can result in changes in eligibility . according to dhs officials , there were a number of changes in the rankings , and these changes were driven by the required change in fy2008 to use msas . for fiscal year 2007 dhs assessed the applications submitted by states and eligible urban areas . dhs used a peer - review process to assess and score the effectiveness of proposed investments by: engaging the states in identifying and selecting peer having peer reviewers individually score investments , and assigning peer reviewers to panels to make final effectiveness score determinations . dhs allocated funds based on the risk scores of states and urban areas , as adjusted by their effectiveness scores . shsp provided a minimum allocation , ensuring no state or territory's allocation falls below the minimum levels established by the usa patriot act . for uasi , dhs established maximum and minimum allocation to minimize variations in some urban areas' final allocations between years . minimum = 0.375% of all funds appropriated for shsp and uasi . two tiers according to relative risk . tiering was established from a policy judgment by dhs leadership , according to dhs grant officials . tier i included the 6 highest risk areas ; tier ii included the other 39 candidate areas ranked by risk . fy 2007 tier i urban areas = 6 urban areas , $410,795,000 allocated ( 55 percent of available funds ) . fy 2007 tier ii urban areas = 39 urban areas , $336,105,000 allocated ( 45 percent of available funds ) . available funds - - $429,896,500 . tier ii = 53 areas ( 14 more than fy 2007 ) and eligible for 45 percent of available funds - - $351,733,500 .