pub . 94 – 580 , 90 stat . 2795 ( 1976 ) ( codified as amended at 42 u.s.c . although rcra amended the solid waste disposal act , pub . 89 – 272 , title ii , 79 stat . 997 ( 1965 ) , the amended law is nonetheless sometimes referred to as rcra , a convention we follow here . subtitle c of rcra , 42 u.s.c . ch . 82 , subch . iii ( §§ 6921-6939f ) , governs hazardous waste management . hereinafter , references are to rcra as amended . formal state deferral approach , the epa region still negotiates the level of oversight appropriate for the particular site . epa may also defer oversight of the long - term cleanup of a site eligible for the npl through the other cleanup activity ( oca ) approach . oca deferrals go to one of four types of entities ( described below ) : states , federal agencies , tribes , or private parties . oca deferral to a state places a site under that particular state's environmental regulations , as opposed to cercla authorities . in contrast to formal state deferrals , the oca deferral to a state involves no formal epa oversight other than periodic discussions between epa regional officials and state officials . since 2012 , epa guidance has indicated regions should have these discussions . oca deferral to federal agencies places a site under that particular federal agency's oversight and authorities , according to epa . certain federal agencies , such as the department of defense , have responsibility and authority for some or all cleanups at their facilities . epa assigns a status of “other cleanup activity: federal facility lead” to federal facilities that epa tracks in its cerclis database and are being cleaned up outside of the npl approach ( these sites are eligible for listing but are not listed on the npl ) . epa periodically checks in with other federal agencies on the status of cleanup work at these sites . oca deferral to a tribe places the site under that tribe's environmental regulations . epa periodically checks in with tribal regulators on the status of cleanup work at these sites . oca deferral to private parties applies to certain sites where the cleanup is conducted by a private party . epa most commonly addresses the cleanup of sites eligible for the npl by “deferring” oversight to approaches outside of the superfund program . epa regions select the cleanup approach and defer oversight of more than half the sites eligible for the npl to approaches outside of the superfund program , primarily through oca deferrals . though oca deferrals include the majority of npl eligible sites , epa's guidance on this approach is less detailed than guidance on other approaches . epa provides regions with discretion in selecting the cleanup approach for a given hazardous waste site . according to the superfund program implementation manual — which lists epa's superfund program management priorities , procedures , and practices — each region is to select an appropriate cleanup approach after determining a site is eligible for the npl .