ii. ) several factors may account for the lower overpayment amounts assessed physician practices in fiscal year 2001 . under pca , probe samples are designed to include a small number of claims per physician , so any overpayments discovered through the probe review process will likely be limited . carriers employ a variety of review mechanisms . automated checks , applied to all claims , are designed to detect missing information , services that do not correspond to a beneficiary's diagnosis , or other obvious errors . we assessed the claims review accuracy of the three carriers in our study — national heritage insurance company in california , wisconsin physicians service insurance corp , and healthnow ny — by validating initial medical review decisions involving physician claims . we contracted with dyncorp — the medicare contractor already selected by cms to administer its comprehensive error rate testing ( cert ) program — to use the same review procedures developed for cert in assessing a sample of medical review decisions made by the three carriers . we requested that each carrier identify the universe of physician claims subjected to prepayment and postpayment review during march 2001 , limiting the universe to those claims submitted by m.d.s and d.o.s . from that universe , dyncorp randomly selected 100 claims for review . then , dyncorp obtained the medical record information for those claims from the carrier , and reviewed each payment decision for accuracy . the number of carrier decisions examined by dyncorp staff exceeded the number of claims because , in several instances , carriers had reviewed multiple lines on a claim . the results of this assessment of carrier medical review decisions can only be generalized to the universe of claims from which the samples were drawn: claims from m.d.s or d.o.s that underwent medical review in march 2001 by one of our three carriers . in reviewing payment accuracy , dyncorp staff was tasked with determining if the carrier's initial review decision was supported by the medical record and carrier policies in place at the time the payment decision was made . specifically , dyncorp assessed whether documentation in the medical records supported the procedure codes and level of service that was billed . where their determination differed from that of the carrier , dyncorp staff discussed those claims with the carrier's medical review staff . in all but one case , the parties came to agreement on whether payment decisions were accurate . in the one case where agreement could not be reached , the acting deputy director of cms's program integrity group — a physician — provided a second opinion that confirmed the carrier's decision . the results obtained from dyncorp's review of physician claims undergoing medical review were consistent across the three carriers . the accuracy of decisions across all the sampled medical reviews for each carrier exceeded 94 percent . ( see table 7. ) in those cases where medical review errors were identified , nhic california and wps decisions resulted in a mix of underpayments and overpayments . however , healthnow ny's review errors were concentrated in decisions to pay claims in full that should have been denied or reduced .