we have added this information to the report . furthermore , our report does not imply that it is cost effective to maintain a supply of vaccines for every possible permutation of each disease of concern . in fact , the report clearly states that it is unlikely that vaccines will ever be developed for all strains of diseases and the report also notes that vaccines should be developed for those of primary concern to usda . we do not state that vaccines are necessary for all foreign animal diseases . we acknowledge , however , that our report did not address the need to develop marker vaccines , and we have modified the report to reflect this need . finally , in response to usda's comment about simplifying the decision - making process on vaccine use , we have added language to the report to clarify usda's position . we modified our report to state that while all u.s. veterinary schools offer information about foreign animal diseases , only about 26 percent of the nation's veterinary graduates have taken a course specifically dedicated to foreign animal diseases . we also revised the report to note that , according to usda officials , all veterinary students must take instruction in infectious diseases and pathology which , according to these officials , includes foreign animal diseases . in addition , we modified the report to state that usda officials believe that requiring accredited veterinarians to be licensed ensures that they receive basic training in foreign animal diseases . furthermore , we note that there are a small number of personnel trained specifically in the diagnosis of foreign animal diseases . finally , we modified the report to state that usda officials told us that new efforts are being made to strengthen aphis' role in colleges of veterinary medicine to provide information on various aspects of regulatory medicine and that usda intends to increase the number of veterinarians entering public service by working to increase the veterinary student awareness of potential careers in public service . we modified our report to include a statement about usda's memorandum of agreement . the following are gao's comments on the department of homeland security's letter dated february 14 , 2005 . dhs provided minor modifications to the total number of agricultural inspectors transferred from usda as well as the number of inspectors remaining as of october 2004 . we have added a footnote to our report to address this change . dhs commented that following the transition of inspectors from usda to dhs in mid - 2003 , the number of agricultural inspections increased . we agree , and our report clearly identifies this increase , but also states that between 2002 and 2004 , the overall number of inspections declined . at the time of our draft report , usda noted that they were unaware of the full scope of research efforts supported by dhs , and dhs officials told us that there was no overall departmental coordination of policy and budget issues concerning agriculture security research .