now that opportunity is gone . officials also said that cutting production quantities from the final years of the program eliminate projected savings in annual unit procurement costs . typical of many dod acquisitions , air force program officials had projected future budgets assuming that the marginal costs for buying f / a - 22s would decrease with each passing year of production as a result of manufacturing efficiencies , productivity projects , and more economical buying quantities . this means that aircraft bought late in the production program usually cost less than those bought earlier in the program . for example , the average unit flyaway cost paid for f / a - 22s was $212 million per aircraft bought in 2002 and $178 million in 2003 . before the budget decision , officials had projected average unit flyaway costs to decrease to $127 million , $111 million , and $108 million in fiscal years 2007 , 2008 and 2009 , respectively . now that the program has been truncated after 2008 , the less expensive aircraft in 2009 and beyond will not be bought and unit costs are now projected at $135 million in 2007 and $149 million in 2008 ( increase associated with close - out of production ) . osd has directed that the 2005 quadrennial defense review include an assessment of joint air dominance in future warfare and the contributions provided by all tactical aircraft , including the f / a - 22 . an announced defense goal is to redirect investment from areas of conventional warfare , where the united states enjoys a strong combat advantage , toward more transformational capabilities needed to counter “irregular” threats , such as the insurgency in iraq and ongoing war on terror . dod is also conducting a set of joint capability reviews to ensure acquisition decisions are based on providing integrated capabilities rather than focused on individual weapon systems . the study results , although still months away , could further impact the future of the f / a - 22 program including the modernization plan . the f / a - 22 will have to compete for funding , priority , and mission assignments with operational systems , such as the f - 15 and f / a - 18 , and future systems , such as the joint strike fighter and the joint unmanned combat air systems . air force leadership and the air combat command continue to support the multi - mission role for the f / a - 22 and do not want to reduce or eliminate the new capabilities and missions . therefore , if restructuring is required , program officials are considering other options to accommodate the program within reduced funding and fleet size . they are considering the possibility of moving forward with blocks 20 and 30 but curtailing block 40 because its enhancements are slated for those aircraft that have been cut by the budget decision ( refer to table 1 ) . officials said that some of the enhancements planned for block 40 could be retrofitted into the block 20 and 30 aircraft .