it will be years before demonstrations validate that the fcs will provide needed capabilities . while the army should have firmed requirements at the outset of its development program , it now faces a daunting task in completing this work by the preliminary design review and subsequent milestone review in 2009 — 6 years into a 10-year development schedule . many of fcs's thousands of requirements are almost certain to be modified as the program approaches these reviews . the army's decision to restructure the program in early 2007 , reducing the set of systems from 18 to 14 , resulted in requirements modifications , deferrals , and redistributions that affected the requirements balance among the remaining systems . as this program adjustment is implemented , further requirements changes to the systems , as well as to the network , could be required . the army also continues to make design trade - offs to accommodate restrictions such as space , weight , and power constraints ; affordability ; and technical risks , such as transport requirements for manned ground vehicles . fcs software development is hampered by incomplete requirements and designs for the information network . while the army's user community expects that fcs will deliver capabilities that are as good as or better than current forces , this position is based on the results of modeling and simulation activities — it will be several years before field demonstrations validate the user community's position . fcs's critical technologies remain at low maturity levels . according to the army's latest technology assessment , only two of fcs's 44 critical technologies have reached a level of maturity that , based on best practice standards , should have been demonstrated at program start . the first large scale fcs network demonstration — the limited user test in 2012 — will take place at least a year after the critical design review and only a year before the start of fcs production . that test will seek to identify the impact of the contributions and limitations of the network on the ability to conduct missions . this test will be conducted after the designs have been set for the fcs ground vehicles , a situation that poses risks because the designs depend on the network's performance . a full demonstration of the network with all of its software components will not be demonstrated until at least 2013 when the fully automated battle command system is expected to be ready . when fcs reaches its planned preliminary design review in 2009 , the army will have expended over 60 percent of its development funds and schedule . however , much will still need to be done in terms of technology maturation , system integration and demonstration , and preparing for production — all three knowledge points fundamental to a successful acquisition . large scale demonstrations of the network will not occur until after manned ground vehicles , which depend on the performance of the network , are already designed and prototyped . the army does not plan to demonstrate that the fcs system of systems performs as required until after the production decision for the core program in 2013 .