open dialogue . in an open dialogue , an agency collects and responds to information , observations , and perspectives provided by a range of citizens and other external experts and stakeholders . they can do this using online tools , including websites or interactive webinars , and in - person meetings or forums . the agency can also use open dialogues to request input and suggestions on a set of options under consideration , and to better understand the values , perspectives , and preferences of citizens and stakeholders . prize competition or challenge . when an agency identifies a problem to solve or a specific goal it wants to achieve with the assistance of members of the public , it can hold a prize competition or challenge . in a competition or challenge , the agency invites interested members of the public to submit potential solutions to this problem or challenge . the agency then evaluates these proposals and provides a monetary or non - monetary award for those that meet specific criteria and are selected as winners . in addition to the contact named above , benjamin t. licht ( assistant director ) and adam miles supervised the development of this report . theodore alexander , joyce y. kang , steven putansu , lauren shaman , erik shive , wesley sholtes , and andrew j. stephens made significant contributions to this report . sarah gilliland , robert robinson and stewart small also made key contributions . shea bader , giny cheong , jeffrey demarco , alexandra edwards , anthony patterson , and timothy shaw verified the information in the report . ballentyne , perrie . challenge prizes: a practice guide . united kingdom: nesta , 2014 . brabham , daren c. crowdsourcing in the public sector . georgetown digital shorts . washington , d.c.: georgetown university press , 2015 . brabham , daren c. using crowdsourcing in government . washington , d.c.: ibm center for the business of government collaborating across boundaries series , 2013 . department of health and human services idea lab . the hhs competes playbook , accessed on january 12 , 2016 , http: / / www.hhs.gov / idealab / what - we - do / hhs - competes . desouza , kevin . table 3 . information on roles and responsibilities from hud's switchboard charter responsibility champion of the project . approval and sign off of project components and requirements . overall ownership of project from an organizational perspective ; management of budget . overall management of the project timelines and scope . oversight of internal and external communications ; sets direction for messaging . manages day - to - day activities of project . provide input into process , manage ideas and responses . the charter also explains the process and criteria used to evaluate an idea , and determine whether it should be elevated for consideration and potential implementation . hud supplemented this charter with a document outlining policies and procedures for investigating , responding to , and implementing an idea . figure 5 summarizes these procedures .