gao - 13-628r . washington , d.c.: may 29 , 2013 . export promotion: the export - import bank's financing of dual - use exports . in addition , the report is missing information . washington , d.c.: april 12 , 2012 . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees . we will also send copies to the president and chairman of ex - im , the secretary of defense , and the secretary of state . in addition , this report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8612 or gianopoulosk@gao.gov . to examine ex - im's compliance with its requirements for monitoring the end uses of the dual - use exports it financed in fiscal year 2012 , and to identify what dual - use exports , if any , ex - im financed in fiscal year 2013 , we reviewed ex - im documentation regarding its dual - use policy , including a 1997 memorandum on implementing that policy ; ex - im documentation associated with each of the three dual - use transactions ex - im financed in fiscal year 2012 ; and data on dual - use determinations . in addition , we interviewed ex - im officials in washington , d.c. , who review applications for the financing of dual - use exports and monitor end - user compliance with dual - use requirements , including the vice - president of the engineering and environment division . we did not independently verify the information provided to ex - im . through interviews with cognizant agency officials about ex - im's procedures for identifying and categorizing dual - use transactions in its application processing system , we determined that ex - im data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of identifying the dual - use exports financed under ex - im's dual - use authority in fiscal years 2012 and 2013 . we conducted this performance audit from march to august 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . kimberly gianopoulos , ( 202 ) 512-8612 , or gianopoulosk@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , adam cowles , assistant director , and kay halpern made key contributions to this report . in addition , ashley alley , martin de alteriis , karen deans , etana finkler , and hai tran provided technical assistance and other support . export - import bank: financing of dual - use exports . gao - 12-628r . export promotion: the export - import bank's financing of dual - use exports . gao - 10-1052r . washington , d.c.: september 15 , 2010 . export - import bank: financing of dual - use exports . gao - 13-628r . washington , d.c.: may 29 , 2013 .