( see fig . 1 for an example of the payment formula. ) the ambulance national fee schedule was phased in from april 2002 through december 2005 by blending new fee schedule payments with historical payments . during this transition , the national fee schedule portion constituted a greater share of the total blended ambulance payment each year until january 2006 , when the historical payment portion of the blend was discontinued . for example , in the latter part of 2002 , total ambulance payments were a blend of 20 percent under the national fee schedule and 80 percent under the historical payment system . in 2004 , the blend was 60 percent national fee schedule and 40 percent historical payment system . ( see fig . 2 for further details on the blending of historic payments and national fee schedule payments. ) the mma introduced several temporary ambulance payment provisions that were implemented in 2004 , the last of which expires at the end of 2009 . cms estimates that these payment adjustments will add $840 million to medicare ambulance services over the 5 years they are in effect . the mma provisions increased payment rates for urban and rural transports and for transports 51 miles or greater . the mma also provided a significant base rate increase for transports originating in super - rural areas and provided for a new regional fee schedule based on the nine census divisions . the regional fee schedule was designed to ease the transition from the historical payment system to the national fee schedule . the introduction of the regional fee schedule overlapped with the phase - in of the national fee schedule . the regional fee schedule gave temporarily higher ambulance payments than what would generally be paid under the national fee schedule to ambulance providers in census divisions that had historically higher payments . if the regional base - rate payment was determined to be greater than the national base - rate payment for a particular region , then the region received the more advantageous blend of the regional fee schedule base - rate payment and the national fee schedule base - rate payment . for example , in the second half of 2004 under the regional fee schedule , affected regions received a blend of 80 percent of their regional fee schedule base - rate payment and 20 percent of the national fee schedule base payment rate . this base - rate payment was then further blended with historical payments as a part of the gradual phase - in of the ambulance national fee schedule . the regional fee schedule component of the base rate blend was reduced each year from 2005 through 2007 , and expires at the end of 2009 . ( see fig . 2 for further details on the blending of historical , national fee schedule , and regional fee schedule payments. ) in addition to providing for a regional fee schedule , the mma temporarily required higher payment rates for super - rural transports . as a result , base rate payments for transports originating in super - rural areas increased about 23 percent . the mma also provided for a 25 percent increase in the mileage rate for every ambulance mile traveled exceeding 50 .