dod did not concur with that recommendation . costs for the development phase of acv are on track to meet cost goals established at the start of development , based on a recent navy estimate , the acv program office , and reporting from the contractors . in september 2017 , the acv program's defense acquisition executive summary report for acv provided a navy cost estimate for development of $750.7 million , less than the $810.5 million baseline established at the start of development in november 2015 . program officials also indicated that the acv program was on track to meet cost goals . they noted that the contractors have not contacted the government to negotiate an increase in billing prices , as of december 2017 . since both of the contractors have delivered all 16 of their required prototypes and the manufacturing of the prototypes is the largest anticipated portion of acv development contract costs , most of the costs associated with the manufacturing of the prototypes have likely been realized . the marine corps made efforts to reduce cost risk to the government by adopting a fixed - price incentive ( firm target ) contract type for the construction of the prototype vehicles . as we previously reported in october 2015 , the marine corps planned to award hybrid contracts to each of the acv development contractors , which would apply different pricing structures for different activities . the marine corps awarded the contracts in november 2015 as planned . most critically , a fixed - price incentive contract type is being used for items in the contract associated with the manufacturing of the development prototypes , which was anticipated to be the largest portion of acv development contract costs . under this contract type , the government's risk is generally limited to the contract's price ceiling . incentive contracts are appropriate when a firm - fixed - price contract is not appropriate and the required supplies can be acquired at lower costs by relating the amount of profit or fee to the contractor's performance . figure 1 depicts the bae and saic prototype vehicles . after testing the prototypes , the marine corps plans to select a single contractor to continue into the production phase . the first prototypes were delivered in january 2017 and have since been undergoing developmental , operational , and live fire testing . developmental testing assesses whether the system meets all technical requirements and is used to: verify the status of technical progress , determine that design risks are minimized , substantiate achievement of contract technical performance , and certify readiness for initial operational testing . acv developmental testing includes testing for sustainability , system survivability , and water and land mobility . operational testing ( assessment ) is the field test , under realistic conditions , for the purpose of determining effectiveness and suitability of the weapons for use in combat by typical military users . live fire testing is used to demonstrate vehicle capability against a range of ballistic and non - ballistic threats expected to be encountered in the modern battlefield , such as improvised explosive devices among others . in january 2018 the marine corps started an operational assessment , which was scheduled to be completed in march 2018 .