ii . eileen r. larence , ( 202 ) 512-8777 or larencee@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , evi rezmovic , assistant director ; tom jessor ; heather may ; susan czachor ; keesha egebrecht ; sharanjit singh ; bill crocker ; janet temko ; amanda miller ; linda miller ; labony chakraborty ; and cheron green made significant contributions to this report . we also reviewed written csa audit policies and procedures . we interviewed senior cjis officials to discuss the fbi's role in ensuring timely entry of missing children reports into ncic , including cjis requirements for csa audits of leas . we also interviewed senior officials overseeing audits and local ncic usage in six selected csas . we selected csas representing six states , based on a combination of factors , including whether cjis found the csa to be in compliance with ncic policy for timely entry of missing children records in prior audits , and ensuring a mix of high and low rates of missing children reported to ncic by leas . the states we selected were: california , illinois , nevada , new york , virginia , and west virginia . we cannot generalize our work from these 6 entities to csas in all 50 states and the district of columbia , but the information we obtained provides examples of the way in which these csas were monitoring timely entry of missing children reports into ncic by leas . we compared cjis's audit policies and procedures with criteria in standards for internal control in the federal government to determine if cjis has control activities in place to enforce its directives and achieve compliance objectives . to determine the extent to which csa audits collect consistent and reliable information on lea compliance with the 2 hour entry requirement , we compared csa audit approaches for assessing leas' compliance with available ncic audit policy and guidance articulated by cjis . to determine what challenges leas face , if any , in reporting to ncic , we interviewed senior officials in leas serving nine large and mid - sized cities or counties in the six states we had selected for our first objective: los angeles , calif. ; visalia , calif. ; chicago , ill. ; peoria , ill. , ; las vegas , nev. ; new york city , n.y. ; poughkeepsie , n.y. ; fairfax county , va. ; and morgantown , w.va. we obtained perspectives on challenges in reporting to ncic from lea officials responsible for the following activities: implementing policies guiding the reporting of missing children into ncic ; training law enforcement staff on responding to reports of missing children ; taking reports of missing children from the public and entering information into ncic ; and conducting investigations of these reports . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . we selected the nine locations based on a combination of factors , including ensuring that we included both large and mid - sized cities or counties located in several different geographic regions of the country .