we disagree . dod should track the progress of its various programs to determine if the programs are worthwhile and should be continued , if the program should receive additional funding , or if changes should be made in the selection or implementation process that could result in better outcomes . further , failure to track even the most basic information , such as the number of projects completed , could result in a lack of ability to manage the program properly and poor stewardship of taxpayer money . dod partially concurred with our recommendation that the three programs develop formal feedback mechanisms consisting of interim and after action reporting , as well as project reviews if major deviations occur in a project . dod agrees that the tti and dacp can be improved and has recently taken steps in this regard . however , dod believes that due to the limited scope and duration of quick reaction fund projects , formal feedback mechanisms may not be necessary for this program . we believe that regular feedback on the progress of each program is important to help program managers mitigate risk . as stated in the report , the quick reaction fund program manager was unaware that one project ran out of funding prior to field testing the technology . had the program manager been aware of the problem , money that had not yet been allocated could have been used to finish the project . in addition , based upon our discussions with the current program manager , dod is planning to require monthly status reports for funded projects . dod partially concurred with our recommendation that the programs implement , as appropriate: ( 1 ) formal agreements to solidify up - front technology development agreements related to cost , schedule , and performance parameters that must be met at key points in time and ( 2 ) confirmation of technology readiness levels as part of the proposal acceptance process . dod indicated that it recently implemented technology transition agreements for the tti , and the dacp program also uses formal agreements . however , dod does not believe formal agreements are necessary for the quick reaction fund because it is not intended to be a transition program . also , it does not believe trls should be a factor in the proposal acceptance process . as stated in the report , we agree that formal agreements may not be appropriate for quick reaction fund projects . however , trls should be considered during the selection process . since the goal of this particular program is to prototype a new technology in 12 months or less , it is important that dod has some assurance that the technology is ready to be field tested . as discussed in the report , the quick reaction fund had to cancel one project , after $1.5 million had already been spent , because it had only achieved a trl 3 . had the selecting official known the trls of each proposed project during the selection phase , he may have decided to fund another , more mature project instead .