met . va , vha , or vba have taken actions that meet the practice . there are no significant actions that need to be taken to further address this practice . in reviewing va and its administrations , we reviewed their policies and procedures to determine to what extent they were consistent with leading practices . we did not assess whether va and its administrations were effectively implementing those policies and procedures . when assigning ratings , we did not consider draft plans or other documents currently in development or under review because it is unclear whether and when leadership will approve them . additionally , we identified requirements related to these leading practices , including those contained in regulations established by opm for strategic human capital management . for example , under the strategic human capital management regulations , agency human capital policies and procedures must align with the agency's mission , goals , and strategic objectives , and be based on comprehensive workforce planning and analysis . agencies are also required to monitor and address skill gaps within mission - critical occupations , and to evaluate succession plans for leadership positions to ensure leadership continuity . we conducted this performance audit from february 2019 to october 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we and others have identified challenges specific to va's management and oversight . these challenges have affected va's ability to accomplish its mission economically , efficiently , and effectively . for example , in april 2019 , we summarized priority open recommendations from our previous reports to address these va challenges . these recommendations cover areas affected by shortcomings in human capital management , such as veterans' access to timely health care and reform of the appeals process for disability benefits . va agreed or partially agreed with 28 of our 30 priority recommendations and is taking steps to implement them . we have also previously reported on human capital challenges across va. for example , we reported in march 2017 that va determined vba staff resources have not sufficiently kept pace with increased pending appeals , and additional staff were needed to improve timeliness and reduce its appeals inventory . we found that va's written workforce plans — which cover recruiting , hiring , and training — were not consistent with sound workforce planning practices . we recommended that vba ensure the development of a timely , detailed workforce plan for recruiting , hiring , and training new hires . as of october 2018 , va had taken steps to address this recommendation , but still needed to address risk mitigation strategies for ensuring it has appropriate capacity to manage appeals workloads and improve timeliness of appeals decisions . in addition , va officials told us in august 2017 that va had taken actions to hire more staff to update regulations on disability eligibility criteria .