ii ) . fema offered comments principally in three areas: ( 1 ) its disappointment that we had not directly addressed the issue of whether congress intended the flood insurance program to restore damaged property to its pre - flood condition ; ( 2 ) its view that the method of choosing its sample for operational reviews was appropriate and that its financial and internal controls are wide - ranging and include processes that we did not address ; and ( 3 ) its view that contrary to the impression given in our draft report , fema has worked diligently to implement the requirements of the flood insurance reform act of 2004 . fema expressed disappointment that our report made no explicit , unambiguous statement regarding whether congress intended flood insurance to restore damaged property to its pre - flood condition . we believe we have addressed the issue consistent with our statutory mandate by explaining the statutory and regulatory provisions that affect both dollar ceilings and other coverage limitations . section 208 of the flood insurance reform act of 2004 mandated gao to conduct a study of aspects of the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) , including “the adequacy of the scope of coverage provided under flood insurance policies in meeting the intended goal of congress that flood victims be restored to their pre - flood conditions , and any recommendations to ensure that goal is being met.” to address this mandate , it was necessary to consider the legal framework of flood insurance coverage established by the national flood insurance act of 1968 , as amended , and fema's implementing regulations . the amounts and limitations of flood insurance policy coverage are affected by both the statute and the regulations . in other words , flood insurance policies can only restore victims to pre - flood conditions within , but not beyond , the limits established by law and regulation . to address our mandate , we therefore explained the statutory and regulatory provisions that placed limitations on the amount claimants could recover under their flood insurance policies . our april 2005 testimony and this report make clear that the statutory ceilings on the maximum amount of coverage that can be purchased and the policy limitations that result from fema regulations may result in a policyholder's insured structure not being restored to its pre - flood condition . fema highlights a number of oversight and management procedures for the program , including those for financial management . it also noted that its method of selecting its sample for operational reviews was more appropriate than the statistically random probability sample we recommended . most of the additional oversight and management processes and controls fema noted in its comments are for financial management — an area not included in the scope of our work . our work focused on program implementation and oversight . during our review , fema managers described the operational reviews and claims inspections as the primary methods fema used for monitoring and overseeing the nfip . in support of its current sampling strategy for its operational reviews , fema cites a report it had commissioned in 1999- - - a report fema had not previously mentioned or provided to us .