reg . 20,210 ( may 1 , 2009 ) . 75 fed . reg . federal waters.deepwater horizon oil spill in the gulf of mexico on april 20 , 2010 . the department published this rule in light of the for the rules in our sample , agencies most often said that issuing an nprm would be contrary to the public interest , but they also frequently cited multiple grounds for invoking the good cause exception ( see table 1 ) . they cited multiple reasons more often for major rules than for nonmajor rules — 63 ( plus or minus 14 ) percent of major rules and 44 ( plus or minus ) percent of the nonmajor rules . ninety - two of the 123 major rules without an nprm in our sample invoked the good cause exception . in examining these 92 rules we identified five primary categories of explanations ( more than one category sometimes applies to a given rule ) : a law imposed a deadline either requiring the agency to issue a rule or requiring a program to be implemented by a date that agencies claimed would provide insufficient time to provide prior notice and comment — 36 rules ; a law prescribed the content of the rule issued — 31 rules ; the agency said it was responding to an emergency — 19 rules ; the rule implemented technical changes — 5 rules ; and all other explanations ( for example , an agency issued a final rule without an nprm in response to a court decision ) — 14 rules . after good cause , agencies most often cited specific exceptions in statutes other than apa . such exceptions were cited in 9 ( plus or minus 4 ) percent of nonmajor rules and in 34 ( plus or minus13 ) percent of all major rules without an nprm . more specifically , in 38 of the 123 major rules in our sample , we identified 18 different statutory authorities that either required or authorized agencies to issue rules without notice and comment . for example , the 2008 farm bill required the issuance of final rules to implement provisions of the law without prior notice and comment . hhs , the department of labor ( dol ) , and the department of the treasury issued several joint rules to implement provisions in the patient protection and affordable care act as interim rules . in another type of example , a provision of the social security act provides an exception to notice - and - comment rulemaking when a statute establishes a specific deadline for implementation of a rule and the deadline is less than 150 days after its enactment . this provision allowed hhs to issue several medicare rules without an nprm because the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 required some rules to be issued within shorter time frames than 150 days . table 2 provides additional information on all of the statutory exceptions that agencies cited for major rules in our sample . as mentioned earlier , in addition to the good cause exception , apa includes six broad categorical exceptions to notice - and - comment rulemaking .