fema did not agree with our recommendations . it noted that its current sampling methodology of selecting a sample based on knowledge of the population to be sampled was more appropriate for identifying problems than the statistically random probability sample we recommended . although fema's current nonprobability sampling strategy may provide an opportunity to focus on particular areas of risk , it does not provide management with the information needed to assess the overall performance of private insurance companies and adjusters participating in the program — information that fema needs to have reasonable assurance that program objectives are being achieved . fema also disagreed with our characterization of the extent to which fema has met provisions of the flood insurance reform act of 2004 . we believe that our description of those efforts and our recommendations with regard to implementing the act's provisions are valid . for example , although fema commented that it was offering claimants an informal appeals process in its flood insurance claims handbook , it must establish regulations for this process , and those are not yet complete . the most immediate challenge for the nfip is processing the flood insurance claims resulting from hurricanes katrina and rita . already , according to fema , the nfip has received about twice as many claims in 2005 as it did in all of 2004 , which was itself a record year . the need for effective communication and consistent and appropriate application of policy provisions will be particularly important in working with anxious policyholders , many of whom have been displaced from their homes . in the longer term , congress and the nfip face a complex challenge in assessing potential changes to the program that would improve its financial stability , increase participation in the program by property owners in areas at risk of flooding , reduce the number of repetitive loss properties in the program , and maintain current and accurate flood plain maps . these issues are complex , interrelated , and are likely to involve trade - offs . for example , increasing premiums to better reflect risk may reduce voluntary participation in the program or encourage those who are required to purchase flood insurance to limit their coverage to the minimum required amount ( i.e. , the amount of their outstanding mortgage balance ) . this in turn can increase taxpayer exposure for disaster assistance resulting from flooding . there is no “silver bullet” for improving the current structure and operations of the nfip . it will require sound data and analysis and the cooperation and participation of many stakeholders . mr. chairman and members of the committee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you and the committee members may have . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . for further information about this testimony , please contact norman rabkin at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or at rabkinn@gao.gov , or william o. jenkins , jr. at ( 202 ) 512-8757 or at jenkinswo@gao.gov . this statement was prepared under the direction of christopher keisling .