visns . va medical facilities can report serious incidents to their visn through two mechanisms — issue briefs that document specific factual information and “heads up” messages that allow medical facility leadership to provide a brief synopsis of the issue while facts are being gathered for documentation in an issue brief . visn offices are typically responsible for direct reporting to the vha central office . vha central office . visns typically report all serious incidents to the vha office of the deputy under secretary for health for operations and management , which then communicates relevant incidents to other vha offices , including the office of the principal deputy under secretary for health , through an e - mail distribution list . law enforcement reporting stream . responsibilities at each level are described below . local va police . most va medical facilities have a cadre of va police officers , who are federal law enforcement officers charged with protecting the medical facility by responding to and investigating potentially criminal activities . local policies typically require medical facility staff to notify the medical facility's va police of incidents that may involve criminal acts , such as sexual assaults . va medical facility police also often notify and coordinate with local area police departments and the va oig when criminal activities or potential security threats occur . va's osle . this office is the department - level va office responsible for developing policies and procedures for va's law enforcement programs at local va medical facilities . va osle receives reports of incidents at va medical facilities through its centralized police reporting system . additionally , local va police are required to immediately notify va osle of serious incidents , including reports of rape and aggravated assaults . va's integrated operations center ( ioc ) . the ioc , established in april 2010 , serves as the department's centralized location for integrated planning and data analysis on serious incidents . serious incidents on va property are reported to the ioc either by local va police or the vha office of the deputy under secretary for health for operations and management . the ioc then presents information on serious incidents to va senior leadership officials through daily reports and , in some cases , to the secretary through serious incident reports . va oig . federal regulation requires that all potential felonies , including rape allegations , be reported to va oig investigators . vha policy reiterates this by specifying that the oig must be notified of sexual assault incidents when the crime occurs on va premises or is committed by va employees . typically , either the medical facility's leadership team or va police are responsible for reporting potential felonies to the va oig . once a case is reported , va oig investigators can be the lead agency on the case or advise local va police or other law enforcement agencies conducting the investigation . we found that there were nearly 300 sexual assault incidents reported to the va police from january 2007 through july 2010 — including alleged incidents that involved rape , inappropriate touching , forceful medical examinations , forced or inappropriate oral sex , and other types of sexual assault incidents .