iv ) . usaid has not issued fully updated or complete guidance for all of these products . however , it has issued some guidance on their use . moreover , usaid officials told us that they are providing the products only on a limited basis to organizations such as unicef that have experience using them in controlled environments , such as clinics , and have issued their own guidance on the use of these products . usaid guidance inadequately addresses key benefits and risks of using specialized food products , according to usaid and implementing partners we spoke with during our field visits and our expert roundtable . this inadequate guidance hinders decision making on whether to use these products . as discussed earlier , the benefit of specialized food products is that , while more costly , they are also more nutritious , or of higher quality , than traditional food products . however , usaid has not quantified or clearly defined the degree of benefit that specialized food products may provide . in 2011 , we reported that in recent years , nutritionists have debated the appropriateness of using fortified and blended foods to prevent and treat malnutrition in young children 6 to 24 months old , who have smaller stomachs , making it more difficult for them to eat enough of the product to obtain sufficient nutrients . as a result , the benefits of some traditional specialized food products are not clear . in addition , limited information on new specialized products is available . as we previously reported , usaid and implementing partners do not know how well new specialized food products perform in promoting nutritional health indicators , such as weight gain and growth , particularly in a program setting , or how well they perform in comparison to traditional food products.which these products promote desired outcomes , is still being studied by usaid , wfp , nutritionists , and other researchers . as a result , while usaid is building knowledge about these products , it is not providing sufficient guidance on the benefits of specialized food products to implementing partners . the efficacy of new specialized products , or the extent to usaid also lacks guidance on how to adequately address risks of using specialized food products , according to implementing partners we spoke with during our field visits and our expert roundtable . a key targeting risk is that various factors implementing partners face in - country may reduce targeting effectiveness to such a degree that the additional cost of using specialized food products outweighs the potential benefit . this trade - off becomes more significant with the higher cost of new specialized food products , for which the cost per ration can be more than triple the cost of traditional food products . poor data quality , host government policies , and sharing may reduce implementing partners' ability to identify and reach recipients , but usaid's existing guidance does not adequately inform decisions on whether the reduction in targeting effectiveness is of such a degree that the use of specialized food products is no longer justified .