we have two recommendations . first , given the central role that the reasonable cause standard plays in defining the responsibilities of employers and thereby potential progress in improving the accuracy of ssns on wage statements , we recommend that the commissioner of internal revenue consider options for revising this standard . second , because changes to this standard likely would have consequences for other federal agencies , the commissioner should ensure that as irs officials consider whether and how to modify this standard , representatives of other potentially affected federal agencies are consulted prior to issuing any proposed regulations . the commissioner of internal revenue provided written comments on a draft of this report in an august 10 , 2004 , letter , which is reprinted in appendix ii . the commissioner agreed with our recommendations , saying that irs would consider revisions to the reasonable cause standard and that irs must proactively work with other potentially affected agencies on possible changes to the standard . regarding possible changes to the reasonable cause standard , we encourage irs to explore options for having employers verify the accuracy of ssns . then , if an employee provided an inaccurate ssn , the employer could take timely actions to obtain a valid ssn . in agreeing that irs should work with other agencies , the commissioner did not indicate when or how irs planned to do so . we believe it is important for irs to work with the other affected agencies before draft regulations are developed so irs has the benefit of the agencies' views when designing the draft regulations . the commissioner of ssa provided written comments on a draft of this report in an august 6 , 2004 , letter , which is reprinted in appendix iii . the commissioner said that due to the possible impact on ssa , employers , and employees , ssa should be involved in the development of any requirement imposed on employers to verify ssns provided by employees , thus agreeing with our recommendation that irs should consult other federal agencies prior to making any changes to the reasonable cause standard . in addition , at ssa's request , we clarified a description of a pilot program for verifying employment eligibility . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date .