( see app . i for a summary of these requirements and categories. ) we also asked the soc representatives to provide documentation to substantiate the status of each requirement , and we verified the reported status of each requirement by reviewing this documentation . officials explained that while they did have anecdotal information about the impact on families who provide care to recovering servicemembers , they lacked the systematic data needed for sound policy decisions — such as frequency of job loss and the economic value of family - provided medical services . a work group official told us that their proposals for increasing support to family caregivers were rejected twice by the soc , due in part to the lack of systematic data on what would be needed . the work group then contracted with researchers to obtain substantiating evidence , a study that required 18 months to complete . in january 2009 , the soc approved the work group's third proposal . a provision for caregiver benefits based on the soc's proposal was included in the ndaa 2010 bill that was introduced in may 2009 . establishing standard definitions for operational terms . one of the important tasks facing the soc was the need to standardize key terminology relevant to policy issues affecting recovering servicemembers . dod took the lead in working with its military services and va officials to identify and define key terms . dod and va officials told us that many of the key terms found in existing dod and va policy , the reports from the review groups , and the ndaa 2008 , as well as those used by the different military services were not uniformly defined . consequently , standardized definitions were important to promote agreement on issues such as identifying the recovering servicemembers who are subject to ndaa 2008 requirements , identifying categories of servicemembers who would receive services from the different classes of case managers or be eligible for certain benefits , managing aspects of the disability evaluation process , and establishing criteria to guide research . in some cases , standardized definitions were critical to policy development . the importance of agreement on key terms is illustrated by an issue encountered by the soc's work group responsible for family support policy . in this case , before policy could be developed for furnishing additional support to family members that provide medical care to recovering servicemembers , the definition of “family” had to be agreed upon . dod and va officials said that they considered two options: to define the term narrowly to include a servicemember's spouse , parents , and children , or to use broader definitions that included distant relatives and unrelated individuals with a connection to the servicemember . these two definitions would result in significantly different numbers of family members eligible to receive additional support services . dod and va officials decided to use a broader definition to determine who would be eligible for support . of the 41 key definitions identified for reconciliation , dod and va had concurred on 33 as of april 2009 and these 33 standardized definitions are now being used .