a separate account of the insurance company . the mutual funds may be managed by outside advisers , but the insurance company holds these assets for the benefit of consumers . by comparison , the investment assets covered by a cda are held by the consumer in his or her own brokerage or investment advisory account and invested in investment funds , such as mutual funds , that the insurance company has agreed to cover under a cda . the investment assets are not owned — nominally or otherwise — by the insurance company issuing the guarantee . like the investment options available under a va / glwb , the investment assets covered by a cda may or may not be managed by the insurance company or an affiliate . in this way , consumers can accumulate retirement assets in a personal account , such as an individual retirement account ( ira ) , and obtain lifetime withdrawal guarantees without having to transfer those assets to an insurance company . further , the base variable annuity contracts to which glwb riders are attached provide additional benefits not available under cdas . for example , a va / glwb contract permits the consumer to annuitize an account balance in the future and receive benefit payments from the insurance company for life at rates set forth in the annuity contract . also , with a va / glwb , if a consumer dies before annuitizing the account balance or taking lifetime withdrawals , the death benefit payable to beneficiaries is typically the greater of the sum of premiums paid or the investment account value . the additional va / glwb benefits come with additional costs , however . for example , in addition to the guarantee fee , variable annuity contracts with death benefits entail additional fees to cover the cost to the insurer . for the cdas we reviewed , the assets covered by the cda could not be annuitized in the future . the assets would first have to be sold and the proceeds used to purchase a separate annuity . in addition , unlike a variable annuity contract , a cda does not have a death benefit . similar to other annuity products , va / glwbs and cdas can provide consumers with the benefit of a guaranteed stream of income for life . that is , for a fee , they can ensure that consumers receive a minimum annual payment until they die , regardless of how long they live or how their investment assets might perform . these products may also lock investment gains into the benefit base on which future lifetime withdrawals are determined and , in the case of variable annuities , also offer other potentially beneficial features such as death benefits , which pass on certain guaranteed amounts to a spouse or other beneficiaries . we also interviewed other stakeholder groups , such as consumer advocates and industry organizations , to gain their perspective on issues related to regulation of lifetime income products considered in our review . we conducted this performance audit from february 2012 to november 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .