dhs concurred with our recommendations . in september 2006 dhs issued a final rule that established procedures governing the receipt , validation , handling , storage , marking , and use of critical infrastructure information voluntarily submitted to dhs . four government and four sector council representatives stated that the lack of prior working relationships either within their sector or with the federal government created challenges in forming their respective councils . for example , the public health and health care sector struggled with creating a sector council that represented the interests of the sector because it is composed of thousands of entities that are not largely involved with each other in daily activities . according to the sector - specific agency representative of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , historically , there was relatively little collaboration on critical infrastructure protection - related issues among sector members . despite these reported challenges , the public health and health care sector has been able to form a sector council that is in the early stages of organization . the commercial facilities sector , which also involves varied and often unrelated stakeholders nationwide , similarly reported that the disparities among stakeholders made forming a council challenging . this sector encompasses owners and operators of stadiums , raceways , casinos , and office buildings that have not previously worked together . in addition , the industries composing the commercial facilities sector did not function as a sector prior to the nipp and did not have any prior association with the federal government . as a result , this sector council has been concentrating its efforts on identifying key stakeholders and agreeing on the scope of the council and its membership . each of the 17 sectors provided a sector - specific plan to dhs by the end of december 2006 , as required by the nipp , according to dhs infrastructure protection officials . council activities have varied based on the maturity of the councils . because some of the councils are newer than others , council meetings have addressed a range of topics from agreeing on a council charter to developing industry standards and guidelines for business continuity in the event of a disaster or incident . for example , the commercial facilities government council , which formed in 2005 , has held meetings to address operational issues — such as agreeing on a charter , learning what issues are important to the sector , learning about risk management tools , and beginning work on the sector - specific plan . challenges also include providing the environment and incentives for the private sector to voluntarily share information with dhs on gaps in vulnerabilities and protective measures , information that the agency must have to be able to ensure assets and resources critical to the nation are protected . challenges also include providing organizational stability and leadership , addressing employee turnover and gaps in expertise , and enhancing agency capabilities , such as for providing analysis and warning and identifying and assessing threats and vulnerabilities . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at any time .