b . are concepts defined where necessary ? dual citizens ? american citizens who have no intention of ever returning to the united states ? naturalized citizens ? how should overseas americans be assigned to individual states ? for certain purposes , such as apportioning congress , the bureau would need to assign overseas americans to a particular state . should one's state be determined by the state claimed for income tax purposes ? where one is registered to vote ? last state of residence before going overseas ? these and other options all have limitations that would need to be addressed . how should the population data be used ? to apportion congress ? to redistrict congress ? to allocate federal funds ? to provide a count of overseas americans only for general informational purposes ? the answers to these questions have significant implications for the level of precision needed for the data and ultimately , the enumeration methodology . how can the bureau verify u.s. citizenship ? administrative records such as passports and social security data have limitations . for example , americans can reside in mexico and canada without a passport and many americans overseas do not have social security numbers , especially dependents . how can the bureau ensure a complete count without a master address list ? the foundation of the stateside decennial census is a master address list . because the list is essentially the universe of all known living quarters in the united states , the bureau uses it to deliver questionnaires , follow up with nonrespondents , determine vacancies , and determine individuals the bureau may have missed or counted more than once . the bureau lacks a complete and accurate address list of overseas americans . consequently , these operations would be impossible and the quality of the data would suffer as a result . can administrative records be used to help locate and count overseas americans ? administrative records such as passport and visa files , voter registration forms , as well as records held by private companies and organizations have the potential to help the bureau enumerate americans abroad . however , the accuracy of these records , the bureau's ability to access them , confidentiality issues , and the possibility of duplication all remain open questions . the bureau maintains that it would need more data than those that are now available to develop a cost model for an overseas enumeration in 2010 . do certain countries have requirements that could restrict the bureau's ability to conduct a count ? for example , bureau officials told us that their agency will track and report the marketing , printing , postage , data capture , and processing costs for conducting the overseas enumeration at the three test sites . all of the costs provided by the bureau are direct costs and could be specifically and uniquely attributed to a cost model for the overseas enumeration . indirect costs , however — those that are not easily attributable to the overseas enumeration such as executive management or technical labor — would still need to be determined and captured . cost will be an important factor to consider when making a decision on whether to enumerate americans overseas .