pub . 111-347 , 124 stat . safety and health ( niosh ) . the department of justice ( doj ) administers the vcf . the zadroga act established a wtchp list of covered conditions for which treatment may be provided at no cost to a wtchp enrollee if the program determines that exposure to the september 11 attacks was “substantially likely to be a significant factor in aggravating , contributing to , or causing” the enrollee's condition . the list included certain aerodigestive disorders , musculoskeletal disorders , and mental health conditions . the wtchp administrator is authorized to consider the addition of other conditions to the list and must respond to petitions that request the addition of conditions to the list . the special master of the vcf decided to rely on the medical judgment of the wtchp and use its list of covered conditions as the basis for determining eligibility for vcf compensation . in response to a september 2011 petition from members of congress to consider the addition of cancer to the list of covered conditions , the wtchp administrator created an approach for determining whether conditions should be added . although the zadroga act required the administrator to respond to petitions to add conditions to the list within a specific time frame , it did not prescribe a particular approach for determining whether conditions should be added . as a result of his review of evidence , in september 2012 , the administrator expanded the list to include 60 types of cancer . coverage for these cancer types became effective october 12 , 2012 ; treatment received after that date has been covered for enrollees with these types of cancers so long as the wtchp determines that exposure to the september 11 attacks is “substantially likely” to be a significant factor in the development of their cancers . furthermore , prospective vcf claimants with a cancer added to the list and associated with exposure to the september 11 attack sites have been eligible , since october 12 , 2012 , to seek vcf compensation for related financial loss . in light of the wtchp administrator's decision in september 2012 to add 60 types of cancer to the list , you asked us to review the administrator's approach , and the potential effects of the additions on the wtchp and vcf . in this report , we ( 1 ) describe and assess the administrator's approach to determining whether to add certain cancers to the list of covered conditions ; ( 2 ) describe effects that the addition of cancers to the list has had on the wtchp ; and ( 3 ) describe effects that the addition of cancers to the list has had on the vcf . to describe and assess the administrator's approach , we analyzed the zadroga act and 2012 proposed and final rulemaking adding cancers to the list of covered conditions , and reviewed federal standards for internal controls . among other things , the proposed and final rulemaking described the administrator's approach and his decision to expand the list to include 60 types of cancer in 2012 .