the approach is reasonable and valid . no other organizations facing comparable risk - management challenges apply notably better methodologies or tools . as part of its evaluation methodology , the homeland security institute examined the conceptual basis for fams's approach to risk analysis . also , the institute examined fams's scheduling processes and analyzed outputs in the form of “coverage” data reflecting when and where air marshals were deployed on flights . to what extent has fams's operational approach for achieving its core mission been independently assessed ? to what extent does fams have processes and initiatives in place to address issues that affect the ability of its workforce to carry out its mission ? also , as you further requested , this statement presents information on possible oversight issues related to fams . to address the questions , we reviewed ( 1 ) relevant legislation regarding fams's mission , ( 2 ) the agency's policies and other documentation regarding the strategy and concept of operations for carrying out that mission , ( 3 ) a july 2006 classified report prepared by the homeland security institute based on its independent evaluation of fams's concept of operations , and ( 4 ) documentation regarding various working groups and other initiatives that fams had established to address issues that affect the ability of air marshals to carry out the agency's mission . also , we interviewed fams headquarters officials and visited 11 of the agency's 21 field offices , where we interviewed managers and a total of 67 air marshals . we selected the 11 field offices and the 67 air marshals based on nonprobability sampling , which is a method of sampling where observations are selected in a manner that is not completely random , generally using specific characteristics of the population as criteria . results from a nonprobability sample cannot be used to make inferences about an entire population because some elements of the population being studied had no chance or an unknown chance of being selected as part of the sample . however , the interviews provided a broad overview of issues important to air marshals . more details about the scope and methodology of our work to address the questions are presented in appendix i of our january 2009 report . in conducting work in july 2009 for this statement , we requested updated information from the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , contacted the department of homeland security ( dhs ) office of inspector general to discuss its fams - related audits or inspections , and ( 3 ) reviewed fams budget data for fiscal years 2009 and 2010 . we conducted the work for this statement in july 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . fams was originally established as the sky marshal program in the 1970s to counter hijackers .