such was the case in hawaii and illinois . in hawaii , parents and mental health advocates alleged that qualified handicapped children were not receiving mental health services . in illinois , plaintiffs alleged that the state had a waiting list for children who were eligible for services . both states settled the lawsuits by agreeing to take specific steps to come into compliance with the act . although the information that osep and the states compile has helped identify some performance problems , overseeing and coordinating children's transitions to idea part b remains a challenge . the transition process involves several sequential steps , and when any of these steps are delayed , a child could miss out on critical services and providers can be left without important information on a child's status . as a child nears age 3 , local early intervention staff must inform the child's family about follow - on programs that may be available for the child , such as part b section 619 . local early intervention staff , with the approval of the family , hold a conference with the family and , if the child is potentially eligible under part b , lea officials , to discuss any services the child may be eligible to receive . this transition planning conference for children potentially eligible under part b , must occur at least 90 days before the child's third birthday . early intervention staff and the family must develop a written transition plan . and if the child is believed eligible for part b services , early intervention staff must notify the lea . the lea must determine the child's eligibility within a reasonable time frame , and if the child is found eligible , a meeting to develop an individualized education program ( iep ) for the child must be conducted within 30 days . part b requires teachers , parents , school administrators , and related services personnel to develop the iep shortly after a child is found eligible for part b services , and the iep guides the delivery of special education supports and services for a student with disabilities . while idea requires states and local programs to provide transition planning and follow these specific procedures , we found in our site visits that delays still happen . education cited preliminary unpublished data that would suggest transitions are a year - round problem . we found that delays generally occur for two reasons . first , data in annual performance reports indicate that some states have difficulty scheduling transition meetings 90 days in advance of a child's third birthday . state and local officials we interviewed said it was difficult to assemble all of the requisite individuals for the conference before the deadline . second , some state officials expressed concern about the timing of the lea's decision on a child's eligibility . the decision may be delayed until the following school year for children with summer birthdays because leas generally operate on a 9- or 10-month academic calendar . in 5 of the 7 states we visited , officials said that some children who turn 3 during the summer and are eligible for part b preschool experience service gaps when school is not in session .