at the time of our review , the navy had not approved the plan . the navy provides the fleet with spare parts through a multitiered inventory system . retail inventory refers to spare parts that are stored shipside or planeside in accordance with standardized spare parts allowance lists . does the navy have the ability to identify the impact on readiness of increased investments for spare parts ? to accomplish these objectives , we analyzed plans and initiatives applicable to the management of the navy's inventory management system . we interviewed officials and obtained information on inventory management practices at navy headquarters , the naval supply systems command , the naval inventory control point , the naval sea systems command , and the naval air systems command . we reviewed project plans , implementation status , and performance measures for six supply system improvement initiatives that navy headquarters and supply systems command officials highlighted as key efforts for mitigating future spare parts shortages and enhancing equipment readiness . we used the government performance and results act of 1993 , prior gao reports , and other key dod documents as criteria to evaluate the navy's strategic plans and initiatives . more details on our scope and methodology may be found on page 25 . will key navy logistics initiatives likely mitigate spare parts shortages that affect readiness ? in prior reports , we have identified major risks associated with dod's spare parts inventory management practices . in 1996 , and then again in 1998 , we reported that the navy's logistics system often could not provide fleet customers with necessary parts in a timely manner , despite billions of dollars invested in inventory . navy item managers interviewed for the 2001 report indicated that spare parts shortages resulted from inaccurate spare parts requirements forecasts , as well as contracting problems with private companies and repair delays at military and privately owned facilities . most recently , in our january 2003 report on major management challenges and program risks , we recommended that dod take action to address key spare parts shortages as part of a long - range strategic vision and a department wide , coordinated approach for improving logistics management processes . in addition to the risk associated with ineffective spare parts management practices , dod recently voiced concerns over the adverse impact spare parts shortages have on readiness of weapon systems . in its august 2002 report on its inventory management practices , dod said that the models it uses to determine inventory purchases are generally biased towards the purchase of low - cost items with high demands , not necessarily the items that would improve readiness the most . the report recommended that the services improve their ability to make inventory purchase decisions based on weapon system readiness . furthermore , the report recommended that the services' requests for funds to increase inventory investments be justified on the basis of the corresponding increase in weapon system readiness . retail level spare parts are funded by the navy's procurement and operations accounts . funding for initial outfitting parts is provided by procurement appropriations , while funding for replenishment parts is provided by operations and maintenance appropriations . wholesale inventory refers to spare parts the navy buys to replenish retail inventory .