focused lens . originally piloted by the coast guard in 2008 , focused lens is an ongoing initiative intended to assist coast guard units in preventing small vessel attacks in their areas of operation by identifying and directing additional resources and efforts toward the most likely points of origin for a small vessel attack , such as marinas and boat ramps . small vessel reporting system . in may 2010 , cbp developed this voluntary , online program to enable small vessel operators to expedite the reporting of their foreign voyages to and planned arrivals in the united states . this program is intended to allow cbp to assess the risks for known small vessels and associated passengers in advance of arrival in the united states and , as a result , make it easier to identify suspicious or unknown small vessels . west coast maritime pilot . under this pilot , dndo provided equipment and training to a variety of federal , state , local , and tribal agencies to enhance their ability to detect and interdict the smuggling of radiological and nuclear materials onboard small vessels . the pilot ran from september 2007 to december 2010 , and according to dndo officials , has integrated the lessons learned and standard operating procedures developed to expand assistance efforts in other regions around the country . coastal surveillance system . this report addresses the following question: the svss and implementation plan identify several dhs what actions , if any , have dhs and its components taken to address small vessel security concerns , and to what extent have they implemented action items from the svss implementation plan ? department of homeland security , small vessel security strategy ( washington , d.c.: april 2008 ) , and small vessel security implementation plan report to the public ( washington , d.c.: january 2011 ) . dhs also issued a sensitive security information version of the svss implementation plan . dhs's actions for tracking the svss implementation plan with ( 1 ) standards for internal control in the federal government , ( 2 ) provisions in dhs's svss , ( 3 ) key management practices , and ( 4 ) useful practices for performance management and measurement . further , we interviewed headquarters officials responsible for developing or addressing the action items in the svss implementation plan from the dhs office of policy , as well as four dhs components — the coast guard , cbp , dndo , and dhs s&t . in these meetings , we also discussed key initiatives that each of the four dhs components' have in place to address small vessel security and reviewed related documents on these initiatives . although these initiatives relate to the overarching goals of the svss , each initiative is not directly aligned with a specific action item in the svss implementation plan . accordingly , we focused on describing these key initiatives identified by the dhs components , not the individual action items in the plan . in addition , we conducted visits to two ports — san diego , california and miami , florida — to interview port security stakeholders and observe small vessel security activities .