gao - 18-144 . washington , d.c.: oct. 5 , 2017 . what are the risks in the approach to implementing the recommendation ? what flexibility does the approach have to respond to unintended consequences ? what are the controls and actions needed to mitigate risk to an acceptable level ? the guidance also notes that components should update risk assessments periodically as progress is made and new data become available . according to the cape tracking tool , as of september 2018 , key risks — or the absence of key risks — are documented for 85 of the 96 open sub - recommendations in the centralized tracking tool . of the 85 sub - recommendations for which risk information is identified in the centralized tracking tool's “key risks and issues” field , key risks are identified for 50 . for the remaining 35 , no risks are identified as rising to the level of being a key risk . based on information in the tracking tool , the air force and the navy have lead responsibility for the 85 sub - recommendations for which risk information is identified in the tracking tool . u.s. strategic command , joint staff , and the office of the secretary of defense have not yet included any risk information for the remaining 11 open sub - recommendations for which they have lead responsibility . in addition to updated risk information in cape's central tracking tool , the air force has updated its internal tracking tool . according to air force officials , the air force tracking tool includes both key risks — risks that require air force leadership to mitigate them — and low - level risks — risks that do not rise to the level where air force leadership should mitigate them — for each of the 60 remaining sub - recommendations for which it has the lead . for example , for the recommendation concerning air force nuclear personnel shortages , the air force's internal tracker notes the risk that over - prioritizing the nuclear enterprise could affect the air force's ability to conduct conventional operations . additionally , the air force has identified areas where there is no key risk . the navy , in addition to documenting risk information in cape's centralized tracking tool , has documented risks for many of its open sub - recommendations in an internal document called the navy nuclear deterrent review plan of actions and milestones , which tracks the navy recommendations by categories that the navy created . for example , when discussing risks for maintaining navy nc3 systems , the navy nuclear deterrent review plan of actions and milestones states that the navy monitors availability across several levels , including sustainment and modernization efforts . additionally , controls are in place at various levels to manage risks to the availability of nc3 assets . the navy nuclear deterrent review plan of actions and milestones acknowledges that if the navy does not continue to use these controls , the risk to the nc3 mission may be unacceptable . according to navy officials , risk is also examined during the navy's internal process for closing recommendations through a review by the navy nuclear deterrent mission oversight council .