the branch manager disagreed . supervisory auditor and branch manager subsequently issued three reports stating that contractor b's practice at three divisions did not constitute defective pricing . insufficient work was performed on these audits to come to any conclusion about defective pricing and as a result , the final opinions on all three audit reports are not supported . absent dcaa audit support for defective pricing , the contracting officer pursued a cas 405 noncompliance at 3 contractor divisions and recovered $71,000 . on july 17 , 2008 , contractor b settled on a defense criminal investigative service defective pricing case for $620,900 . draft audit report identified six significant deficiencies , one of which led contractor c to overbill the government by $246,000 and another which potentially led to $3.5 million in overbillings , but audit work was incomplete . the contractor had refunded the $246,000 . the original auditor reported that the $3.5 million was for subcontractor costs improperly billed to the government . the supervisor deleted the finding based on a flawed audit procedure , but did not require additional testing . first supervisory auditor and auditor were replaced after draft audit was completed . new auditor and supervisory auditor worked together to modify working papers and alter draft audit opinion from “inadequate,” to “inadequate in part,” and , finally , to “adequate.” sufficient testing was not performed to determine if the contractor had systemic weaknesses or to support an opinion that contractor billing system controls were adequate . on the basis of the “adequate” opinion , the field audit office ( fao ) approved the contractor for direct billing . dod ig recommended that dcaa rescind the final report for this audit , but dcaa did not do so . following the briefing on our investigation , the dcaa western region rescinded the audit report on may 22 , 2008 . auditor identified five deficiencies and concluded the contractor's system was “inadequate in part.” auditor did not perform sufficient work to support some findings , but supervisory auditor did not direct the auditor to gather additional evidence . after consulting with the branch manager , the supervisory auditor modified documents and eliminated significant deficiencies , changing the draft audit opinion from “inadequate in part” to “adequate.” working papers did not properly document the reason for the change in opinion and therefore do not support the final opinion . dod ig recommended that dcaa rescind the final report for this audit , but dcaa did not do so . on june 27 , 2008 , the dcaa western region informed us that it was rescinding this audit report . auditor believed audit evidence related to a 24 percent error rate in a small sample of cost pools supported an “inadequate in part” opinion and suggested testing be expanded , but supervisory auditor disagreed . auditor and supervisory auditor documented their disagreement in the working papers . supervisory auditor subsequently modified documents to change the draft audit opinion from “inadequate in part” to “adequate” before issuing the final report . certain final working papers were prepared and approved by the supervisory auditor , without proper supervision . noncompliance with gagas in the cases we investigated has had an unknown financial effect on the government .