107-296 , sec . all three bureaus have liaisons at the headquarters level . for example , ice has liaisons to cbp and cis that serve as points of contact and facilitators in convening the appropriate officials for discussions on cross - cutting issues , and ice's liaisons are to contact those agencies' liaisons should ice initiate discussions . in the field , officials in cbp , cis , and ice said they typically used meetings to maintain contact with one another , although the frequency of meetings varied — from not at all to bimonthly — and there are no requirements for field officials to meet regularly . officials who said that they met regularly also said that they found these meetings to be useful in sharing information and addressing issues that cut across programs . overall , most field officials we contacted who responded to this question in cbp , cis , and ice characterized communication and coordination among their programs as good or excellent . most sacs and asacs said that communication and coordination with cbp's inspections , cis's adjudications , and ice's detention and removal programs were good or excellent . on the other hand , about one - third of sacs and asacs who responded to this question believed that communication and coordination with cbp's border patrol and ice's intelligence programs were fair to poor . some officials said they expressed this view concerning communication and coordination with the border patrol because there were conflicts or overlaps in roles and responsibilities or a lack of communication . sacs and asacs who characterized communication and coordination with ice's intelligence program as fair or poor said they did so for such reasons as the intelligence office was not in close proximity to the sac office or they did not feel that intelligence analysts were producing analyses useful to the sac office . table 1 presents the responses by ice's sacs and asacs regarding communication and coordination with cbp , cis , and other ice programs . many sacs and asacs indicated that their positive views of communication and coordination with staff from other programs were primarily based on previous working relationships built while the programs were all in ins or customs . in addition , officials we contacted in cis and cbp , and other officials in ice , said that they also relied on working relationships that existed before the transfer to facilitate communication and coordination on cross - cutting issues . those sacs and asacs who responded that they relied to a little or no extent on pre - existing working relationships said that they provided such a response because they did not have a prior relationship to rely upon . in addition , such informal means of maintaining communication and coordination among program officials , while helpful , can be short - lived as personnel retire or resign . for the long term , processes that provide a systematic way of building and maintaining such relationships among program staff provide better assurance of effective communication and coordination . providing guidance that outlines roles and responsibilities among the programs is one way of helping to achieve systematic maintenance of such relationships .