developing contingency plans . in september 2010 , we reported that while there was a potential gap in backup coverage due to satellite launch delays , noaa had not established adequate continuity plans for its geostationary satellites . we recommended that the program's plan include implementation procedures , resources , staff roles , and timetables needed to transition to a single satellite , a foreign satellite , or other solution . in december 2012 , noaa finalized a contingency plan that generally included these elements . however , more work remains to ensure that the plan is viable . more recently , in february 2013 , we added the potential gaps in weather satellite data to our biennial high - risk list . program officials also report that the program is operating within its estimated budget of $10.9 billion . however , key information on reserves has not been reported to management . further , both the flight and ground segments have experienced delays in achieving major milestones due to technical challenges , and weaknesses in the development of master schedules could cause further delays . program officials stated that they have made improvements on how they manage cost reserves and schedules , but acknowledged that there will always be opportunities for improvement because the reserves and schedules are so dynamic on a big program like goes - r . these challenges have the potential to impact the expected launch date of the first goes - r satellite , which would delay the availability of an on - orbit backup and increase the potential for a gap in goes satellite coverage should either of the two operational satellites fail prematurely . nasa and noaa are following nasa's standard space system life cycle on the goes - r program . this life cycle includes distinct phases , including concept and technology development ; preliminary design and technology completion ; final design and fabrication ; system assembly , integration and testing , launch and checkout ; and operations and sustainment . there are key program reviews throughout each of the phases , including preliminary design review , critical design review , and system integration review . noaa and nasa jointly conduct key reviews on the flight and ground segments individually as well as for the program as a whole , and then make decisions on whether to proceed to the next phase . figure 4 provides an overview of the life cycle phases , key program reviews , and associated decision milestones . in addition , the key reviews are described in table 5 . this was an increase of $670 million from the previous estimate . the program also moved the launch dates for the first two satellites to december 2014 and april 2016 . further , in november 2007 , to mitigate the risk that costs would rise , program officials decided to remove selected program requirements from the baseline program and treat them as contract options that could be exercised if funds allowed . these requirements included the number of products to be distributed , the time to deliver the remaining products ( product latency ) , and how often these products would be updated with new satellite data ( refresh rate ) .