iii ) . the board issued its final report on the draft health risk assessment of 1,3-butadiene on november 19 , 1998.the board's 1,3-butadiene panel did not support classifying 1,3-butadiene as a known human carcinogen as had been recommended in epa's draft health risk assessment . although the panel did not reach consensus position on this issue , a majority of the panelists recommended that 1,3-butadiene be classified as a “probable” human carcinogen . this appendix contains information on the panel that reviewed epa's draft health risk assessment of 1,3 butadiene . for this panel , we identify the panelists , their primary employment , their job titles ( when available ) , and other pertinent information the panelists provided about themselves ( 1 ) on the confidential financial disclosure forms and ( 2 ) at the voluntary public disclosure session . ( 2 ) are the approaches taken to characterize plausible cancer risk reasonable given the science ? ( 3 ) are the conclusions and quantitative estimations for reproductive / developmental effects adequately supported ? a 15-member peer review panel met april 30 through may 1 , 1998 , to conduct the review . a key consideration was whether the panelists would recommend classifying 1,3-butadiene as a known human carcinogen or as a likely carcinogen . the classification will affect future regulatory actions regarding this chemical and represents one of the areas of controversy in the proposed revised cancer health risk assessment guidelines also reviewed by the board ( see app . we also present the staff director's assessments of the viewpoints of the panelists . the following information on the panelists is based on the roster of panelists that was provided to the public at the first meeting of the panel: 10 of the 1,3-butadiene panelists were professors , medical directors , or both at academic or medical institutions ; 4 worked for companies or industry - affiliated research organizations ; and 1 worked for a state environmental protection agency . ( see table 1. ) the staff office obtained other pertinent information from the panelists relevant to identifying potential conflicts of interest , assessing impartiality , and achieving a properly balanced peer review panel . some of the following information was obtained in advance of the panel's first meeting from financial disclosure forms , and the rest of the information was obtained before the voluntary public disclosure session at the first panel meeting , during it , or both . the staff office had access to information from the confidential financial disclosure statements that most of the panelists provided to the staff office before the first meeting . on the basis of our review of the minutes of the meeting , at the public disclosure session the panelists did not volunteer information about the following items that could be relevant to understanding their perspectives . one panelist was also an official of an environmental health organization . during the prior year , one panelist received fees from about 23 companies and organizations , including chemical companies and law firms . one panelist reported fees for serving as an expert legal witness , and several panelists reported fees for legal consulting work during the prior year . one panelist worked for a company that manufactures and distributes 1,3-butadiene .