figure 14 describes the sdvg process . while it can expedite work on smaller dollar value items , the use of sdvg carries cost risk for the navy and the executing contractors , which rmc leadership officials and contractor representatives acknowledged . according to these officials , under sdvg the navy , at times , will likely pay more for growth items than it would if it devoted increased time to negotiate prices , with the same being true for the contractors . for example , the navy awarded a contract delivery order for the uss bulkeley ( ddg 84 ) availability in february 2019 that included sdvg . the sdvg line item provided for up to 291 changes for growth during that availability at a firm - fixed - price of $7,144 per change based on historical needs of similar availabilities . this meant that the navy could use sdvg up to 291 times during the availability , and each of those growth items would cost the navy $7,144 regardless of whether the actual cost to the contractor underran or exceeded that amount . after the contractor identifies the in - scope growth item , the navy only must determine that the cost is equal to or less than the $25,000 threshold in the contract . nonetheless , navy officials expressed that the benefit of significantly decreased negotiation time outweighs the potential cost risk . as reflected in table 2 , the navy implemented a second new contract change process , known as loe to completion , in november 2018 . this process is used for growth work items when the price exceeds the sdvg threshold of $25,000 . loe to completion allows the navy , within the already awarded contract for the availability , to fund growth work that contractors regularly discover during availability execution without having to separately negotiate each item . through loe to completion , rmc leadership officials stated they have decreased negotiations and schedule delays during availability execution . loe to completion allows the navy to obligate funding for labor - hours and material costs for estimated growth work at the time of award , rather than having to obtain appropriate funds after repair work begins . the navy can then use those labor - hours and materials for individual growth work items over the course of the availability . according to rmc leadership officials , this provision allows them to avoid incurring additional delays . to establish the amounts of funding , the navy reviews historical cost for growth work by class type and whether the availability is a docking or non - docking availability . we discuss some factors that can contribute to schedule growth below . figure 8 shows the schedule growth for individual cno availabilities . figure 9 shows the schedule growth for the 41 cno availabilities grouped by location . figure 10 shows the schedule growth for the 41 cno availabilities grouped by ship class . navy officials stated that one potential source of delays is unplanned work , which consists of both growth work and new work . the navy defines growth work as additional work that is identified or authorized after contract award that is related to a work item included in the original contract .