state . state's democracy assistance is provided by drl , inl , and other state bureaus and offices . drl . inl provides funding for programs that combat crime and narcotics trafficking , including democracy assistance to promote the rule of law , combat corruption , and promote good governance . usaid . as the lead u.s. government agency for international development , usaid considers democracy , human rights , and governance to be central to its core mission . usaid missions overseas play a primary role in providing democracy assistance , and the regional bureaus in washington , d.c. , provide oversight of this assistance . usaid's bureau for democracy , conflict , and humanitarian assistance , headquartered in washington , d.c. , consists of several offices , including two that support the bureau's mission to promote democratic and resilient societies: the center of excellence on democracy , human rights , and governance and the office of transition initiatives . state and usaid allocated a total of more than $8.8 billion for democracy assistance in fiscal years 2015 through 2018 . state allocated 33 percent of this amount — a total of $2.9 billion , averaging approximately $727 million annually — to drl , inl , and other bureaus to provide democracy assistance . usaid allocated the remaining 67 percent — $5.9 billion , averaging approximately $1.5 billion annually . figure 1 shows the total amounts that state and usaid allocated for democracy assistance in fiscal years 2015 through 2018 . in fiscal years 2015 through 2018 , drl , inl , and usaid directed allocations for democracy assistance to many of the same countries , although the program areas they supported varied . drl , inl , and usaid directed democracy assistance allocations to a combined total of 100 countries , including 33 countries where all three entities provided such assistance ( see fig . drl directed democracy assistance allocations to 67 countries ; inl , to 45 countries ; and usaid , to 84 countries . state officials said that , because the countries have serious democracy - related challenges , the agencies providing this assistance may address these challenges from different perspectives and with different objectives . although drl and usaid directed democracy assistance allocations to many of the same countries , drl focused a greater percentage of its funding in countries where citizens enjoy fewer democratic freedoms . drl directed 70 percent of its allocations for democracy assistance in fiscal years 2015 through 2018 to less democratic countries — those rated as “not free” by freedom house's 2018 “freedom in the world” survey . in contrast , usaid directed about half of its allocations for democracy assistance during this period to “not free” countries . similarly , although drl , inl , and usaid directed their allocations for democracy assistance to many of the same countries , the entities concentrated funding in different program areas . in fiscal years 2017 and 2018 , drl and inl directed the largest percentages of democracy assistance allocations to encouraging human rights and promoting the rule of law , respectively , while usaid directed about half of its democracy assistance allocations to promoting good governance ( see fig .