aboveground miners are included . additional states may apply for inclusion as a covered state . for those exposed prior to age 21 , and subsequently contract any medically recognized form of acute or chronic leukemia , other than chronic lymphocytic leukemia , a period of only 1 year , from january 21 , 1951 to october 31 , 1958 , is required atmospheric nuclear tests from july 16 , 1945-december 31 , 1962 . onsite testing areas include the nevada , pacific , trinity , and the south atlantic test sites . certain types of leukemia , lung cancer , and lymphomas , multiple myeloma , and primary cancer of the thyroid , male or female breast , esophagus , stomach , pharynx , small intestine , pancreas , bile ducts , gall bladder , salivary gland , urinary bladder , brain , colon , ovary , or liver ( certain types ) . the payment to the victim may be offset by payments received by the victim from the department of veterans affairs based on the same radiation - related illness . time periods any time from january 1 , 1942-december 31 , 1971 . location colorado , new mexico , arizona , wyoming , south dakota , washington , utah , idaho , north dakota , oregon , and texas . this is up from 269 days when we last reported . the average processing time for downwinder claims is 244 days . this is up from 190 days when we last reported . the average processing time for onsite participant claims is 263 days . this is up from 245 days when we last reported . uranium mill employee claims and ore transporter employee claims are new categories since we last reported . however , each of these claimant categories , on average , took well over a year to process , 459 days and 392 days , respectively . table 3 shows the average number of days to process a claim for fiscal years 1992 through 2002 and the increase in processing time by claimant category since we last reported . recp officials attributed the increase in average time required to process claims to differing characteristics associated with each claim and the different factors involved in the review and application of the reca legislation , as amended , for the five claims categories . recp officials told us that since the inception of the program , its policy has been to assist claimants in any way that it can . for example , rather than denying a claim for a lack of documentation , program officials said that they allow claimants additional time to provide corroborating documentation . in many cases , claimants in the uranium industry were employed as millers , miners , and ore transporters over the course of their career . recp officials said that if a claimant filed a uranium miner claim , but could not provide sufficient documentation to satisfy reca's uranium miner requirements , recp would work with the claimant to obtain additional documentation in order to satisfy the uranium miller or transporter requirements where appropriate .