iv ) . ireland and austria had the lowest rates at around 20 percent or less , while italy and germany , with rates over 35 percent , had the highest . the two other studies , which covered limited selections of countries , suggested that effective tax rates in the united states , the united kingdom , germany , france and australia were within 5 percentage points of each other , while canada had a significantly lower rate and japan a significantly higher rate . a comparison of the country rankings based on these estimated effective tax rates for all corporations and the rankings based on our estimates of effective rates for u.s. cfcs and other foreign affiliates of u.s. mncs reveals both consistencies ( low rates for ireland and high rates for italy and japan ) and inconsistencies ( in the cases of netherlands and the united kingdom ) . business activity can be measured in a variety of ways and the location of these activities can be influenced by numerous factors , with certain factors having greater influence on some activities than on others . for example , taxes , wage rates , the availability of skilled labor , and proximity to natural resources or to final product markets can all influence where businesses decide to locate production facilities ; however , wage rates are likely to be particularly important for the location of low - skilled , labor - intensive operations , while access to a highly educated workforce may have greater influence on the location of scientific research activities . tax regimes — both those of the united states and of foreign countries — will have some influence over where business activity is actually located ; however , they also provide some incentive for businesses to report net income as coming from locations other than where factors of production , such as labor and physical capital , actually generated the income . this shifting of income may be reflected in income data bea and other agencies gather from businesses as well as in data on related items , such as sales and value added . in contrast , measures such as physical assets , employment , and compensation are less likely to be debatably sourced because of tax considerations . 8 in app . these practices make it difficult to determine the extent to which the distribution of some of the business activities that we present below reflects the actual , as opposed to just the reported , location of the activities . figure 5 shows the trends across the last four bea benchmark studies of u.s. mnc operations ( 1989 – 2004 ) for six key measures of business activity: value added , sales , physical assets , compensation of employees , number of employees , and pretax income excluding income from equity investments . each bar in the graph shows how the aggregate amount of a particular activity was divided between operations of u.s. parent corporations ( including any of their domestic subsidiaries ) and the operations of the majority - owned foreign affiliates of those parent corporations .