the conversion was made the same day . there are many types of conversions . this report focuses on one type of conversion ; i.e. code is for use by the internal revenue service ( department of treasury ) only . nh: business management and technical professional . dod acquisition workforce demonstration project . code is for use by the department of the air force , department of the army , department of defense , and department of the navy only . sk: securities exchange commission individuals formerly under the gs , gm , and ez pay plans . code is for use by the securities and exchange commission only . for 18 of these conversions , it appears that agencies did not follow proper procedures or may have violated other statutory or regulatory requirements . opm has oversight authority to ensure that agencies are following the merit system principles when hiring . in accordance with this authority , opm has traditionally required agencies to seek its pre - appointment approval for the conversion of certain noncareer appointees ( schedule c and noncareer ses ) into certain career positions ( competitive service and career ses ) during a presidential election review period . opm defined the most recent pre - appointment review period as beginning on march 18 , 2004 , and concluding on january 20 , 2005 , inauguration day . additionally , career ses positions require a further review and approval of the merit staffing process by opm , and the proposed selectee's executive / managerial qualifications by an opm - administered ses qualifications review board ( qrb ) which are composed of members of the ses from across the government . seven of the 18 conversions were subject to opm review and approval ; 2 because they fell within the presidential election pre - appointment review period as prescribed by opm and 5 because they were to ses level positions . of the 2 conversions subject to opm's presidential election pre - appointment review process , in one instance , it appeared the agency did not submit the conversion to opm for its review . in the other instance , opm reviewed the file but did not take timely action before the january 20 , 2005 , deadline for the pre - appointment review period . of the 5 conversions to ses level positions , an opm - administered qrb reviewed and approved the selectee's qualifications for each of these appointments , although in one case a qrb initially rejected the selectee's qualifications , then a different qrb approved the selection after the agency revised and resubmitted its application . department of defense ( dod ) . the eventual selectee served as a schedule c special assistant to the principal deputy under secretary of defense for policy from december 2001 through august 2002 . in september 2002 , she was reassigned to another schedule c position as a special assistant to the director , program analysis and evaluation . official records indicate the eventual selectee occupied this position until her conversion to the career position of assistant for plans and integration on january 25 , 2004 . however , according to her resume , the eventual selectee assumed the duties of the career position beginning in march of 2003 .