however , the utcs are not the same size . we provided a draft of the classified version of the report to dod for review and comment . that draft contained the same recommendations as this unclassified version . in written comments ( reproduced in appendix ii ) , dod concurred with our recommendations and noted planned actions to address each recommendation . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the senate armed services committee and the house armed services committee and the secretary of defense ; the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff ; and the secretary of the air force , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3489 or pendletonj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . maintenance demands of the f - 22's unique low observable ( lo ) coating , along with supply challenges exacerbated by the fleet's small size , limit the number of aircraft available for missions . in part because of these challenges , the air force had an average of 80 f - 22s available for operations during fiscal year 2016 . maintenance demands of the f - 22's unique lo coating , a critical component that gives the f - 22 its stealth characteristics , reduces aircraft availability . without the lo maintenance issues , availability would have been significantly closer to meeting the annual availability standard , according to air force officials . fourth generation fighters , lacking a full lo coating , do not have to contend with this maintenance issue . the lo coating is actually a series of coatings that require diligent and time - consuming application and curing , resulting in extended periods of time during which aircraft are not available , according to air force officials . further , the lo coating for each f - 22 requires regular and thorough inspection to ensure that any damaged or degraded areas are identified and repaired . if damage to the lo coating exceeds a threshold , the f - 22 is considered not capable of conducting its mission . an air force report summarizing fiscal year 2016 maintenance issues reported that lo maintenance was the primary reason f - 22s were not considered mission capable due to maintenance . maintaining the integrity of the lo coating complicates other f - 22 maintenance actions because the lo coating must be removed and then restored . according to air force officials , removing and replacing a part on an f - 22 and a fourth generation fighter , like an f - 15c , could take a similar amount of time .