pub . 91-190 , 83 stat 852 ( 1970 ) ( codified as amended at 42 u.s.c . in addition to the contact named above , vondalee r. hunt ( assistant director ) , candace carpenter ( analyst in charge ) , matthew levie , and rebecca makar made key contributions to this report . in addition , michael armes , justin fisher , gwen kirby , patricia moye , and kiki theodoropoulos contributed to the report . environmental review . these provisions relate to implementing nepa and other environmental statutes when conducting feasibility studies . for example , the corps is to establish a program to measure and report on progress made to improve and expedite the planning and environmental review process . for example: issuance of a joint coordination guide . in september 2015 , as a result of the act and previous ongoing coordination efforts , the corps , nmfs , and fws worked together to jointly issue a coordination guide for conducting feasibility studies . the guide discusses the feasibility study process in depth and emphasizes the importance of substantive , early engagement among the three agencies to successfully deliver projects and avoid delays later in the process that may result from lingering disagreements among the agencies . issuance of corps guidance on wrrda 2014 acceleration provisions . in march 2018 , the corps issued guidance on how officials should implement the wrrda 2014 acceleration provisions when conducting feasibility studies . this includes guidance on implementing administrative changes such as deadlines for gathering agency or public comments . it also includes guidance on coordination within the agency as well as with other agencies and stakeholders , such as nonfederal sponsors . for example , wrrda 2014 provides that the corps is to make certain information available to other agencies as early as practicable in the environmental review process . the corps' march 2018 guidance indicates that corps officials are to provide information on the ( 1 ) environmental and socioeconomic resources located within the physical area associated with a feasibility study , and ( 2 ) general locations of the different alternatives under consideration . while the guidance was not issued for almost 4 years after the enactment of wrrda 2014 , several corps headquarters and district officials said the corps disseminated information on how to implement the acceleration provisions to the districts in various ways , such as through webinars and working with teams that had initiated feasibility studies subject to the act's acceleration provisions . many corps headquarters , division , and district officials said that many of the act's coordination and administration provisions are similar to long - standing practices they followed , based on requirements in other laws such as nepa . for example , according to many corps headquarters , division , and district officials , the wrrda 2014 provision to develop a coordinated environmental review process is generally consistent with nepa and its implementing regulations . according to a corps headquarters official , the wrrda 2014 coordination provisions add specificity to the corps' existing practices by detailing which agencies to involve in coordination efforts and when to involve them . the corps also has taken steps to address one of the wrrda 2014 provisions related to public transparency .