base . the base is a voluntary security assessment of national mass transit , passenger rail , and highway systems conducted by tsa surface transportation inspectors that addresses potential vulnerabilities , among other things . it consists of an assessment template with 17 security action items developed by tsa and the federal transit administration that address , among other best practices , security training programs , risk information sharing , and cybersecurity . tsa developed this assessment in 2006 to increase domain awareness , enhance prevention and protection capabilities , and further response preparedness of passenger transit systems nationwide . the agency uses the base assessments to track progress in implementing specific security measures over time , offer technical assistance and share best practices to help improve the overall security posture of agencies , and inform transportation security grant funding by , among other things , identifying actions agencies have taken to reduce vulnerability . tsa officials stated that the most recent formal update to the assessment template began in 2014 and was fully implemented in 2015 . the update included , among other changes , revised guidance for tsa surface inspectors and the addition of questions concerning active shooter events . how does tsa assess risks to the u.s. passenger rail system ? to what extent does tsa work with u.s. and foreign passenger rail stakeholders to identify security standards and key practices , including intermodal station and cybersecurity practices ? to what extent does tsa share passenger rail security standards and key practices with stakeholders ? to address the first objective , we reviewed agency assessments and documentation pertaining to the elements of risk ( threat , vulnerability , and consequence ) , as defined in the national infrastructure protection plan ( nipp ) . specifically , we reviewed tsa's transportation sector security risk assessment ( tssra ) from fiscal years 2015 through 2017 , documents related to tsa's baseline assessment for security enhancement ( base ) , and tsa's annual and semiannual threat assessments from calendar years 2015 through 2019 . in addition to reviewing general risks to the passenger rail system identified in these documents , we analyzed the extent to which they address intermodal station and cybersecurity risk . we conducted interviews with tsa officials responsible for tsa's passenger rail risk assessment efforts . we also conducted interviews with officials from dhs's cybersecurity and infrastructure security agency ( cisa ) to understand additional efforts to assess the cybersecurity risk in passenger rail , and how the agency coordinates with tsa . to address objectives two and three , we obtained information in person or via telephone from officials at seven domestic rail agencies , including amtrak . we also conducted site visits to two foreign countries and interviewed government officials and officials from three passenger rail agencies in these countries . we conducted these interviews and visits to obtain perspectives on both domestic and foreign passenger rail security standards and key practices , as well as tsa engagement in this area . to select domestic rail agencies , we first identified agencies with the largest passenger volume by type of agency ( heavy , light , or commuter rail ) .