usda . under its water and waste disposal program , usda's rural utilities service provides grants and loans for drinking water and wastewater projects in rural areas — defined by usda as a city , town , or unincorporated area that has a population of no more than 10,000 inhabitants . usda can provide assistance for various activities , such as construction of drinking water treatment and sewage collection facilities , connection of single - family homes to drinking water distribution or wastewater collection lines , and training for utility operators . the rural utilities service allocates program funds to usda offices in each state ; these offices are required to loan or grant their funds by 10 months into the year and return any unobligated funds to usda headquarters for reallocation to other states . under the program , a staff of engineers and loan specialists works with local communities and their utilities to fund projects , and usda also provides funding for technical assistance to help utilities apply for funding and operate and maintain their drinking water and wastewater infrastructure . in fiscal year 2016 , usda provided $549 million in grants and $1.21 billion in loans through its state offices . hud . hud disburses grants to states and local governments through its community development block grant program to fund housing , infrastructure , and other community development activities . the annual appropriation for the block grants is allocated according to formulas so that , after setting aside specified amounts for indian tribes , insular areas , and special purposes , 70 percent is allocated among participating metropolitan cities and urban counties and 30 percent among the states to serve cities with populations of fewer than 50,000 and counties with populations of fewer than 200,000 . in addition , federal law requires that not less than 70 percent of the total community development block grant funding be used for activities that benefit low - and moderate - income persons . historically , according to hud data , approximately 10 percent of total funding has been used for drinking water and wastewater infrastructure . total community development block grant funding was $3.01 billion in fiscal year 2016 , and , according to hud officials , at least $381.5 million was used to fund drinking water and wastewater infrastructure . indian health service . hhs's indian health service funds and constructs drinking water and wastewater projects through its sanitation facilities construction program . this assistance is available to tribal nations within the united states and includes various projects such as distribution and collection lines , treatment facilities , and home connections . indian health service's sanitation facilities construction program was funded at $99.4 million in fiscal year 2016 . reclamation . reclamation provides different types of assistance for drinking water and wastewater infrastructure in the 17 western states , as directed by congress . reclamation received authorization , under the rural water supply act of 2006 , to establish a rural water supply program . under the program , reclamation was authorized to work with rural communities and indian tribes to identify municipal and industrial water needs and options to address such needs through appraisal investigations and in some cases feasibility studies .