risk characterization . risk management . oerr uses a tiered approach for superfund risk assessments , in which the agency employs more conservative methods and assumptions in the initial screening phases , followed by a more rigorous , multistage risk assessment if screening results indicate the need . under superfund , decisions generally are made on a site - by - site basis . according to agency officials , early activities at superfund sites are often based on initial tier screening . however , they pointed out that the remedial cleanup decision is supported by a site - specific risk assessment that is usually quite detailed with either site - specific exposure assumptions or national default assumptions appropriate to the site which result in “high - end” reasonable risk estimates . although the superfund program initially employed an approach of using a hypothetical “worst case” scenario for exposure assessments , epa's exposure assessment guidance now emphasizes use of a more realistic upper - bound exposure scenario . the epa guidelines emphasize that this exposure scenario should be in the range of plausible real exposures , and also call for a central tendency case . in addition , guidelines put forth by the superfund program office emphasize streamlining the process and reducing the cost and time required , focusing on providing information necessary to justify action and select the best remedy for a superfund site . an important change in epa's approach for developing awqc , reflected in the 2000 human health methodology , has been the move toward use of a bioaccumulation factor ( baf ) to estimate potential human exposure to contaminants via the consumption of contaminated fish and shellfish . bafs reflect the accumulation of chemicals by aquatic organisms from all surrounding media ( eg , water , food , and sediment ) . epa's 1980 method used a bioconcentration factor that reflected only absorption directly out of the water column , and therefore tended to underestimate actual contaminant levels in fish and shellfish . epa's revised methodology also gives preference to the use of high - quality field data over laboratory or model - derived estimates of bafs . ow considers indirect exposures to a substance from sources other than drinking water ( eg , food and air ) when establishing awqc . this is particularly important for noncarcinogens , where the fact that several exposure sources might individually be below the rfd level does not mean that collectively the exposure is below this presumably safe level . ow has revised and expanded its policy on accounting for nonwater sources of indirect exposures known as the “relative source contribution.” the procedures for calculating the relative source contribution vary depending on the adequacy of available exposure data , levels of exposure , sources and media of exposure relevant to the pollutant of concern , and whether there are multiple health - based criteria or standards for the same pollutant . ( see table 5 in the next section for a more detailed description of these assumptions. ) epa's risk assessment guidelines and other related documents identify many default assumptions , standardized data factors , and methodological choices that may be used in chemical risk assessments .