mission requirements . to determine the extent to which dod and the services have identified funding to resource eod forces to meet anticipated future requirements , we collected and analyzed available eod funding data from each of the services for the past 3 fiscal years . to determine the extent to which dod has developed guidance for employing the eod capability effectively in joint operations , we reviewed existing service , multi - service , and joint dod regulations and doctrine ; reviewed and analyzed prior dod reports' findings about doctrine ; and determined whether associated recommendations had been implemented . we interviewed key dod eod officials to ascertain the extent to which dod has comprehensive joint eod guidance . additionally , we met with officials from selected eod units in all four military services and conducted group discussions with eod - qualified team members , team leaders , senior enlisted personnel , and officers to obtain their perspectives on issues related to military service - specific missions , joint combat operations , training , equipment , and operational tempo . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from may 2012 through april 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the services anticipate maintaining their currently authorized eod personnel levels . however , planning for the future eod capability may be hampered by dod's lack of visibility into the current costs of eod capabilities across the services . according to officials from each service , overseas contingency operations funding has been used to provide equipment and training to eod forces for the past several years , such as that shown in figure 4 below . in the future these costs will have to be funded from regular appropriations , and to compete with other service priorities . for example , the services received eod robots and mine resistant ambush - protected vehicles from overseas contingency operations funding . should eod units need to continue to use the equipment in the future or to acquire similar such equipment , maintaining and procuring it may have to be funded through regular appropriations . overseas contingency operations funding also provided advanced homemade explosive , forensic , and medical training opportunities that eod technicians in our discussion groups thought were valuable to their missions and their safety . service officials expressed concerns to us about the adequacy of future funding for their eod forces after overseas contingency operations funding is phased out , but the extent to which the services have identifiable funding plans for future eod activities varied . the navy and air force now have program element codes that enable service officials to identify and evaluate the appropriate level of spending on their eod capabilities .