dod has not yet provided the information . the deputy assistant secretaries believe they have had a positive influence on weapon acquisition programs over the past 2 years during milestone reviews with senior department leaders and through recommendations to program offices . in fiscal year 2010 , for example , nearly 85 percent of the staff in the systems engineering office and 67 percent of the staff in the developmental test and evaluation office were contractors . both deputy assistant secretaries would like to have a larger proportion of government employees because they believe it is important to maintain a core cadre of people with the required institutional knowledge and skills to support current and future program office needs . however , they are not optimistic about their chances of getting additional government employees because of a civilian hiring freeze .  developmental test and evaluation office influence: current and former dod test and evaluation officials continue to believe the developmental test and evaluation office could be more effective in its oversight role with the proper influence . for example , they pointed out that the office's primary avenue for voicing concerns about weapon acquisition programs to senior leaders is at overarching integrated product team meetings that take place in preparation for defense acquisition board meetings . the integrated product team leader ultimately decides which organizations will get to present issues at the defense acquisition board meetings . current testing officials told us that in some cases developmental testing issues do not make the defense acquisition board meeting agendas , which is a concern to officials who believe the developmental test and evaluation office should provide independent assessments of weapon acquisition programs directly to senior leaders . in addition , officials said that the deputy directors who attend the overarching meetings are not at the senior executive level like other meeting attendees , which officials said in some cases has reduced their relative influence during these meetings . to ensure developmental testing information , such as the assessment of operational test readiness , receives appropriate consideration by senior leaders , the defense science board recommended in 2008 that the office report developmental testing issues directly to the deputy under secretary of defense for acquisition and technology . currently , the office reports through an intermediary — the assistant secretary of defense for research and engineering . even though the systems engineering office reports through the same reporting channel as the developmental test and evaluation office , the deputy assistant secretary for systems engineering believes his office has the appropriate amount of influence . this is because the systems engineering office's primary emphasis is on assisting program managers in the development of their systems engineering plans . in contrast , the deputy assistant secretary for developmental test and evaluation believes his office should put about equal effort into assisting and assessing program office activities .  developmental test and evaluation office resources: information provided by the developmental test and evaluation office shows the office can not provide full coverage of its portfolio of about 250 acquisition programs given its current workforce .