typemp with officil . the letter - sized ci document features an attached photo of the individual , two circular “attorney general , govt . of american samoa” stamps , as well as a unique ci identification number featured in the upper left - hand corner , as depicted in figure 6 . there are three individuals within the office of the attorney general with authorization to stamp cis . both the stamped seals and the id numbers on the ci are in red ink . the cis are signed — generally by the attorney general or deputy attorney general — for approval prior to being provided to the applicants . u.s. and american samoa agencies report that american samoa's operations of its customs and immigration programs may pose risks to american samoa and the rest of the united states , but no u.s. agency has performed a risk assessment . according to u.s. and american samoan government officials we met with , potential risks from the customs program's operations primarily affect american samoa , whereas potential risks related to the immigration program's operations affect both american samoa and the rest of the united states . certificte , photo id , nd passport - ized complete ? prepre ci pcket for pprovl . according to these officials , potential risks to the government of american samoa from its customs operations include lost revenues and the possible aiding of criminal activities based on allegations of inadequate enforcement . regarding american samoa's immigration program , u.s. and american samoan government officials stated their principal concerns are that current enforcement practices may lead to ( 1 ) exploitation of aliens by sponsors , ( 2 ) incidents of human trafficking , ( 3 ) overstays by aliens , and ( 4 ) exceeding numerical limits of aliens . according to u.s. officials we met with , the potential risk to the rest of the united states from american samoa's immigration operations is illegal immigration into the rest of the united states as a result of travelers fraudulently obtaining documentation , such as a ci , in american samoa . in contrast , the potential risks identified by u.s. officials for the rest of the united states are more limited . in particular , u.s. officials identified little to no potential risks to the rest of the united states based on american samoa's customs operations . american samoan law enforcement officials we met with told us these same concerns still exist . however , u.s. officials we met with , including cbp , acknowledged that they do not know the magnitude of fraudulently issued cis or the potential threat and consequences to the united states as a result of fraudulently issued cis because no assessment has been performed of the risks posed by the continued use of the cis as identity and nationality documents for u.s. nationals . a threat assessment issued by the government of american samoa in december 2005 reported that inadequate enforcement of customs laws has led to incidents related to insufficient container inspections ; allegations of customs officers accepting bribes ; and the smuggling of drugs , firearms , and other illegal contraband .