therefore , we closed this recommendation as implemented . this statement summarizes our july 2017 reports . specifically , this statement addresses ( 1 ) how state works with unhcr to ensure program integrity in the unhcr resettlement referral process ; ( 2 ) the extent to which state and rscs have policies and procedures on refugee case processing and state has overseen rsc activities ; ( 3 ) the extent to which uscis has policies and procedures for adjudicating refugee applications ; and ( 4 ) the extent to which state , uscis , and their partners follow leading practices to reduce the risk of staff and applicant fraud in usrap . for those reports , we reviewed state , dhs , rsc , and unhcr policies and documents and interviewed relevant officials — including officials at all 9 rscs . in addition , we conducted fieldwork at selected unhcr offices , as well as at rscs in austria , jordan , kenya , and el salvador . we also observed uscis supervisors while they reviewed officers' initial decisions , interview transcripts , and case file documentation , consistent with uscis policy , at two of the sites we visited . further , all six of the officers that we met with stated that supervisors conducted the required supervisory case file review during their circuit rides and the four supervisory officers we met with were aware of the requirements and stated that they conducted the supervisory reviews . uscis also provides specialized training to all officers who adjudicate applications abroad , but we found that uscis could provide additional training for officers who work on a temporary basis . according to uscis policy , all uscis officers who adjudicate refugee applications must complete specialized training , and the training varies based on the uscis division of the officer . however , temporary officers receive a condensed ( or shortened ) version of the trainings received by full time refugee officers and do not receive infield training . although temporary officers receive training prior to conducting in - person interviews with refugee applicants , we found that they sometimes face challenges adjudicating refugee applications . directors at the remaining five rscs also told us that they had developed local sops that covered the overarching usrap requirements . we observed how rsc staff implemented state's case processing and prescreening policies and procedures during our site visits to four rscs from june 2016 to september 2016 . specifically , we observed 27 prescreening interviews conducted by rsc caseworkers at the four rscs we visited and found that these caseworkers generally adhered to state requirements during these interviews . information from such risk assessments could help state and rscs revise existing controls or develop new controls to mitigate the staff fraud risks faced by the program , if necessary . in addition , we observed how rsc staff in all four locations implemented additional required procedures during our site visits , such as initiating required security checks and compiling case file information for uscis interviewing officers , and found that these rsc staff were generally complying with sops . millions of people worldwide have fled their home countries to seek asylum because of persecution .