gao - 10-213 . washington , d.c.: january 29 , 2010 . social security disability: additional outreach and collaboration on sharing medical records would improve wounded warriors' access to benefits . gao - 09-762 . what factors contribute to lengthy processing times for disability claims and appeals ? what is the status of vba's recent efforts to improve disability claims and appeals processing timeliness ? to address our objectives , we collected and analyzed information through multiple methods . we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations , court decisions , vba policy manuals and documents , and training materials . we also reviewed past gao and va office of inspector general ( oig ) reports , vba studies and evaluations , and other documents relevant to claims and appeals processing at vba regional offices . we collected data on claims and appeals processing workload and timeliness from vba's internal dashboard . to assess the reliability of the data , we conducted interviews with vba officials in charge of maintaining vba's internal dashboard about their quality control procedures and practices used to extract timeliness and workload data from underlying data sources . we relied on past gao data reliability assessments of the underlying data sources where enterprise - wide data on workload and timeliness of claims and appeals processing is stored and extracted into the internal dashboard tool . in addition , we collected data on claims processing resources from vba's personnel and accounting integrated database . to assess the reliability of these data , we interviewed officials in vba's office of human resources about practices to record personnel actions , quality control procedures conducted within the office of human resources to ensure the quality of the data , as well as potential limitations to the data . we reviewed the data and found it to be sufficiently reliable for the purpose of analyzing timeliness , workload , and resources assigned to claims processing . we interviewed vba central office officials , including officials in vba's implementation center ( which was established as a project management office to manage improvement initiatives ) , and vso representatives who assist veterans with their claims and appeals . we also met with staff from five va regional offices — atlanta , georgia ; houston , texas ; los angeles , california ; new york , new york ; and philadelphia , pennsylvania . we selected offices based on size of metropolitan area , claims workload , and timeliness of claims and appeals processing . for each location , we interviewed regional office management and staff , analyzed workload management documents , and reviewed written notifications sent to veterans ( see fig . for additional information on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from march 2012 through december 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . va pays monthly disability compensation to veterans with service - connected disabilities ( i.e.