dod stated that it had no comments . hhs provided a technical comment , which was incorporated . we will send copies of this report to relevant congressional committees and other interested members . ( see fig . similarly , medicaid's average net price for the subset of brand - name drugs in our sample was $1.57 per unit , the lowest among the three programs , while dod paid 34 percent more ( $2.11 per unit ) , and medicare part d paid an estimated 69 percent more ( $2.65 per unit ) . medicaid also paid the lowest net price for the subset of generic drugs in our sample ( $0.28 per unit ) , while medicare part d paid 4 percent more ( $0.29 per unit ) and dod paid 50 percent more ( $0.42 per unit ) . gao staff members who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . in this appendix we describe our data sources , the selection of the drug sample , and calculations of gross and net unit prices paid by the department of defense ( dod ) , medicaid , and medicare part d for prescription drugs dispensed to their beneficiaries at retail pharmacies . we obtained prescription drug claims data from dod and the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) for the third calendar quarter of 2010 . specifically , we obtained pharmacy data transaction service ( pdts ) data from dod covering prescription drugs dispensed to its beneficiaries by non - dod retail pharmacies and we obtained medicaid analytic extract ( max ) data and medicare part d prescription drug event ( pde ) claims data from cms . for each data source , we excluded claims with third - party payments ; we also excluded physician - administered outpatient prescription drugs and items that are not traditionally considered drugs such as bandages , syringes , needles , diabetes test for medicaid , we excluded arizona and delaware strips , and saline.because claims from those states did not include third - party payment data . we included only fee - for - service medicaid claims because claims paid under a capitated managed care plan or similar methods would not provide an accurate picture of drug prices actually paid . we also excluded medicaid claims for beneficiaries who were also eligible for medicare because retail prescription drugs for those beneficiaries are covered by medicare part d. we excluded medicare part d claims from plans that restrict enrollment , such as employer plans , program of all - inclusive care for the elderly ( pace ) plans , and demonstration plans . we used red book data from truven health analytics to determine the brand - name or generic status of each drug . we reviewed agency data for reasonableness and consistency , including screening for outlier prices and examining possible reasons for inconsistencies between the data sources . the results of our analyses are limited to the 78 high - utilization and high - expenditure drugs in our sample for the third calendar quarter of 2010 and are not necessarily applicable across all drugs or any other time periods .