they could not provide a time frame for its completion . without strong noaa oversight of nasa's management of program components , jpss may continue to face the same cost , schedule , and contract management challenges as the npoess program . cost growth resulting from contract and program changes: because neither acquisition has fully developed plans for their respective programs , it is unclear whether contracts will need to be fully or partially terminated , and what the terminations and other program changes could ultimately cost . we have previously reported that if the government decides to terminate a contract for convenience , it must compensate the contractor — in the form of a termination settlement — for the work it has performed . however , a settlement only addresses the government's obligation under a terminated contract , and there may be additional costs . for example , additional costs could result from awarding a new contract to replace a terminated contract . until noaa and dod make decisions and plans for their programs , the full cost of contract and program changes will be unknown . noaa , nasa , and dod acknowledge that there are risks associated with the transition to new programs , but they have not yet established plans to mitigate these risks . while noaa and dod are developing plans for their new programs , the development of key npoess components is continuing . in recent months , the program completed the development of the critical imaging sensor , called the visible / infrared imager / radiometer suite ( viirs ) , and delivered it to nasa for integration onto the npp satellite . four of the five sensors intended for npp are now on the spacecraft . in addition , the program continues to work on components of the first and second npoess satellites , which are to be transferred to noaa and dod to become part of their respective follow - on programs . however , the expected launch date of the npp satellite has been delayed by 9 months ( moving the launch date to september 2011 or later ) , due to technical issues in the development of the npp sensor that has not yet been integrated . in addition , the development of the viirs sensor for the first npoess or jpss satellite is experiencing significant cost overruns . further , the program is slowing down and may need to stop work on key components because of potential contract liabilities and funding constraints , but it has not developed a prioritized list on what to stop first . until the transition risks are effectively mitigated , and unless selected components are able to continue scheduled development , the launches of npp and the first noaa and dod satellites could be further delayed . further launch delays are likely to jeopardize the availability and continuity of weather and climate data . for example , the poes satellite currently in the afternoon orbit is expected to reach the end of its lifespan at the end of 2012 . if npp is delayed , there could be a gap in polar satellite observations in the afternoon orbit .