pub . 109-295 , § 550 , 120 stat . facilities considered to be high - risk in one of four risk - based tiers , require high - risk facilities to develop security plans , review these plans , and inspect the facilities to ensure compliance with regulatory requirements . dhs's national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) is responsible for the cfats program . within nppd , the infrastructure security compliance division ( iscd ) , a division of the office of infrastructure protection ( ip ) , manages the program . on february 6 , 2014 , congressman meehan and other members of the house of representatives' committee on homeland security , along with one member of the house of representatives' committee on energy and commerce , introduced h.r . 4007 , the chemical facility anti - terrorism this standards program authorization and accountability act of 2014.bill would authorize the cfats program for 2 years and would take effect 30 days after enactment . this bill includes provisions regarding multiple aspects of the cfats program , including risk assessment , security plan reviews , and facility inspections . among other things , h.r . 4007 would require dhs to consult with the heads of other federal agencies , states and political subdivisions and business associations to identify chemical facilities of interest ; direct dhs to develop a risk assessment approach that includes all elements of risk , including threat data based on available intelligence , the vulnerability of the facility to terrorist attack , and consequence measurements including potential economic consequences ; reaffirm the risk - based performance standard approach to facility security plans and the use of alternative security programs allow chemical facilities to utilize any federal screening program that periodically vets individuals against the terrorist screening database to satisfy the requirements of a personnel surety performance standard ; authorize the use of non - department or non - government entities , with the secretary's approval , for audits and inspections ; and require us to submit a semiannual report to congress containing our assessment of the implementation of the bill . my testimony today summarizes our past work on the cfats program and provides our observations on the status of dhs's efforts in four key areas — identifying facilities to be covered by cfats , assessing risk and prioritizing covered facilities , reviewing facility security plans , and inspecting facilities to verify compliance with cfats regulations . my statement is based on reports and testimonies we issued from july 2012 through august 2013 on various aspects of the cfats program in addition to work we conducted in february 2014 to update the status of dhs actions related to these four areas . to conduct our prior work , we reviewed applicable laws and regulations , as well as nppd , ip , and iscd policies and procedures for administering the cfats program and conducting its mission . we interviewed senior iscd officials along with nppd and ip officials to obtain their views on the program and how iscd assesses risk . we also reviewed iscd documents and data on tiered facilities and the approach used to determine a facility's risk and assessed iscd's process for reviewing security plans .