reg . therefore , the appropriations pay cap applied to all section 209 ( f ) consultants from 1956 until hhs changed the regulations in 1966 allowing for the hiring of consultants for indefinite periods . although the regulations implementing section 209 ( f ) no longer included a time limitation on the employment of special consultants after 1966 , the appropriations provisions for 1967 and subsequent years , using virtually identical language each year , imposed a cap only on pay of “consultants or individual scientists appointed for limited periods of time pursuant to .” the appropriations restriction did not impose any cap on pay for those consultants whose appointments were not limited in time . as a result , after the 1966 regulations were promulgated and continuing to the present , hhs has employed two categories of consultants: those appointed for limited periods of time , to whom the pay cap applies , and consultants appointed for indefinite periods , to whom the pay cap does not apply . importantly , the appropriations pay restriction is applicable only to payments made from labor - hhs - education appropriations acts . three components of the public health service ( the agency for toxic substances and disease registrations , the food and drug administration , and the indian health services ) are funded by appropriations acts other than the labor - hhs - education appropriations act , and are not covered by a restriction on funds appropriated under that act . thus , we concluded that there is a cap of executive level iv on the pay of consultants and scientists employed for limited periods of time pursuant to 42 u.s.c . §§ 209 ( f ) or ( g ) in all but three of the public health service agencies . with respect to individuals not covered by the appropriation cap , we examined the applicability of two pay limitations found in title 5: section 3109 , which limits pay for consultants “procure” on a temporary or intermittent basis , and section 5373 , which limits pay fixed by administrative action . section 3109 , enacted in 1946 , establishes specific legal parameters , including a pay cap and a limit on appointment duration , governing the employment of experts or consultants whose appointment must be authorized by an “appropriation or other statute.” that pay cap applies unless a different cap is authorized by the appropriation or another statute . beginning in 1956 , congressional actions signaled that section 3109 did not apply to section 209 ( f ) appointments . from1956 and continuing until 1993 , congress enacted provisions yearly in appropriations acts that set a cap ( which may or may not have been higher than that found in section 3109 in any given year ) for all those appointed pursuant to sections 209 ( f ) or ( g ) for a limited period of time and funded out of the labor - hhs - education appropriations act . from fiscal year 1970 until the provisions became permanent in fiscal year 1993 , the appropriations acts for hhs contained separate provisions placing identical compensation limits for experts and consultants subject to 5 u.s.c .