the remaining state was discussing such a plan . however , only one of the states we visited has tested in an exercise its plan for conducting mass smallpox vaccinations . our recent work shows that progress in improving public health response capacity has lagged in hospitals . this department had been attempting to hire more epidemiologists . barriers to finding and hiring epidemiologists included noncompetitive salaries and a general shortage of people with the necessary skills . shortages in laboratory personnel were also cited . officials in one city noted that they had difficulty filling and maintaining laboratory positions . people that accepted the positions often left the health department for better - paying positions . increased funding for hiring staff cannot necessarily solve these shortages in the near term because for many types of laboratory positions there are not enough trained individuals in the workforce . according to the association of public health laboratories , training laboratory personnel to provide them with the necessary skills will take time and require a strategy for building the needed workforce . we found that the overall level of public health preparedness varied by city . in the cities we visited , we observed that those cities that had recurring experience with public health emergencies , including those resulting from natural disasters , or with preparation for national security special events , such as political conventions , were generally more prepared than cities with little or no such experience . cities that had dealt with multiple public health emergencies in the past might have been further along because they had learned which organizations and officials need to be involved in preparedness and response efforts and moved to include all pertinent parties in the efforts . experience with natural disasters raised the awareness of local officials regarding the level of public health emergency preparedness in their cities and the kinds of preparedness problems they needed to address . even the cities that were better prepared were not strong in all elements . for example , one city reported that communications had been effective during public health emergencies and that the city had an active disease surveillance system . however , officials reported gaps in laboratory capacity . another one of the better - prepared cities was connected to han and the epidemic information exchange ( epi - x ) , and all county emergency management agencies in the state were linked . however , the state did not have written agreements with its neighboring states for responding to a public health emergency . response organization officials were concerned about a lack of planning for regional coordination between states of the public health response to an infectious disease outbreak . as called for by the guidance for the cdc and hrsa funding , all of the states we visited organized their planning on the basis of regions within their states , assigning local areas to particular regions for planning purposes . a concern for response organization officials was the lack of planning for regional coordination between states . a hospital official in one city we visited said that state lines presented a “real wall” for planning purposes . hospital officials in one state reported that they had no agreements with other states to share physicians .