this training will be periodically repeated . in addition , its postaward reviews will include an assessment of whether requiring work is within the scope of the basic contract . gao and dod consider this recommendation closed . to ensure that task orders issued to rebuild iraq comply with applicable requirements , and to maximize incentives for the contractors to ensure effective cost control , the secretary of the army should ensure that any future task orders under the logistics civil augmentation program ( logcap ) contract for iraq reconstruction activities are within the scope of that contract . according to dod , the procuring contracting officer for the logcap contract reviews each proposed scope of work that will result in a task order and makes a determination whether the action is within the scope of the contract and obtains appropriate legal advice as necessary . gao and dod consider this recommendation closed . to ensure that task orders issued to rebuild iraq comply with applicable requirements , and to maximize incentives for the contractors to ensure effective cost control , the secretary of the army should address and resolve all outstanding issues in connection with the pending justifications and approvals for the contracts and related task orders used by the army corps of engineers to restore iraq's electricity infrastructure . as of june 2006 , the justifications and approvals were being processed for assistant secretary of the army for acquisition , logistics and technology , approval . gao considers this recommendation open , though defense procurement and acquisition policy has indicated that this recommendation will be closed in the near term . to ensure that task orders issued to rebuild iraq comply with applicable requirements , and to maximize incentives for the contractors to ensure effective cost control , the secretary of the army should direct the commanding general , army field support command , and the commanding general and chief of engineers , u.s. army corps of engineers , to definitize outstanding contracts and task orders as soon as possible . dod has definitized , or reached agreement on key terms and conditions for , all of the six contract actions identified in our june 2004 report . we noted in our march 2005 report entitled , high - level dod coordination is needed to further improve the management of the army's logcap contract ( gao - 05-328 ) , that the army had made improvements in definitizing task orders issued under the logcap contract . gao and dod consider this recommendation closed . to improve the delivery of acquisition support in future operations , the secretary of defense , in consultation with the administrator , u.s. agency for international development , should evaluate the lessons learned in iraq and develop a strategy for ensuring that adequate acquisition staff and other resources can be made available in a timely manner . in november 2005 , dod issued directive 3000.05 , military support for stability , security , transition , and reconstruction operations , which , in part , required that dod ensure proper oversight of contracts in stability operations and ensure u.s. commanders deployed in foreign countries are able to secure contract support rapidly .