separate chip . states may operate their chip programs separate from their medicaid programs . in so doing , the states are not required to follow the same rules as medicaid ; thus , these states have some additional flexibility in designing chip , such as determining which benefits to offer and how , if at all , to charge premiums . combination chip . states may have a combination program , where they operate a separate chip program , as well as a medicaid expansion chip program , each for a different population of children . for example , some states that operate combination chip programs apply different age or income eligibility requirements for their medicaid expansion chip and separate chip programs . similar to medicaid , chip program expenditures are shared between the states and the federal government , but federal matching rates for chip are higher than for medicaid and federal funding for chip is capped , with states receiving annual chip allotments . the type of chip program a state designs may affect the amount of federal funding available to that state in the event the state exhausts available chip funding for the year . a state with a medicaid expansion chip program that exhausts available chip funding may apply medicaid funds at the medicaid matching rate to remaining expenses for enrolled children for that year . however , a state with a separate chip program that exhausts available funding would not have access to such funding . in general , states administer chip under broad federal requirements that permit flexibility in how they design their programs , including in the services they cover , their upper income eligibility limits , and the fees they charge to participate . in terms of income eligibility , as of january 2019 , 19 states , including the district of columbia , had chip upper income eligibility limits of 300 percent of the fpl or higher compared with 32 states whose chip upper income eligibility limits were below 300 percent of the fpl . ( see fig . in addition , states can charge beneficiaries fees for chip coverage . these fees can vary depending on whether they are enrollment fees , premiums , or other types of cost sharing . among the states that charge chip premiums , the premiums can vary based on family income and the number of children in chip . ( see table 1. ) although states may charge premiums or have other cost sharing , according to cms , chip provides more affordable coverage than is generally available in the private health insurance market . chip crowd - out may occur when employers modify or decide not to offer health insurance to their employees or to their dependents , because of chip availability . for example , employers who are aware of chip may decide not to offer health insurance to employees or their dependents due to concerns about the costs of providing insurance , especially for smaller sized firms , or as a result of changes in federal or state policies , such as requirements resulting from ppaca .