the iid is a far simpler device . our work with a law enforcement organization in the washington , d.c. , metro area in february 2006 confirmed that the components of the iid ( one of which is a liquid ) could function as intended , causing damage to an aircraft and threatening the safety of passengers . our investigators devised methods that would allow them to conceal the prohibited components for these devices from transportation security officers . during this planning phase , they considered publicly advertised tsa policies related to liquids and other items , including prohibited items . they also judged that some components could be hidden in either their carry - on luggage or on their persons . they developed covert test procedures to challenge tsa screening measures using these components and methods . specific details regarding the methods of concealment we used are classified by tsa ; as such , these details are not discussed in this testimony . by using various concealment methods , our investigators demonstrated that it is possible to bring the components for several functioning ieds and one functioning iid through checkpoints and onto airline flights without being challenged by transportation security officers . in most cases , transportation security officers appeared to follow tsa procedures and used technology appropriately ; however , we uncovered weaknesses in tsa screening procedures and other vulnerabilities as a result of these tests . for example , although transportation security officers generally enforced tsa's 3-1-1 rule , we were able to bring a liquid component of the iid undetected through checkpoints by taking advantage of weaknesses we identified in tsa's policies based on a review of public information . tsa determined that specific details regarding these weaknesses are sensitive security information and are therefore not discussed in this testimony . we did not notice any difference between the performance of private screeners and transportation security officers during our tests . we obtained components for these devices at local stores and over the internet . we devised methods to conceal the prohibited components using public information about tsa policies and procedures and obtained items to conceal the components at local stores and over the internet . we then conducted our covert tests at a nonrepresentative selection of 19 airports across the country . the criteria we used to select the airports resulted in our testing a variety of u.s. commercial airports , some of which employed private screeners . our work was not intended to evaluate the overall design and effectiveness of tsa's airport security program , which contains multiple layers of security . rather , our work was performed to test specific security vulnerabilities related to the three major elements of tsa's passenger screening process — human capital ( i.e. , people ) , processes , and technology employed at the checkpoint . we had identified this weakness based on a review of public information before performing our tests . from may 7 through may 9 , 2007 , two investigators tested the tsa checkpoint screening process at a number of u.s. airports .