openness . to address openness , information resellers took steps to inform the public about key aspects of their privacy policies . they used means such as company web sites and brochures to inform the public of specific policies and practices regarding the collection and use of personal information . reseller web sites also generally provided information about the types of information products the resellers offered — including product samples — as well as general descriptions about the types of customers served . individual participation . although information resellers allow individuals access to their personal information , this access is generally limited . resellers may provide an individual a report containing certain types of information — such as compilations of public records information — however , the report may not include all information maintained by the resellers about that individual . further , because they obtain their information from other sources , most resellers have limited provisions for correcting or deleting inaccurate information contained in their databases . if individuals find inaccuracies in such reports , they generally cannot have these corrected by the resellers . resellers , as a matter of policy , do not make corrections to data obtained from other sources , even if the individual provides evidence that the data are wrong . instead , they direct individuals wishing to make corrections to contact the original sources of the data . several resellers stated that they would correct any identified errors resulting from their own processing and aggregation of data ( for example , transposing numbers or letters or incorrectly aggregating information ) . accountability . although information resellers' overall application of the fair information practices varied , each reseller we spoke with reported actions to ensure compliance with its own privacy policies . for example , resellers reported designating chief privacy officers to monitor compliance with internal privacy policies and applicable laws . information resellers reported that these officials had a range of responsibilities aimed at ensuring accountability for privacy policies , such as establishing consumer access and customer credentialing procedures , monitoring compliance with federal and state laws , and evaluating new sources of data ( for example , cell phone records ) . although there are no industrywide standards requiring resellers to conduct periodic audits of their compliance with privacy policies , one information reseller reported using a third party to conduct privacy audits on an annual basis . using a third party to audit compliance with privacy policies further helps to ensure that an information reseller is accountable for the implementation of its privacy practices . in commenting on excerpts of our draft report , several resellers raised concerns regarding the version of the fair information practices we used to assess their practices , stating their view that it applied more appropriately to organizations that collect information directly from consumers and that they were not legally bound to adhere to the fair information practices . as discussed in our report , the version of the fair information practices we used has been widely adopted and cited within the federal government as well as internationally . further , we use it as an analytical framework for identifying potential privacy issues for further consideration by congress — not as criteria for strict compliance .