disaster grants . these provide temporary employment to workers affected by natural disasters and other catastrophic events . dual enrollment grants . these provide supplemental assistance to workers who have been certified by labor to receive services under the trade adjustment assistance reform act of 2002 . workers eligible under dual enrollment grants are typically workers who have lost their jobs because of increased imports from , or shifts in production to , foreign countries . grantees apply for national emergency grants when their dislocated worker formula funds are insufficient to meet the needs of affected workers . entities that are eligible to receive regular national emergency grants are: the designated state wia program agency , a local workforce investment area agency , a consortium of local workforce investment boards for adjoining areas , a designated organization receiving funds through the native american program provision of wia . for regular national emergency grants covering more than one state , eligible grantees are limited to a consortium of local workforce investment boards for adjoining local areas or a consortium of states . for disaster and dual enrollment grants , eligible grantees are limited to states . for national emergency grants awarded from program years 2000 to 2002 , 241 grants were awarded to states and 6 grants were awarded to local areas . national emergency grants are discretionary awards by the secretary of labor that are intended to temporarily expand service capacity at the state and local levels by providing time - limited funding assistance in response to major layoffs . national emergency grant funds may be used to provide core , intensive , and training services . for disaster - related projects , funds may be used for temporary employment assistance on projects that provide food , clothing , and shelter , as well as on projects that perform demolition , cleaning , repair , renovation , and reconstruction . according to labor , projects funded by national emergency grants must be designed to achieve performance outcomes that support the performance goal commitments by the secretary under the government performance and results act . labor will provide target performance levels for national emergency grant projects through separate policy guidance . beginning july 1 , 2004 , national emergency grant projects will be subject to the common measures for employment and training programs , including entered employment , job retention , and earnings increase . participants in temporary disaster projects are expected to receive necessary assistance to return to the workforce . between july 1 , 2000 , and june 30 , 2003 ( covering program years 2000 , 2001 , and 2002 ) , labor distributed about $600 million from the dislocated worker reserved funds for national emergency grants to 46 states , the district of columbia , guam , and the federated states of micronesia ( see fig . california , massachusetts , ohio , oregon , pennsylvania , texas , virginia , washington , and wisconsin received the largest amount of grant funds , at least $20 million each . appendix ii lists the amount of funds labor distributed to each state for regular , disaster , and dual enrollment national emergency grants between july 1 , 2000 , and june 30 , 2003 .