what are family caregivers ? paid family caregivers are typically not career home care workers ; rather they are usually close family members and friends willing to help the consumer . dol guidance states that in situations where family members are paid care providers , there is both a familial and an employment relationship , and only hours worked within the scope of the employment relationship are covered by the flsa . in these circumstances , the employment relationship is usually limited by a “plan of care” or other written agreement approved by the program funding the services . for example , a familial relationship rather than an employment relationship would exist for a father who has an adult son with a physical disability and helps his son with eating dinner and bathing in the evenings . if the son enrolls in a medicaid - funded program and the father becomes his paid care provider under a program - approved plan of care that funds 8 hours of services per day , then the father would also be in an employment relationship with his son for purposes of the flsa for those 8 hours . respite care — a break from caregiving responsibilities — to family caregivers . in one state we visited , officials expressed concern that flsa principles would apply to respite workers . for example , officials in this state said a worker may easily incur overtime in overnight respite situations , which could potentially strain a consumer's budget for care . introducing additional workers to provide respite in order to avoid overtime costs may not always be practical . for example , one state official said it may be very disruptive for some consumers , such as those with intellectual and developmental disabilities who do not handle changes well , to have different caregivers in a respite situation over the course of a weekend . live - in arrangements — under some medicaid - funded programs , home care workers and consumers may live together . officials in two of the states we visited told us they were concerned about how flsa requirements may affect live - in care arrangements for those consumers who require substantial care and how it could be costly to comply with the flsa in certain live - in situations . many of these live - in arrangements were designed without consideration of flsa overtime requirements and were made affordable by reliance on the companionship and live - in exemptions . state officials in one state we visited said they may redesign one of their live - in programs in response to the home care rule to help keep overtime costs down . however , they said it would require time to reevaluate and possibly rewrite parts of existing program guidance . state budgets — officials in all of the six states we visited said the home care rule has the potential to strain limited state budgets . for example , officials in three states said that medicaid rates may not be sufficient to cover additional costs incurred as a result of the rule , including compensable travel time between medicaid beneficiaries .