gao - 09-655 . washington , d.c.: may 21 , 2009 . we have modified the report to include this distinction . doe made no comments on the recommendations since they were directed towards dhs and cbp . a copy of doe's comments are reprinted in appendix ii . what planning efforts has cbp made to address the requirement to scan all u.s. - bound cargo containers by july 2012 ? what are the estimated costs to date of the sfi program , and to what extent have future implementation costs been estimated ? what challenges , if any , does cbp face in integrating the 100 percent scanning requirement with its existing container security programs ? to address these questions , we compared data on the volume of u.s. - bound cargo containers and the number of containers scanned at sfi ports to the scanning requirement set forth in the 9 / 11 act . after speaking with cbp officials to resolve inconsistencies with the scanning data , we determined that the data provided were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we reviewed available cbp documentation on expanding the sfi program , including the sfi program management plan and implementation strategy , and assessed it against a guide to the project management body of knowledge . we obtained available data on costs for operating the sfi program as reported by cbp and doe , which we determined to be sufficiently reliable after assessing how cbp and doe collect and manage cost data . we assessed cbp's cost estimates for further implementation of the sfi program using the gao cost estimating and assessment guide . we reviewed the need to do a cost - benefit analysis using criteria in dhs' cost - benefit analysis guidebook and office of management and budget ( omb ) circulars . we reviewed bilateral and multilateral efforts to enhance container security , such as the wco safe framework of standards . we conducted site visits at six of the seven foreign ports that have been involved in the sfi program , and spoke with foreign government , cbp , and terminal operator officials during these visits . while the results of these site visits and interviews cannot be generalized across all ports that ship cargo containers to the united states , by observing operations at six of the seven ports involved with the sfi program to date — busan , south korea ; puerto cortes , honduras ; salalah , oman ; southampton , united kingdom ; hong kong ; and singapore — we gained an understanding of the factors and challenges associated with implementing sfi at foreign ports . in addition , we met with cbp , doe , and state department officials who have program responsibilities for sfi and other programs that are part of the u.s. government's layered maritime cargo container security strategy . further , we met with representatives from the wco and european commission , and officials from seven foreign governments , five of which contain an sfi pilot port , to discuss multilateral and bilateral efforts to promote supply chain security . we also spoke with six members of cbp's customs trade partnership against terrorism ( c - tpat ) program .