measure has a numerical goal . ( 4 ) objectivity . measure is reasonably free from significant bias or manipulation . ( 5 ) reliability . measure produces the same result under similar conditions . ( 6 ) core program activities . measures cover the activities that an entity is expected to perform to support the intent of the program . ( 7 ) limited overlap . measure should provide new information beyond that provided by other measures . ( see app . iii for more information on available funding by location ) . in addition to states , the act granted permission to municipalities to apply directly for funding under ssbci in the event that a state either failed to file a notice of intent to apply for its allocation of program funds by november 26 , 2010 , or , after filing a notice of intent , failed to submit an application to treasury by june 27 , 2011 . treasury officials stated that municipalities granted permission to submit an application for program funds were generally subject to the same approval criteria and program requirements as states . municipalities were eligible to apply for up to the total amount of their state's ssbci allocation , but the final approved amounts were to be apportioned based on their pro rata share by population of all applicants . figure 1 provides a timeline of major ssbci milestones . the act allowed treasury to provide ssbci funding for two state program categories: capital access programs ( cap ) and other credit support programs ( ocsp ) . a cap is a loan portfolio insurance program wherein the borrower and lender , such as a small business owner and a bank , contribute to a reserve fund held by the lender . under the act , approved caps are eligible to receive federal contributions to the reserve funds held by each participating financial institution in an amount equal to the total amount of the insurance premiums paid by the borrower and the lender on a loan - by - loan basis . amounts in the lender's reserve fund are then available to cover any losses incurred in its portfolio of cap loans . for an ssbci loan to be eligible for enrollment in a state's approved cap , the borrower must have 500 or fewer employees and the loan amount cannot exceed $5 million . in addition , the following types of ocsps are eligible to receive ssbci funds under the act: collateral support programs: these programs supply cash collateral accounts to lenders to enhance the collateral coverage of borrowers . the accounts will cover all or a portion of the collateral shortfall identified by a lending institution . these programs can be designed to target certain regions or industries , such as equipment lending , in which a lender may be willing to fund at 80 percent loan - to - value , but a borrower may not be able to bridge the difference in cash at closing . loan participation programs: these programs enable small businesses to obtain medium - to long - term financing , usually in the form of term loans , to help them expand their businesses .