gao - 08-526 . washington , d.c.: may 21 , 2008 . these threats can be unintentional or intentional . unintentional threats can be caused by software upgrades or defective equipment that inadvertently disrupt systems . intentional threats include both targeted and untargeted attacks from a variety of sources , including criminal groups , hackers , disgruntled employees , foreign nations engaged in espionage and information warfare , and terrorists . these threat sources vary in terms of the capabilities of the actors , their willingness to act , and their motives , which can include monetary gain or political advantage , among others . table 1 shows common sources of cyber threats . these sources of cyber threats make use of various techniques , or exploits , that may adversely affect computers , software , a network , an organization's operation , an industry , or the internet itself . table 2 provides descriptions of common types of cyber exploits . the unique nature of cyber - based attacks can vastly enhance their reach and impact . for example , cyber attackers do not need to be physically close to their victims , technology allows attacks to easily cross state and national borders , attacks can be carried out at high speed and directed at a number of victims simultaneously , and cyber attackers can more easily remain anonymous . moreover , the use of these and other techniques is becoming more sophisticated , with attackers using multiple or “blended” approaches that combine two or more techniques . using these techniques , threat actors may target individuals , resulting in loss of privacy or identity theft ; businesses , resulting in the compromise of proprietary information or intellectual capital ; critical infrastructures , resulting in their disruption or destruction ; or government agencies , resulting in the loss of sensitive information and damage to economic and national security . significant weaknesses in information security controls continue to threaten the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of critical information and information systems used to support the operations , assets , and personnel of federal agencies . for example , in their performance and accountability reports and annual financial reports for fiscal year 2011 , 18 of 24 major federal agencies indicated that inadequate information security controls were either material weaknesses or significant deficiencies for financial reporting purposes . in addition , inspectors general at 22 of the major agencies identified information security or information system control as a major management challenge for their agency .