according to the u.s . global change research program's fourth national climate assessment , the effects of climate change are already being felt in the united states and are projected to intensify in the future . these effects will include increases in the incidence of extreme high temperatures , heavy precipitation events , high tide flooding events along the coastline , and forest fires in the western continental united states and alaska . the assumption that current and future climate conditions will resemble those of the recent past is no longer valid , according to the report . for example , sea levels are expected to continue to rise along almost all u.s. coastlines . we and others , such as the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine , have therefore recommended enhancing climate resilience as one strategy to help limit the federal government's fiscal exposure . enhancing climate resilience means being able to plan and prepare for , absorb , recover from , and more successfully adapt to climate - related impacts , such as those identified by the u.s . global change research program in the 2018 fourth national climate assessment . examples of resilience measures to protect infrastructure include raising river or coastal dikes to reduce the risks to infrastructure from sea level rise , building higher bridges , and increasing the capacity of stormwater systems . enhancing climate resilience can add additional costs up front , but could also reduce potential future costs incurred as a result of damage from climate - related events . as a result of the significant risks posed by climate change , in february 2013 , we placed limiting the federal government's fiscal exposure by better managing climate change risks on our high - risk list . as part of our work in this high - risk area , in 2015 we reported that the climate information needs of federal , state , local , and private - sector decision makers were not being fully met and that a national climate information system could help them make more informed decisions about managing climate change risks . we made two recommendations , including that the executive office of the president develop a set of authoritative climate change projections for use in federal decision making , but as of may 2018 , the executive office of the president had yet to take action in response . in 2016 we reported that improved federal coordination could facilitate the use of forward - looking climate information in facilities design standards and building codes , the technical guidelines that promote the safety , reliability , productivity , and efficiency of infrastructure . we made one recommendation — that the director of the national institute of standards and technology at the department of commerce convene an ongoing government - wide effort to provide the best available forward - looking climate information to standards - developing organizations for consideration in design standards and building codes . as of may 2018 , our recommendation had not been implemented . we have also previously reported on the risks of extreme weather and climate change effects to dod installations .