this view is now apparently shared by the department . in a january 2011 memorandum , the secretary of defense expressed concern about the risks introduced by dod's current level of dependency on contractors , future total force mix , and the need to better plan for operational contract support in the future . toward that end , he directed the department to undertake a series of actions related to force mix , contract support integration , planning , and resourcing . according to the secretary , his intent was twofold: to initiate action now and to subsequently codify the memorandum's initiatives in policy and through doctrine , organization , training , materiel , leadership , education , personnel , and facilities changes and improvements . he concluded that the time was at hand , while the lessons learned from recent operations were fresh , to institutionalize the changes necessary to influence a cultural shift in how dod views , accounts for , and plans for contractors and personnel support in contingency environments . the secretary's recognition and directions are significant steps , yet cultural change will require sustained commitment from senior leadership for several years to come . while my statement has focused on the challenges confronting dod , our work involving state and usaid has found similar issues , particularly related to not planning for and not having insight into the roles performed by contractors and workforce challenges . the need for visibility into contracts and contractor personnel to inform decisions and oversee contractors is critical , regardless of the agency , as each relies extensively on contractors to support and carry out its missions in iraq and afghanistan . our work has identified gaps in usaid and state's workforce planning efforts related to the role and extent of reliance on contractors . we noted , for example , in our 2004 and 2005 reviews of afghanistan reconstruction efforts that usaid did not incorporate information on the contractor resources required to implement the strategy , hindering its efforts to make informed resource decisions . more generally , in june 2010 , we reported that usaid's 5-year workforce plan for fiscal years 2009 through 2013 had a number of deficiencies , such as lacking supporting workforce analyses that covered the agency's entire workforce , including contractors , and not containing a full assessment of the agency's workforce needs , including identifying existing workforce gaps and staffing levels required to meet program needs and goals . similarly , in april 2010 , we noted that state's departmentwide workforce plan generally does not address the extent to which contractors should be used to perform specific functions , such as contract and grant administration . as part of state's fiscal year 2011 budget process , state asked its bureaus to focus on transitioning some activities from contractors to government employees . state officials told us , however , that departmentwide workforce planning efforts generally have not addressed the extent to which the department should use contractors because those decisions are left up to individual bureaus .