the same is not true under tanf . tanf funds may be used to pay for shared systems only to the extent that the tanf program benefits from the systems , so they cannot cover common costs , but only a proportion of these costs in shared systems . as part of the transition from afdc to tanf , hhs requested that states submit new public assistance cost allocation plans that would take effect july 1999 for most states . some conference participants cited a need for more guidance or flexibility on acceptable cost allocation methodologies . in his presentation on the development of utah's uworks project , russell smith said that obtaining approval for the cost allocation plan took considerably more time and effort than originally estimated . utah state officials spent 6 months negotiating an acceptable cost allocation plan with federal officials for the project , which used funds from labor's one stop grants , tanf funds , and food stamp employment and training funds . bill cox identified inflexible cost allocation methodologies as a problem in his presentation on north carolina's business process reengineering project . he said that while project costs are commonly allocated based on the size of program caseloads , the state did not think it was appropriate to use this basis for its reengineering project . he explained that while the state's tanf caseload has decreased in recent years , the size of the caseload does not accurately represent the amount of time that caseworkers actually spend on tanf cases . the state proposed using a cost allocation methodology based on the amount of time caseworkers spent on different programs and projects . however , while the cms and the food and nutrition service had no comments on this change in methods , the administration for children and families did have reservations and indicated that the preferred method is caseloads , according to cox . cox also maintained that more guidance is needed with respect to appropriate cost allocation methodologies in complex projects with multiple phases . in their presentation , software productivity consortium president werner schaer and state information technology consortium president bob glasser highlighted project management as a key challenge for systems modernization . they explained that in their extensive consulting work on a wide range of state information systems projects , the major problems they observed have involved issues other than technology . the primary causes of these problems are a lack of wide - ranging management experience with information technology , a lack of management experience with large and complex systems , and insufficient user participation in project processes . they added that most firms that are dependent on software development for their core business have learned significant lessons about how to manage the development and deployment of large , complex software systems . yet in their view , the states , as a general rule , are very early on this learning curve and could benefit from the lessons that the industry has learned . information technology contractor representatives from hsitag echoed these themes in their presentation .