( see fig . the combination of these trends means that labor force growth will begin to slow after 2010 and by 2025 is expected to be less than a third of what it is today . ( see fig . relatively fewer workers will be available to produce the goods and services that all will consume . without a major increase in productivity , low labor force growth will lead to slower growth in the economy and to slower growth of federal revenues . this in turn will only accentuate the overall pressure on the federal budget . this slowing labor force growth is not always recognized as part of the social security debate . social security's retirement eligibility dates are often the subject of discussion and debate and can have a direct effect on both labor force growth and the condition of the social security retirement program . however , it is also appropriate to consider whether and how changes in pension and / or other government policies could encourage longer workforce participation . to the extent that people choose to work longer as they live longer , the increase in the share of life spent in retirement would be slowed . this could improve the finances of social security and mitigate the expected slowdown in labor force growth . today , the social security trust funds take in more in taxes than they spend . largely because of the known demographic trends i have described , this situation will change . although the trustees' 2003 intermediate estimates project that the combined social security trust funds will be solvent until 2042 , program spending will constitute a rapidly growing share of the budget and the economy well before that date . in 2008 , the first baby boomers will become eligible for social security benefits , and the future costs of serving them are already becoming a factor in the congressional budget office's ( cbo ) 10-year projections . under the trustees' 2003 intermediate estimates , social security's cash surplus — the difference between program tax income and the costs of paying scheduled benefits — will begin a permanent decline in 2009 . to finance the same level of federal spending as in the previous year , additional revenues and / or increased borrowing will be needed . by 2018 , social security's tax income is projected to be insufficient to pay currently scheduled benefits . at that time , social security will join medicare's hospital insurance trust fund ( whose outlays are projected to begin to exceed revenues in 2013 ) as a net claimant on the rest of the federal budget . the combined oasdi trust funds will begin drawing on the treasury to cover the cash shortfall , first relying on interest income and eventually drawing down accumulated trust fund assets . the treasury will need to obtain cash for those redeemed securities either through increased taxes , and / or spending cuts , and / or more borrowing from the public than would have been the case had social security's cash flow remained positive . neither the decline in the cash surpluses nor the cash deficit will affect the payment of benefits .