the overall methodology for both reports is also the same . to describe dod's process for assessing the strategic triad , we reviewed relevant documentation and interviewed officials from the military services and dod offices that participated in the key reviews the department carried out in analyzing its strategic force structure from 2009 to 2014 , including the 2010 npr . we used this documentation and testimonial evidence to understand dod's process for determining a need to maintain the triad and dod's consideration of alternatives to the triad . we compared this information to direction referenced in the 2010 npr and subsequent strategic force reviews . nuclear weapons have long been a cornerstone of the nation's defense strategy . since the 1960s , the united states has deployed nuclear weapons on three types of strategic delivery vehicles . these three types of vehicles — together with the warheads they carry — are collectively referred to as the strategic triad . the office of the secretary of defense and the joint staff led the effort in consultation with the departments of state and energy . other organizations participated , including the military departments , the combatant commands , the departments of homeland security and treasury , the office of the director of national intelligence , and the national security council and its supporting interagency bodies . the triad comprises the sea - based strategic deterrent ( submarine - launched ballistic missiles carried on ballistic missile submarines ) , the ground - based strategic deterrent ( intercontinental ballistic missiles ) , and the airborne strategic deterrent ( nuclear - capable heavy bombers ) . figure 2 shows a timeline of events and reviews related to dod's assessment of u.s. nuclear forces from 2010 through 2014 . the third of these objectives — maintaining strategic deterrence and stability at reduced nuclear force levels — emphasizes the importance of bilateral and verifiable reductions in strategic nuclear weapons in coordination with russia . in support of this objective , the united states signed a new strategic arms reduction treaty with russia — known as new start — on april 8 , 2010 , which entered into force on february 5 , 2011 . new start gives russia and the united states 7 years to reduce their strategic delivery vehicles and strategic nuclear warheads — under the counting rules outlined in the treaty — and will remain in force for 10 years . the strategic triad has played an essential role in u.s. policy for deterring potential adversaries and assuring u.s. allies and other security partners that they can count on u.s. security commitments . dod and military service officials told us these numbers reflect dod's current planned strategic force structure for implementing new start . the united states has maintained its nuclear deterrent capability while decreasing numbers of weapons in response to arms control agreements and strategic policies . the review was led by dod and included senior - level participation by the office of the secretary of defense , the joint chiefs of staff , strategic command , the department of state , the department of energy , the office of the director of national intelligence , and the national security staff ( now known as the national security council ) .