ed . mda's development of the bmds outside of dod's normal acquisition process makes it difficult to compare the actual unit co st of a delivered asset with its planned unit cost . for example , mda plans to only report recurring unit flyaway costs for the blocks that are baselined . figure 2 reveals the significant reduction in standard areas of costs covered by mda's approach compared to that normally reported for major defense acquisition programs . mda's decision to report only flyaway unit costs will not capture research and development costs associated with bmds assets — which account for more than 97 percent of the nearly $56 billion mda costs to date . in addition , the procurement costs for initial spares and support equipment are not included . insufficient oscillator stand - off height increased thermal stress . circuit board deflection caused by three washers missing from the board . in responding to these delays , multiple tests over several years were affected . several defects contributed to the problem , the first three of which are presumed to affect all pcmes manufactured up to that point and all 24 fielded test bed / capability enhancement ( ce ) i ekvs: the pcmes experienced gold embrittlement due to lack of pretinning . in addition to these manufacturing defects , there were stress fractures in the solder of three pcmes caused by the removal and replacement of a chip on the device . this chip was removed because a clock on a chip was asynchronous with another component's clock . it was estimated that there was an 18 to 48 percent chance of the loss of telemetry data at some point during a flight test due to the asynchronous chip problem . again , all 24 fielded test bed / ce - i ekvs have the chip with this problem . this chip does not affect operational performance , but rather is a critical component needed to transmit flight test data only . see table 10 for timeline of events related to this cancellation . the contractor , boeing , and the subcontractors , raytheon and the manufacturer of the component , l - 3 , took actions to mitigate the problem . they eliminated the gold embrittlement problem by sending the oscillator out for pretinning , they designed custom washers for two already produced pcmes and raised three bosses for new pcmes to eliminate the need for washers , and they tightened tolerances on the board to eliminate the deflection issue . these first three pcme manufacturing improvements were finalized on may 16 , 2008 . they also made changes to correct the chip with the asynchronous clock problem in all newly manufactured pcmes . none of the previously fielded gbis will be refurbished with improved pcmes needed for flight tests , but the gbis emplaced starting in october 2008 and thereafter have the improved pcme . on may 1 , 2008 , mda's program change board considered five options . execute ftg - 04 as scheduled , using payload ( 32 ) “as is” 2 . continue diagnostic testing of payload 32 , but if decision was made that it was not ready , substitute payload 33 , leading to a delay in the test schedule 3 .