fleet. ) challenges such as those faced by dhs's counter - manpads program can be significantly addressed through the use of a knowledge - based approach , as demonstrated by our past work on the best practices of leading product developers in industry and government . this approach helps decision makers make informed investment decisions based on knowledge they gain at three critical junctures or knowledge points during product development , which will reduce risks and increases the likelihood of successful outcomes . these three knowledge points are as follows: knowledge point 1 — needs and resources are matched . this level of knowledge is attained when a match is made between a customer's needs and the developer's technical , financial , and other resources . achieving a high level of technological maturity at the start of system development is a particularly important best practice . this means that the technologies needed to meet essential product requirements have been demonstrated to work in their intended environment . knowledge point 2 — the product design is stable . this level of knowledge is attained when the product's design is shown to meet the customer's requirements . a best practice is to achieve design stability at the system - level critical design review , usually held midway through development . completion of engineering drawings at the system design review provides tangible evidence that the design is stable . knowledge point 3 — production processes are mature . this level of knowledge is attained when it is demonstrated that the product can be manufactured within cost , schedule , and quality targets . a best practice is to achieve production maturity at the start of production . this means that all key manufacturing processes produce output within statistically acceptable limits for quality . a knowledge - based approach also involves the use of controls or exit criteria to ensure that the required knowledge has been attained at each critical juncture . manpads are designed to be lethal . frequently called heat - seeking missiles , most manpads models employ sensors that search for and home in on the target's infrared signature , often the engine . newer manpads can recognize specific aircraft characteristics and reject simple countermeasures or distractions , according to a defense manufacturer . manpads are effective up to approximately 15,000 feet in altitude and 3 miles in range . thus , while aircraft generally are safe from manpads when flying at cruising altitude ( 30,000 feet ) , they are most vulnerable during take off and landing . manpads systems are relatively easy to use but do require training . an individual rests the weapon on his or her shoulder , looks through a sight , and pulls a trigger . manpads typically have a “fire - and - forget” design that does not require the operator to remain in place to help guide the missile to its target . manpads' small size — about 5 feet long and a few inches in diameter and less than 35 pounds — make them easy to transport and to conceal . as a result , there have been recorded efforts to smuggle them into the united states , including two thwarted attempts .