returns . to set an annual return for each of the years of the worker's career for our hypothetical scenarios we formulated a composite return based on social security trustee projections . for the fixed income portion of the return , we used the social security trustees' projected annual trust fund real interest rate of 2.90 percent , and the projected consumer - price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers ( cpi - w ) of 2.70 percent , both published in the 2015 oasdi trustee's report intermediate long range economic assumptions , for a nominal interest rate of 5.6 percent . for the equity portion of the return , we added an estimated long - term equity risk premium of 3.5 percentage points to the annual trust fund nominal interest rate , for a nominal rate of return on stocks of 9.1 percent . we changed the ratio slightly each year to reduce equities exposure and investment risk as the worker approaches retirement . the ratio corresponds to a “100 minus age” rule , which means that the percentage of assets invested in equities is set at 100 minus the worker's current age . for example , when the worker is 50 years old , we assume that just half of their assets are invested in equities and assign the nominal return on stocks to just 50 percent of their retirement savings , while the remaining portion is calculated to earn the nominal interest rate on bonds . the “100 minus age” rule for portfolio diversification is relatively conservative , thus the projected value at retirement that we report is less than it would be if we had assumed a rule using a higher equities allocation . for example , another rule used for portfolio diversification is “120 minus age,” which would mean a higher equities allocation and higher projected returns , because over time equities tend to produce a higher average annual return than corporate bonds . a lower return assumption would result in lower projected savings lost or forfeited from the policies discussed in this report . leakage and fees . we assumed no leakage from the worker's account over time and did not apply any plan fees to the account balance . both of these factors could decrease the rate of the account balance's growth over time . in addition to the contact named above , tamara cross ( assistant director ) , angie jacobs ( analyst in charge ) , sherwin chapman , katherine d. morris , rhiannon patterson , and stacy spence made significant contributions to this report . additional support was provided by jessica artis , deborah bland , julianne cutts , laura hoffrey , saida hussain , gene kuehneman , jill lacey , sheila mccoy , mimi nguyen , dae park , joe silvestri , frank todisco , walter vance , kate van gelder , adam wendel , jill yost , and chris zbrozek . retirement security: federal action could help state efforts to expand private sector coverage . gao - 15-556 . washington , d.c.: september 10 , 2015 . retirement security: most households approaching retirement have low savings . gao - 15-419 . washington , d.c.: may 12 , 2015 .