most funds have been for programs in russia . without an interministerial implementing agreement , dod cannot begin to directly secure russia's former biological weapons facilities . as a result , dod has to provide assistance through an intermediary organization that has an agreement with the russian government . dod has negotiated implementing agreements and avoided this problem in three eurasian republics , georgia , kazakhstan , and uzbekistan , and is finalizing an agreement with ukraine . as an alternative to an implementing agreement , dod has used an existing program , the international science and technology center ( istc ) , to begin security projects at russian biological sites . however , istc was implementing hundreds of research projects and was unable to accord dod projects as high a priority as dod wished . istc is an international organization in moscow founded by the united states , russia , the european union and japan to engage former weapon scientists in peaceful scientific research . istc was created to prevent the proliferation of former soviet wmd expertise by offering nuclear , biological and chemical weapons and missile scientists peaceful research opportunities and thus discouraging them from selling their expertise to countries of concern or terrorist groups . the bulk of istc's funding pays scientists for their work , with some limited spending for laboratory equipment or computers . istc agreed to facilitate dod's biosecurity projects in russia because the u.s. government had an existing agreement with istc that allowed it to finance a range of research projects and other activities . however , istc's procurement system was not set up to handle the large contracts necessary for engineering and construction projects . in addition , approval of all istc proposals , including the biosecurity proposals , took time , partly because istc had to obtain host - government concurrence for each proposal from the ministry of atomic energy ; the ministry of industry , science and technology ; the ministry of defense or the academy of science . also , according to dod officials , a shortage of administrative and managerial staff at istc impeded istc's efforts to process dod's biosecurity projects . in 2001 , dod funded additional staff positions at istc to help expedite the processing of its security projects . according to dod officials , until an interministerial implementing agreement is negotiated , dod biosecurity projects will continue to be managed through istc . despite frustration with istc's slow pace , dod officials stated that istc's role was critical in implementing u.s. assistance at russian bioweapons facilities . while dod has identified several former biological weapons sites in russia where it would like to provide biological security assistance , the russian government has consistently refused to grant dod access to certain facilities managed by the ministries of health , defense , and agriculture . for example , the russian ministry of health maintains five antiplague institutes and a network of numerous antiplague field stations . these institutes and stations were part of the former soviet system of medical facilities housing dangerous pathogen collections for research and are completely closed to u.s. assistance programs .