hiv . two grants totaling about $23.8 million were awarded with the goal to increase access to hiv care and services . one specifically targeted prevention and treatment services in those communities most affected by hiv . outreach and enrollment . $222.0 million in grant funding was awarded to support health centers in raising awareness of affordable insurance options and providing eligibility and enrollment assistance to uninsured patients of health centers and residents in their approved service areas . patient - centered medical home . about $84.6 million in grant funding was awarded to support hrsa efforts to expand the number of patient - centered medical homes with a particular focus of improving quality of care , access to services , and reimbursement opportunities . quality improvement . approximately $305.1 million in grant funding was awarded to support health centers that displayed high quality performance so they can continue to strengthen quality improvement efforts . specifically , the funds were to support health centers to further improve the quality , efficiency , and effectiveness of health care delivered to the communities served . training and technical assistance . two grants totaling about $14.3 million were awarded to support training and technical assistance for health centers in order to support programmatic , clinical , and financial operations . one grant focused on the delivery of training and technical assistance by national organizations and the other grant was based on statewide and regional needs . zika . a grant for about $5.7 million was awarded to health centers that chose to apply to expand their existing activities to strengthen the response to the zika virus in puerto rico , the u.s. virgin islands , and american samoa . these activities included outreach , patient education , screening , voluntary family planning services , and / or treatment services . see appendix iii for a complete list of all grants awarded through chcf by category . we provided a draft of this report to hhs . hhs provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further action until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or at farbj@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and office of public affairs can be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . this appendix provides information on health centers and patients served .