ess . appendix ii: chief information officers interviewed agency / department commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) corporation for national and community service ( cncs ) department of health and human services ( hhs ) michael w. carleton department of homeland security ( dhs ) department of housing and urban development ( hud ) department of transportation ( dot ) department of veterans affairs ( va ) environmental protection agency ( epa ) federal labor relations authority ( flra ) general services administration ( gsa ) national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) national science foundation ( nsf ) nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) office of personnel management ( opm ) small business administration ( sba ) social security administration ( ssa ) u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) . in march 2011 , we convened a panel of former federal agency chief information officers , during which we discu sed cios' roles and s responsibilities , reporting relationships , anial changes any potentd needed to legislation . table 5 provides the former and current titles of these officials . the following summarizes information gathered from cios related to responsibilities in the 13 information management and information technology management areas discussed in this report . cios are responsible for strategic planning for all information and information technology management functions [paperwork reduction act] . of the 3 0 cios we surveyed , ensuring compliance with law agency . in 2004 , all 27 cios strategic planning . all cios indicated they were responsible fo s related to it strategic planning w surveyed also indicated re r ithin their sponsibility for it all cios re strategic planning . twenty - nine of the 30 cios reported that it strategic planning was imporying out their mission.rtant to car the cio who reported that it strategic plning was not important said this area was an being executed properly and it did not require much attention or guidance . table 6 provides a summary of cio responses regarding it strategic planning . t the cio should be responsible for it accountability and transparency in the linger - cohen act] . of the 30 cios we surveyed , all of them indicated they were responsible for capital planning and investment management activities at their agency . this is consistent with the results of our 2004 report , which found that all 27 cios also indicated responsibility for capital planning and investment management . all 30 of the cios reported they thought the cio should be responsible for capital planning and investment management . all 30 cios reported that capital planning and investment management was “very important” or “important” to carrying out their mission . table 8 provides a summary of cio responses regarding capital planning and investment management . cios are responsible for ensuring agency to in protect information and systems [paperwork reduction act , federal formation security management act , and clinger - cohen act] . all 30 cios indicated they were responsible for ensuring compliance with information security best practices and related laws at their agency . this is consistent with the results of our 2004 report , which found that all of the 27 cios surveyed indicated being responsible for information security .