for this report , we examined 1 . in order to automatically extract data from the ehr , cdrs must develop methods for converting the data in each ehr to a format that the cdr's it system can accept and accurately interpret . for example , an acc official told us that one reason why their system has been costly to implement and does not work with ehr systems from certain vendors is because of differences in how data are stored in different ehr systems . finally , even if ehr systems collect the same basic content and use compatible storage methods , their data elements may be specified or defined differently . for example , an ehr may identify a smoker based on whether a person smoked any number of cigarettes in the last year , while another may count as a smoker anyone who has smoked at least 100 cigarettes in the past and still currently smokes . while both of these definitions may serve various purposes , the information collected from each ehr on smoking would not be fully comparable . these variations in ehr data content , storage , and specifications can impact a cdr's ability to extract data electronically from physician ehr systems . in order to assess physician performance , cdrs have to collect all the data elements needed for their performance measures and ensure that those data elements are consistent with the cdr's data specifications . consequently , cdrs cannot take full advantage of ehr systems to facilitate data collection and transmission unless they can overcome these variations in content , storage , and specifications across existing ehr systems . one way to reduce variation across health it applications , including ehr systems , and thereby facilitate collection and transmission of clinical data , is to develop and implement relevant health it standards . according to experts , cdrs could benefit from health it standards that reduce variation across ehr systems on the data elements needed for the measures used by cdrs . where such standards are in place , they are available for vendors to use in designing and implementing ehr systems . the program is scheduled to take effect in january 2014 . atra mandated that gao report on the potential of cdrs to improve the quality and efficiency of care in the medicare program and the role of health information technology ( it ) in facilitating cdrs . ways cdrs have demonstrated the capacity to improve the quality and efficiency of physician care ; 2 . we synthesized the experts' comments at the meeting together with other relevant sources , including related published literature , to assess the potential impact of selected actions hhs could take on overcoming the identified barriers to the development of qualified cdrs . to examine the potential of health it to enhance cdr operations and actions hhs can take to facilitate cdr use of health it , we reviewed documents and interviewed officials from cms and onc on the agencies' plans related to it for the qualified cdr program .