attorneys offices . we selected the criminal division because it had negotiated the vast majority of agreements entered into by prosecutors at doj headquarters , and we selected 12 specific u.s . attorneys offices because they were the only ones that had negotiated at least 2 agreements , of which at least 1 had been completed . to date , we have also interviewed representatives of 17 of the 25 companies that signed dpas or npas that met the following criteria: the agreement required the company to improve or institute an ethics or compliance program ; the agreement had been completed ; and we had discussed the agreement with doj . fifteen of these 25 companies were also required to hire an independent monitor , and , to date , we have interviewed 6 of these monitors . since we determined which doj officials , company representatives , and monitors to interview based on a nonprobability sample , the information we obtained from these interviews is not generalizable to all doj litigating units and all companies and monitors involved in dpas and npas . however , the interviews provided insights into the negotiation and implementation of dpas and npas . we conducted this performance audit from september 2008 to june 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our objectives . in summary , doj prosecutors with whom we spoke have based their decisions on whether to enter into a dpa or an npa and setting the terms of these agreements on the principles of federal prosecution of business organizations — which includes guidance , for example , on factoring in a company's cooperation and collateral consequences that may result from prosecution — as well as input from companies and regulatory agencies and other factors . while the correspondence in one case included information describing how prosecutors adhered to the processes required by doj guidance , the correspondence in the other case did not . in addition , 10 of the 13 doj offices we included in our review have made efforts to be transparent in their decision making by issuing press releases that explain the reasons why they entered into these agreements . however , prosecutors differed in their willingness to use dpas or npas . for instance , 3 of the 13 doj offices exclusively entered into dpas , and a prosecutor from 1 of these offices asserted that entering into an npa would be too lenient on the company . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this statement include kristy n. brown , jill evancho , tom jessor , danielle pakdaman , and janet temko as well as katherine davis , sarah kaczmarek , amanda miller , janay sam , and mandana yousefi . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .