at 2 of these sites , there were no institutional controls in place at all . according to epa , icts is a state - of - the - art tracking system that is web - based , is scalable , and will serve as the cornerstone for future programmatic and trend evaluations . the system is built around a cross - program , cross - agency , consensus - based institutional control data registry developed by the agency . the icts draft project management plan notes that epa envisioned an integrated tracking system that would be developed collaboratively using a work group approach that relied on existing data sources for its information . the primary sources of the data to be entered in icts include rods and any amendments ; explanations of significant differences ; notices of intent to delete ; and actual institutional control instruments , such as consent decrees , easements , ordinances , and advisories . the objectives of icts are to make institutional controls more effective by creating links across all levels of government through a tracking network ; improve epa program management responsibilities ; establish relationships with coregulators ( other federal agencies , along with state and local regulatory agencies ) ; improve information exchange with individuals interested in the productive use of a site after cleanup ; and improve existing processes allowing for notification to excavators of areas that are restricted or need protection prior to digging . some governmental controls may be established under state jurisdiction . some of these sites were delegated to states for monitoring and possible future action . for example , in one case , groundwater contamination was contained as long as wells at a nearby plant continued to operate — the wells , which pump approximately 10 million gallons a day , provide protection by capturing contaminants from a former landfill on site before they migrate into the off - site groundwater . epa asked the state to assume responsibility for monitoring the continued operation of the wells and to conduct an examination of groundwater contamination if well operation ceased . finally , deleting superfund sites and terminating corrective action at rcra facilities where waste remains without implementing institutional controls may be contrary to epa guidance . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is presented in appendix i . we conducted our work from october 2003 to january 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards , including an assessment of data reliability and internal controls . land use and institutional controls are usually linked , and should be considered together during the investigation phase of cleanup , according to epa guidance . as a site moves through the early stages of the cleanup process , site managers should develop assumptions about reasonably anticipated future land uses and consider whether institutional controls will be needed to maintain these uses over time . epa guidance states that , if remediation leaves waste in place that would not permit “unrestricted use” of the site and “unlimited exposure” to residual contamination , use of institutional controls should be considered to ensure protection against unacceptable exposure to the contamination left in place .