gao - 14-778 . washington , d.c.: september 23 , 2014 . we did not make recommendations to dod in this report . dod agreed with gao's observations . the services established initial operational capabilities dates in 2013 . the marine corps and air force are planning to field initial operational capabilities in 2015 and 2016 , respectively , and the navy plans to field its initial capability in 2018 . dod concurred with our recommendation and is in the process of conducting the assessment . the department of defense ( dod ) currently has or is developing several plans and analyses that will make up its overall f - 35 sustainment strategy , which is expected to be complete in fiscal year 2019 . primary gao conclusion / recommendation dod response and actions the annual f - 35 operating and support costs are estimated to be considerably higher than the combined annual costs of several legacy aircraft . dod had not fully addressed several issues that have an effect on affordability and operational readiness . operating and support cost estimates may not be reliable . we recommended that dod develop better informed affordability constraints ; address three risks that could affect sustainment , affordability , and operational readiness ; and take steps to improve the reliability of its cost estimates . dod concurred with all but one recommendation and partially concurred with the recommendation to conduct uncertainty analysis on one of its cost estimates , stating it already conducts a form of uncertainty analysis . gao continues to believe that the recommended analysis would provide a more comprehensive sense of the uncertainty in the estimates . to assess the program's ongoing development and testing we reviewed the status of software development and integration and contractor management improvement initiatives . we also interviewed officials from the program office , lockheed martin , pratt & whitney , and the defense contract management agency ( dcma ) to discuss current development status and software releases . in addition , we compared management objectives to progress made on these objectives during the year . we obtained and analyzed data on flights and test points , both planned and accomplished during 2014 . we compared test progress against the total program plans to complete . in addition , we interviewed officials from the f - 35 program office , lockheed martin , pratt & whitney , and director , operational test and evaluation office to discuss development test plans and achievements . we also collected information from the program office , prime contractor , engine contractor , and department of defense test pilots regarding the program's technical risks including the helmet mounted display , autonomic logistics information system , carrier arresting hook , structural durability , and engine . supplier quality at lockheed martin has been mixed . lockheed martin uses a reactive approach to managing most of its supplier base because , according to officials , they do not have access to supplier specific manufacturing data . the company uses internal metrics to track supplier performance such as the number of quality defects — known as non - conformances — discovered at the lockheed martin facility and the amount of scrap , rework , and repair driven by poor supplier performance .