the relationship was the same for large corporations . in 2000 , an estimated 82 percent of large usccs and 76 percent of large fccs reported tax liability of less than 5 percent of their income . ( see fig . 2 and tables 5 and 6 in app . fccs reported less tax liability as a percentage of gross receipts than usccs . overall , in 2000 , fccs reported an estimated $11.88 in tax liability per $1,000 in gross receipts compared with an estimated $14.75 reported by usccs . ( see table 1. ) among large corporations , fccs also reported less tax liability relative to gross receipts than usccs . these data were consistent across all years in the reporting period for both all corporations and for large corporations . ( see table 7 in app . another way of comparing tax liabilities is by the percentage of corporations reporting a tax liability below an arbitrary amount . for example , in 2000 , an estimated 92 percent of all fccs and an estimated 98 percent of all usccs reported less than $100,000 in tax liability . the percentages were not as high for large corporations: an estimated 46 percent of large fccs and 53 percent of large usccs reported less than $100,000 in tax liability . ( see tables 8 and 9 in app . in contrast , large usccs were concentrated in the financial services industry . ( see table 3. ) the distribution of large fccs and usccs among industry sectors across the years 1996 through 1999 reflects that of 2000 . ( see tables 15 and 16 in app . differences in cost ratios across industries are possible explanations for why industry concentration might affect the reported tax liabilities of fccs and usccs . cost differences could affect profits and thus tax liabilities . for example , higher cost of goods sold relative to receipts could contribute to lower taxable income relative to receipts and , consequently , to lower tax liability relative to receipts . tables 19 and 20 in appendix i show several types of cost ratios by major industry groups for 2000 . after controlling for age and industry concentration , we estimate that all fccs remained more likely than all usccs to have reported no tax liability from 1996 through 2000 . however , consistent with our earlier comparisons , all fccs were significantly less likely than all usccs to have reported tax liabilities of less than 5 percent of their total incomes , after controlling for the same factors . for an explanation of the simple statistical model used to control for age and industry concentration or for details of the regression results , see appendix ii . for large corporations , estimated differences in tax liabilities between fccs and usscs after controlling for age and industry were generally smaller than the comparisons without controlling for these two factors . our simple model did not control for other possible influences . for a further explanation of the regression model , see appendix ii . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the commissioner of internal revenue . we conducted our review from july 2003 through february 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .