( app . the mission need statement did not require the use of human systems integration . instead , the document required that the ship “be automated wherever practical to reduce workload and manpower requirements” and directed that operation by military sealift command personnel be considered for selected functions rather than navy personnel . however , the document stated that “changes to manpower requirements are not expected.” the analysis of alternatives examined crew sizes ranging from 60 percent smaller to 50 percent larger than those of current command ships and using civilian mariners to perform jcc ( x ) crew functions to reduce crew size . the analysis found that using a mix of military and civilian personnel rather than all military personnel would reduce personnel costs by nearly a third , saving $2.3 billion for four ships over a 40-year service life . however , the analysis did not include a full human systems integration assessment of each design alternative . at the time of its cancellation , the program had not received approval of its operational requirements document , which would have established key performance parameters . program officials stated that although achieving crew size reduction was not included in key program documents , they expected to achieve some crew size reductions on the jcc ( x ) when compared to existing command ships through the use of modern , more reliable equipment , for example , diesel propulsion instead of steam propulsion . yet , despite the program's informal interest in reducing the size of the crew needed to operate the ship , the analysis of alternatives did not examine optimizing via human systems integration one of the main drivers of crew size — the size of the embarked command staff . the total crew size of the jcc ( x ) equals the sum of the embarked joint command staff and the crew needed to operate the ship and perform basic ship functions . navy analyses show that the crew size needed to operate the ship depends upon the joint command staff size and the mission equipment that is to be maintained by the crew . yet , all of the navy analyses examined joint command staff alternatives , ranging from 500 to 1,500 staff , which were larger than the fleet commander's staff of 285 to 449 currently embarked on existing command ships . none of the analyses used human systems integration to determine the optimal size of the joint command staff . “the hsi team was not part of a larger jcc ( x ) system engineering effort , as would be expected in a full - up proposal or system development activity . the hsi team also did not have contact with potential jcc ( x ) users or with navy / joint hsi team members , as would be expected and desired in a normal system acquisition environment .