agency accountability . sixty - one percent of tribes that provided comments to federal agencies in 2016 raised concerns related to the extent of agencies' accountability for tribal consultation , stating that some agencies or officials are not held accountable for consulting ineffectively or for not consulting with relevant tribes . for example , comments included concerns that tribes may not have appeal options short of litigation when they believe that federal officials did not adhere to consultation requirements . in addition , officials from 21 federal agencies included in our march 2019 report identified factors that they had experienced that limit effective consultation for infrastructure projects . for the purposes of this testimony , we are highlighting those factors that more than 60 percent of the 21 agencies identified as concerns . for example: maintaining tribal contact information . officials from 14 of 21 agencies ( 67 percent ) cited difficulties obtaining and maintaining accurate contact information for tribes , which is needed to notify tribes of consultation opportunities . for example , ongoing changes or turnover in tribal leadership make it difficult to maintain updated tribal information , according to some agency officials we interviewed . agency resources to support consultation . officials from 13 of 21 agencies ( 62 percent ) cited constraints on agency staff , financial resources , or both to support consultation . however , sustained congressional attention to these issues and the relevant factors impacting the effectiveness of agencies' consultation efforts may help to minimize the negative impacts on tribes' cultural resources , when relevant federal laws and regulations apply . chairman gallego , ranking member cook , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact anna maria ortiz at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or ortiza@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . key contributors to this statement include lisa van arsdale ( assistant director ) , brad dobbins , leslie kaas pollock , and jeanette soares . that report included a discussion of arpa and nagpra . in addition , we reported in august 2018 that arpa and nagpra contain provisions prohibiting the removal of archaeological resources and native american cultural items from certain lands unless certain conditions are met , including consultation with indian tribes . specifically , arpa prohibits , among other things , the excavation or removal of archaeological resources from public or indian lands without a permit from the federal agency with management authority over the land . if the federal agency determines that issuance of such a permit may result in harm to , or destruction of , any religious or cultural site , the agency must notify any indian tribe which may consider the site as having religious or cultural importance and meet , upon request , with tribal officials to discuss their interests . nagpra prohibits the intentional removal from , or excavation of , native american cultural items from federal or tribal lands unless an arpa permit has been issued and other requirements are met .