steel . in this industry , the largest u.s. producers are cdsoa recipients . recipient companies reported that payments — though small relative to company size and the challenges they face in their capital - intensive industries — had positive effects . steel accounts for the single largest industry share of outstanding dumping orders , and most major u.s. producers receive cdsoa payments under numerous ad / cv orders on different products . steel recipients we contacted varied in their assessments of cdsoa's effects , but generally agreed that the program benefited them by providing greater opportunities for making needed capital investments in their plant and equipment . steel recipients also commented , though , that cdsoa has not been a complete solution to the serious problems they faced . when the asian financial crisis spawned rising imports , falling steel prices , and consolidating of firms , the receipt of cdsoa disbursements did not prevent several steel producers from joining numerous others in the industry in filing for bankruptcy . candles . ten of the estimated 400 u.s. candle companies are eligible and receive cdsoa disbursements . a number of recipients contended that distributions have helped keep them in business , enabling them to develop newer , better , and safer candles through investment in equipment and research and development . one recipient stated that it has been able to offer employees more consistent and comprehensive benefits packages due to cdsoa . several large candle producers that are comparable in size to leading recipients complained that they are in favor of the order but are ineligible to receive cdsoa disbursements . some non - recipients argue that recipients have an unfair advantage in their ability to keep prices lower than they otherwise would . for instance , a major non - recipient company has closed two of four of its domestic manufacturing facilities and has reduced shifts at others . a smaller non - recipient company contended that when it matched its competitors' lower prices , it was not able to make a profit . as a result , the company stated that it was forced to exit this segment of the candle business and release some workers . crawfish . about 30 small , family - owned crawfish processors have received cdsoa disbursements . recipients said cdsoa payments provided the industry with its first effective relief against dumped imports in several years and enabled them to buy and process more crawfish , make long - needed repairs and investments , hire more employees , and pay off debts . in june 2003 , the itc reported that cdsoa disbursements to some domestic producers had converted an industrywide net loss into net income . the 16 crawfish tail meat processors who received cdsoa distributions that we spoke with generally believe that the program has had positive effects on the industry and their companies , keeping businesses open and employees working . non - recipients we spoke with in this industry said that cdsoa had helped recipient companies - - - but had put them at a competitive disadvantage .