artillery occupations . for the army we also included infantry , and for the marine corps we also included amphibious assault vehicles and motor transport occupations . to determine how the army's and marine corps' use of simulation - based training devices has changed , including efforts to integrate live and simulation - based training capabilities , we analyzed service documents that provided information on the historical use of simulation - based training devices . we also interviewed officials representing the selected occupations and , among others , the services' training commands and materiel development organizations to discuss how simulators and simulations were and are currently being used . we evaluated guidance and documentation on the services' processes for coordinating their development of simulation - based training capabilities and technologies . in addition , we reviewed documents on the development of technical capabilities to connect simulation - based training devices . we also interviewed , and reviewed documents from , officials at fort hood , texas — the first installation to field and use the army's new technical capability for connecting live and simulation - based training — to discuss user assessments . to ascertain the factors the army and marine corps consider in determining whether to use live or simulation - based training , including the extent to which they consider performance and cost information , we reviewed dod and service policies and guidance related to developing and conducting training . we also reviewed documentation on simulator usage data and met with officials from the services' training commands to discuss how this data was being used , and how the services determine the relationship between simulator usage and performance . in addition , we met with officials from department of the army and both services' training commands to determine how costs are considered and compared when developing the different mixes of live and simulation - based training . we reviewed training documents to determine how the services identified the mix of training for institutional and home station training . in addition , we reviewed leading management practices , the federal internal control standards , and our past reviews on the navy's and air force's use of live and virtual training , and federal cost - estimating and budgeting guidance . we conducted this performance audit from june 2012 to august 2013 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . for additional information on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . all army and marine corps training — whether for individuals or units — is task - based , and each task has an associated set of conditions and standards . for example , the conditions may specify daytime or nighttime training , and the standard , a measure of a unit's or individual's proficiency in performing a task , could be to fire a weapon to become familiar with how it operates , or to put a specific number of rounds on target .