identifying alternatives . the identifying alternatives category includes best practices that help ensure the alternatives to be analyzed are sufficient , diverse , and viable . analyzing alternatives . according to nwp officials , this plan was partially effective . specifically , nwp officials said that they discovered that components for the interim ventilation system were damaged when they inspected the components before formally accepting them . in addition , they said that the costs to return the components to the manufacturer and repair them were paid for by the manufacturer . however , the nwp officials said that as a result of receiving the faulty equipment , the installation of the interim ventilation system was delayed about 4 months because nwp needed to send the components back to the manufacturer and make corrections to its shipping process to prevent a reoccurrence of these issues . corrective actions from the phase two accident investigation report . nwp identified the risk of potential delay of up to 6 weeks regarding the length of time doe needed to complete the phase two accident investigation . in the summer and fall of 2014 , when nwp was developing the initial project management baseline , doe's phase two accident investigation was still underway . according to nwp officials , they needed to wait for doe to complete the accident investigation and issue the final report with recommendations before they could begin developing and implementing corrective actions . doe issued the final report in april of 2015 . according to the operations activity manager for wipp in the carlsbad field office , completing the corrective actions in response to the report's recommendations resulted in a 3-month delay . nwp officials said that in recognition of the need for a more effective risk management process , they revised their process as part of revising the recovery cost and schedules estimates . these officials explained , for example , the revised process now involves more frequent discussions and updating the status of potential risks with managers at wipp who oversee the departments where the project risks are generated . we did not conduct an assessment of the effectiveness of this new risk management process . doe did not follow all best practices in analyzing and selecting an alternative for the new ventilation system at wipp . as a result , doe's analysis was not reliable and doe cannot be confident that the selected alternative will best provide the needed capabilities . of the four categories of the best practices , doe fully met the category for identifying alternatives . however , doe partially or minimally met the other three categories of best practices — general principles , analyzing alternatives , and selecting the preferred alternative — because of key limitations . ( see app . iv for the detailed results of our analysis of doe's aoa process. ) doe's aoa process fully met the best practices in the identifying alternatives category . to identify alternatives , doe relied on analyses conducted by nwp , the contractor responsible for the project , and the second contractor — trinity . the pressure forced open the container's lid and propelled its radioactive waste contents , combustible gases , and other materials into the air and on to adjacent waste containers .