the toll for such use varies , increasing during periods of peak congestion . there are several approaches to implementing congestion pricing on roads and at airports . however , incorporating pricing into our transportation systems involves overcoming several implementation challenges , such as current restrictions on using congestion pricing on our highways and on runways , and equity and fairness concerns . economists generally believe that charging automobile , truck , vessel , and aircraft operators surcharges or tolls during congested periods can enhance economic efficiency by making them take into account the external costs they impose on others in deciding when , where , and how to travel . in congested situations , external costs are substantial and include increased travel time , pollution , and noise . the goal of efficient pricing on public roads , for example , would be to set tolls for travel during congested periods that would make the price ( including the toll ) that a driver pays for such a trip equal or close to the total cost of that trip , including external costs . conversely , drivers who had little flexibility to alter their work schedules to avoid a toll by traveling at off - peak hours could potentially be more affected than workers with such flexibility . there is widespread agreement that mobility is essential for a strong economy . it provides people with access to goods , services , recreation , and jobs ; it provides businesses with access to materials and markets . it also promotes the movement of personnel and material to meet national defense needs . however , our transportation systems — for surface , maritime , and air transportation — have become increasingly congested . by some measures , for example , overall roadway congestion has increased more than 50 percent between 1982 and 2000 in some of the largest metropolitan areas . congestion results in significant costs to the environment through increased pollution , and to individuals and businesses through wasted energy , time , and money . in recent reports covering all three of these transportation systems , we have analyzed ways to make these systems operate more efficiently — including ways to do so without major new capital investment . one such approach involves congestion pricing — that is , charging a higher price to use the system during peak periods or on congested routes . doing so provides incentive for users to shift to less congested times or make other adjustments . those who value the service enough will pay the additional price ; those who value it to a lesser degree will shift their use accordingly . currently , there is renewed interest in the role that congestion pricing can play in enhancing mobility , as evidenced by several recent proposals to institute pricing policies from industry , interest groups , and the department of transportation . my statement for the record is meant to provide some overall perspective on what we have learned about congestion pricing .