determined the authenticity of seized assets . approves and , with dod , manages the obligation and expenditure of seized funds . coordinates with state on outreach to foreign government officials , including finance ministries . coordinates with state and justice on potential asset designations . tracks the status of assets frozen in and transferred from other countries . undertake diplomatic efforts to encourage other governments to implement un resolution 1483 . seized an additional $32 million . negotiated consensus on un resolution 1483 . submits potential freezing designations to the united nations . identify , freeze , and transfer assets to the development fund for iraq . coordinates u.s. efforts to locate additional hidden assets . reviews documents and interviews individuals connected to saddam hussein's finances , front companies , and account transactions ; provides leads to embassies and to other governments and financial institutions . undertake diplomatic efforts to encourage other governments to follow up on leads and freeze assets . encourages un members to identify , freeze , and transfer assets . identify and track financial assets related to the central bank of iraq . provides research and analysis used to identify assets of the former iraqi regime . work with the iawg to facilitate activities in iraq , including providing logistical support to treasury investigators . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . maintains treasury's vested account . as directed by treasury , released the vested funds to the department of defense and the coalition provisional authority ( cpa ) . approves cpa spending requests of vested funds . approves and manages the obligation and expenditure of vested funds . military identified and seized assets in u.s. dollar , euro , and dinar currency notes ; gold , jewelry , and iraqi bonds . we will be happy to answer any questions you may have . for questions regarding this testimony , please call joseph christoff at ( 202 ) 512-8979 or davi m. d'agostino at ( 202 ) 512-5431 . other key contributors to this statement were thomas conahan , lynn cothern , philip farah , rachel demarcus , ronald ito , barbara keller , sarah lynch , zina merritt , tetsuo miyabara , marc molino , and mark speight . froze assets in 1990 , directed financial institutions to transfer these assets to treasury account in 2003 . leads interagency iraq task force working group for tracking and recovery of iraqi assets ( iraqi assets working group , iawg ) . assisted the military in the identification and seizure of assets . this amount included $750,000 found with saddam hussein when he was captured . department of homeland security agents seized an additional $32 million . the cpa is authorized to use these seized funds for humanitarian and reconstruction efforts . the study found that at least 48 percent of the contracts were overpriced and that on average the contracts were overpriced by 21 percent .