ii. ) for the demonstration , suppliers were also required to meet standards developed by palmetto that were more stringent and explicit than the current 21 general standards . for example , the demonstration standards required that only qualified staff deliver , set up , and pick up equipment and supplies and established time frames for suppliers to pick up equipment after a beneficiary had requested its removal . these included evaluations of the demonstration . two evaluation reports on the demonstration have been published , and a final report is pending . we also conducted interviews with officials from cms , the contractor that administered the demonstration , and its evaluators . in reviewing referrals , palmetto looked for evidence of quality and service . this included evidence of financial stability and good credit standing , a record of providing products that met beneficiaries' needs , compliance with medicare's rules and regulations , acceptable business practices , ethical behavior , and maintenance of accurate records . the bid evaluation process also included inspections of bidding suppliers' facilities that focused on indicators of quality and service . these on - site inspections were more comprehensive than those normally performed for medicare suppliers of dme , prosthetics , orthotics , and supplies . for example , inspectors were tasked with determining if the supplier had access to the full range of products for which it had bid , documentation of infection control procedures , instructions on using equipment , and patient files with required information . in some cases , a demonstration supplier's selection was conditional on the supplier making specified improvements . for example , according to a cms official , some suppliers were told to clarify instructions for beneficiaries , properly store oxygen equipment , or improve procedures for following up with patients after initial service was provided . cms and palmetto officials told us that comprehensive inspections were useful in ensuring the selection of quality suppliers . cms can use its experience from the demonstration to make informed decisions as it implements large - scale competitive bidding within the framework established by mma . the demonstration showed that competitive bidding has the potential to garner significant savings for both the medicare program and its beneficiaries , especially on items with high levels of medicare spending . while the potential exists for significant savings , moving from small - scale to large - scale competitive bidding calls for streamlining implementation . developing a cookie - cutter approach to competitive bidding — for example , using the same policies and processes in multiple locations — could help cms roll out its implementation in over 80 locations more easily , while employing mail - order to deliver items with prices set through nationwide competitive bidding could allow cms to more quickly implement competitive bidding on a large scale . to ensure that competitive bidding savings are not achieved by the suppliers' substitution of lower - cost items , cms can consider ways to collect better information on the specific items that suppliers are providing to beneficiaries . finally , careful monitoring of beneficiaries' experiences will be essential to ensure that problems are quickly identified .