the office is responsible for the enforcement of the lda . the office fulfills its administrative responsibilities by researching and responding to referrals of noncomplying lobbyists submitted by the secretary of the senate and clerk of the house . the office sends additional noncompliance notices to the lobbyists , requesting that the lobbyists file reports or correct reported information . the office also has the authority to pursue a civil or criminal case for noncompliance . an electronic system has been developed and implemented in response to a recommendation in our prior report , specifically to address issues we raised regarding the tracking , analysis , and reporting of enforcement activities for lobbyists who were referred to the office for failure to comply . the officials said that the new system is designed to provide a more structured approach for assigning resources and to better focus lobbying disclosure compliance enforcement efforts . the new system is intended to track and record enforcement activities , record the status and disposition of lobbyists' cases , provide automated alerts to ensure timely follow - up and monitoring , provide the ability to track those who continually fail to comply with the lda , and use data to report statistical trends to track the effectiveness of enforcement activities . neither the lda nor guidance requires lobbyists to maintain records or documentation to support information disclosed in their reports . however , similar to our findings in last year's review , most lobbyists reporting $5,000 or more in income or expenses were able to provide written support for certain elements of individual activity reports we examined . for example , most lobbyists were able to provide documentation to support income or expenses related elements of their reports . we estimate that lobbyists could provide written documentation for income or expenses for an estimated 88 percent of the disclosure reports for the fourth quarter of 2008 and the first three quarters of 2009 . the clerk of the house takes longer to send referrals because the office uses different referral procedures , such as reviewing the data for duplicate referrals before they are sent to the office . table 3 shows the number of referrals received from the secretary of the senate and clerk of the house as well as the number of noncompliance letters the office sent to lobbyists as a result of these referrals . the office has also received referrals for noncompliance with the hloga requirement to file ld - 203 reports . to date , the office has received 2,486 ld - 203 noncompliance referrals for the 2008 calendar year and 194 ld - 203 noncompliance referrals for the first half of the 2009 calendar year . officials from the office stated that similar to the ld - 2 referrals , the number of ld - 203 referrals from the secretary of the senate is larger than the number from the clerk of the house because of differences in their referral procedures . lobbyists for all but 11 of the 112 reports that we reviewed from our sample that reported income and all but 5 of the 22 sampled reports with lobbying expenses provided some form of documentation for the dollar amounts reported .