evaluate the benefits . establish an operational concept . assess the impact on air traffic control . conduct a safety assessment and record it with the appropriate safety risk management documentation . determine requirements . conduct a feasibility and economic analysis . establish requirements for aircraft and operator approval . conduct rulemaking . coordinate with industry and international participants . coordinate with air traffic control representatives and pilot groups . complete regional documentation . acquire approval for aircraft and operators . develop pilot and air traffic control procedures . design pilot and air traffic control training materials . confirm that the system works . employ the separation standard . monitor the performance of the system in accordance with safety risk management practices . in addition to the contact named above , jonathan carver ( assistant director ) , sarah arnett ( analyst - in - charge ) , amy abramowitz , melissa bodeau , samuel gaffigan ; david hooper , richard hung , amanda miller , malika rice , and pamela vines made key contributions to this report . march 2018 . jrc directed the aseps program to proceed with both enhanced surveillance options — enhanced ads - c and space - based ads - b — to a final investment decision , which was planned for september 2018 . june 2018 . aseps program proposed a strategic shift , which involved delaying the final investment decision on enhanced ads - c and deferring a final investment decision on space - based ads - b to allow additional testing on how to use space - based ads - b in oceanic and domestic airspace . drivers of this shift in approach included the results of the business case analysis . september 2018 ( strategy decision ) . jrc approved the aseps program's strategic shift . the aseps program asked the jrc to approve their plan to delay a final investment decision on enhanced ads - c and to defer a final investment decision on space - based ads - b . the jrc approved the aseps program's proposal to merge the aseps enhanced ads - c investment with a planned final investment decision on upgrades to the advanced technology and oceanic procedures ( atop ) system . the jrc also approved the aseps program's proposal to continue studying space - based ads - b through an operational evaluation in u.s. offshore airspace and longer - term studies concerning using space - based ads - b for contingency operations and future use in u.s. oceanic airspace . april 2019 ( final investment decision ) . jrc approved a final investment decision on the aseps program's plan to use enhanced ads - c to enable new minimum separation standards in u.s. oceanic airspace . the atop program management office asked the jrc to approve investments in large - scale atop enhancements that include system changes that will enable the implementation of new minimum separation standards ( i.e. , 23 nautical miles lateral and 20 nautical miles longitudinal ) with the use of enhanced ads - c . as part of its acquisition process ( outlined in app .