this restriction may result in too many staff in some areas and too few in other areas . in addition , because dvop and lver grants are separate funding streams , states have little flexibility in staffing decisions . while the congress has clearly defined employment service to veterans as a national responsibility , the law has not been amended to reflect the recent changes in the employment and training service delivery system introduced by wia . if a state does not spend all of its grant money , states return the extra funding and vets redistributes it to states that request additional funding . a state that overspends in its dvop program but spends less than its allocation in the lver program would have to use other funds to cover the amount overspent in the dvop program , and vets would take back the additional lver grant money . the state may request more money from vets for its dvop program , but there is no guarantee that it will get the additional funding . states are also constrained when it comes to deciding what dvop and lver staff members do and whom they serve . the law specifies the separate duties for dvop and lver staff , although we found that they generally performed similar duties . furthermore , dvop and lver staff members may not serve certain individuals who may qualify for veteran services under other employment and training programs . the law governing the dvop and lver programs defines veterans eligible for employment assistance more narrowly than wia or vets for its other veterans' activities . because of this more restricted definition , dvop and lver staff are not allowed , for example , to serve veterans who were on active duty for 180 days or less , and they are not permitted to serve reservists or national guard members . another sign that the dvop and lver grants are not well integrated into the one - stop environment is that the funding year for dvop and lver programs does not coincide with the funding year for other employment programs offered in the one - stop center system . the appropriation to fund the dvop and lver grants is made available on a federal fiscal year basis — october 1 through september 30 — while other employment programs and states operate on a program year basis — july 1 through june 30 . having labor programs' funding streams on different schedules is burdensome for states and makes the budgeting process more complicated . vets has taken a more reactive rather than proactive approach to adapting to the one - stop system and has not taken adequate steps to adapt the dvop and lver programs to the new environment . for example , instead of coordinating with other programs to determine how best to fit the dvop and lver programs into the one - stop system , vets officials reported that they are waiting to see how states implement their programs and will then decide how to integrate the staff or adjust their programs . those who find employment before being registered are not counted as having entered employment after using self - service resources available through the one - stop center .