however , more competition is possible . in written comments , dod concurred with the report's last two recommendations and partially concurred with the first recommendation . the recent changes that air force made to its process , which introduced a new high - level review of contract actions under a class justification , may help increase the extent of competition . far ยง 5.201 ( d ) . nsa and nro , which reported that they use the national security exception for all or nearly all contracting , showed high levels of competition compared to the dod military departments . as illustrated in figure 8 below , according to data provided by the agencies , annual competition rates ranged from 27 percent to nearly 70 percent of total obligations at nsa and nro . because data on contracting at intelligence agencies are typically classified at highly restrictive levels , we did not have sufficient access to independently validate the data provided . nro and nsa have both developed tools to help increase competition in procuring sensitive goods and services and have made these tools available for other intelligence agencies . these tools bring together a large number of potential offerors and help the agencies solicit and evaluate vendors , and competitively award the contract , while taking measures to limit the risk to national security . the nro acquisition research center , developed for intelligence community procurements , limits potential contractors to about 1,200 registered firms that are already cleared to perform in a secure environment and have a workforce with security clearances . an nro senior procurement official described this system as a proprietary classified version of fedbizopps . the nsa's acquisition resource center is the nsa's business registry database that provides industry with a central source for acquisition information . this system also serves as a market research tool for nsa personnel , as well as a means for distribution of acquisition documents to its industry partners . all companies that wish to do business with nsa must be registered in the system . as of october 2010 , the database included about 9,300 companies . an nsa inspector general report found that this system improved the agency's ability to conduct market research and solicit competition . the inspector general found that it improved competition by making the process more systematic . the other two dod intelligence agencies , dia and nga , have made arrangements to use one or both of the nsa and nro systems . for example , our review of a dia contract under the national security exception showed that the agency solicited 11 companies and received five proposals by using nsa's acquisition resource center . a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is presented in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from march 2011 to january 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .