the law does not require such a review . state officials said that , while they are aware of instances where proliferation activities ended following the imposition of sanctions on particular firms , such information is primarily collected on an anecdotal basis . there has been no overall or systematic review of whether sanctioned entities ended their proliferation activities , though state officials indicated that they monitor the activities of sanctioned parties as part of their daily responsibilities . ( see app . ii for more information regarding the timing and nature of u.s. and un sanctions. ) treasury administers a ban on almost all u.s. trade or investment activity involving iran . the prohibitions of the trade and investment ban began with a 1987 ban on iranian imports and were followed by a 1995 ban on u.s. exports to and investment in iran . these prohibitions apply to u.s. persons , including u.s. companies and their foreign branches , wherever located . u.s. officials stated that the ban does not apply to independent foreign subsidiaries of u.s. companies . non - u.s. persons are generally exempt from the provisions of the ban . trade sanctions against iran were eased in 2000 to allow for the purchase and import from iran of carpets and food products . further , the trade sanctions reform and export enhancement act of 2000 lifted , subject to certain exceptions , u.s. sanctions on commercial sales of food , agricultural commodities , and medical products to several sanctioned countries , including iran . the ban also prohibits u.s. financial institutions from having direct banking relationships with banks in iran and banks owned or controlled by the government of iran . according to a treasury official , the trade and investment ban is aimed at making it more difficult for iran to procure u.s. goods , services , and technology , including those that could be used for terrorism or proliferation . the official further stated that , as with all u.s. economic sanctions programs , the premise of the sanctions is to exact a price on the sanctioned entity , which serves as an inducement to change the behavior that threatens u.s. national security and foreign policy goals . sanctions also serve to make it more difficult for a sanctioned entity to pursue its threatening conduct . treasury's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) administers the trade and investment ban and is responsible for reviewing and licensing requests to export or re - export goods to iran , with most items subject to a general policy of denial . state officials said that generally no consideration of additional penalties or measures is given to parties who have been sanctioned multiple times , although some of these entities have been sanctioned under other sanction tools . however , state officials emphasized that they raise concerns about the activities of such entities with foreign governments as appropriate . in deciding to sanction an entity under inksna , state officials reported that every 6 months they assess as many as 60,000 intelligence reports to identify transfer cases that should be submitted to agencies for review .