prescreening cargo . in its efforts to increase security , customs has entered into an agreement to station inspectors at three canadian ports to prescreen cargo bound for the united states . the agency has since reached similar agreements with the netherlands , belgium , and france to place u.s. inspectors at key ports and initiated similar negotiations with other foreign governments in europe and asia . working with the global trade community . customs is also engaging the trade community in a partnership program to protect u.s. borders and international commerce from acts of terrorism . in this recent initiative , u.s. importers — and ultimately carriers and other businesses — enter into voluntary agreements with customs to enhance the security of their global supply chains and those of their business partners . in return , customs will agree to expedite the clearance of the members' cargo at u.s. ports of entry . ins is also working on a number of efforts to increase border security to prevent terrorists or other undesirable aliens from entering the united states . ins proposes to spend nearly $3 billion on border enforcement in fiscal year 2003 — about 75 percent of its total enforcement budget of $4.1 billion . a substantial number of ins's actions relate to creating an entry and exit system to identify persons posing security threats . ins is working on a system to create records for aliens arriving in the united states and match them with those aliens' departure records . the immigration and naturalization service data management improvement act of 2000 requires the u.s. attorney general to implement such a system at airports and seaports by the end of 2003 , at the 50 land border ports with the greatest numbers of arriving and departing aliens by the end of 2004 , and at all ports by the end of 2005 . the usa patriot act , passed in october 2001 , further instructs the u.s. attorney general and the secretary of state to focus on two new elements in designing this system — tamper - resistant documents that are machine - readable at ports of entry and the use of biometric technology , such as fingerprint and retinal scanning . another act passed by congress goes further by making the use of biometrics a requirement in the new entry and exit system . a potentially more active agency in the future is the new tsa , which has been directed to protect all transportation systems and establish needed standards . to date , however , tsa has had limited involvement in certain aspects of improving port security . tsa officials report that they are working with the coast guard , customs , and other public and private stakeholders to enhance all aspects of maritime security , such as developing security standards , developing and promulgating regulations to implement the standards , and monitoring the execution of the regulations . tsa , along with the maritime administration and the coast guard is administering the federal grant program to enhance port security . tsa officials also report that they plan to establish a credentialing system for transportation workers . the congress is currently considering additional legislation to further enhance seaport security .