we also interviewed officials from iom about the iom recommendations . finally , we interviewed stakeholders involved in clinical trial activity , such as groups representing pharmaceutical companies and clinical researchers , to obtain their perspectives on nih's clinical trial activity . to determine the extent to which nih's od uses data to oversee clinical trial activity across the ics , we reviewed documentation of the data that the od reviews related to clinical trial activity , such as documentation of the funding provided for each clinical trial supported by the ics . we compared the types of data the od reviews on clinical trial activity with the federal internal control standards described in standards for internal control in the federal government , which specify that agencies should have operational and financial data to determine whether they are meeting their goals . we interviewed od officials about the process they use to review data on clinical trial activity , and we compared the od's process with requirements for comparing actual performance to planned or expected results outlined in standards for internal control in the federal government . to supplement our understanding of how the od reviews data from ic officials , we interviewed officials from the four selected ics described above about the data that they provide to the od and about how the od uses that information . we also reviewed documentation from the selected ics on the types of information the ics collect on clinical trial activity , such as information collected through progress reports submitted to nih by recipients of nih clinical trial funding . we conducted this performance audit from july 2015 through march 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . nci has efforts underway to implement each of the recommendations . a provision in the conference report accompanying the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 , directed nih to conduct a review of the applicability of the iom recommendations to all of nih's ics that conduct clinical trials . leaders from nih and the ics indicated that more analysis was needed to account for the ics' portfolios and management activities . through its ctwg , nih developed recommendations that aim to enhance its stewardship of clinical trials , including several recommendations to improve nih's ability to collect data on clinical trial activity across its ics . according to officials , the ctwg — a working group which included officials from nih's od and the ics — began in february 2013 in response to discussions among nih officials at the agency's annual leadership forum , where officials presented the results of nih's survey on the applicability of the iom recommendations . although it decided not to apply the iom recommendations across ics , nih officials recognized that they could enhance aspects of nih's stewardship of clinical trials , and so they developed the ctwg to provide recommendations on how nih could do so . in august 2013 , the ctwg issued eight recommendations intended to enhance nih's stewardship of clinical trials . ( see table 2. )