what do you do with an iguana ? the group that was being destructive moved back and forth between campus and the city , so we communicated and coordinated a lot with community partners . we work together on a daily basis , so the communication that night was seamless . we also had a member of the local police department in our emergency management headquarters during the event , which was very helpful . in the days leading up to hurricane irma , statewide briefings were held twice a day with a variety of emergency personnel in the room , including local police and fire chiefs , mayors , power companies , communications personnel , and the state emergency management department . everyone had already discussed how we would work together in the event of an emergency , so the conversation focused on coordinating specific actions . for example , we are a state system of technical colleges with many tractor - trailer drivers on campus . we were asked to deploy those drivers to deliver supplies to various state and fema locations around the state . in addition to managing emergencies for the college , i am also the mayor of one of the local towns and those responsibilities dovetail nicely . responding to emergencies never becomes second nature , but it's nice to know that when something natural or manmade strikes , there are systems , people , and assets in place . one of the reasons that the system works so well now is because frameworks like nims were put in place after hurricane katrina . various sub - agencies within dhs , doj , and education are involved in developing and providing emergency preparedness resources for colleges ( see fig . these three agencies use a variety of methods to provide resources , such as written guidance , webinars , and individual technical assistance ( see fig . the content of these resources ranges from general emergency management information to guidance specifically tailored to schools ( see text box ) . agency officials we interviewed said federal agencies have specific areas of expertise as it relates to college emergency preparedness . for example , dhs' fema provides broad emergency preparedness information and tools and doj approaches emergency preparedness through a law enforcement and public safety perspective . education's role includes the work of its federal student aid office , which approaches emergency preparedness by issuing relevant guidance , providing technical assistance , and enforcing compliance with the clery act . federal officials noted that colleges can have differing needs when it comes to emergency preparedness , based on their size , funding , and current threats . as a result , agency officials said they strive to provide tailored resources when possible . for example , dhs officials said that the campus resilience program is building a website portal that will include a menu of fema resources tailored to colleges' needs , including a downloadable self - assessment of risk and vulnerability . this new program is meant to expand on a similar pilot program that operated from 2013 to 2016 ; officials expect it to be accessible to schools midway through fiscal year 2018 .