the ccmrfs are not whole units by themselves . they are a collection of geographically separated dod capabilities and units across the military services and consist of such existing specialized capabilities as the u.s. marine corps' chemical biological incident response force as well as general capabilities , such as transportation units . although the ccmrf is intended to be about 4,500 personnel in size , the size of the force that would deploy in support of an actual incident could be modified based on the size of the incident . dod ultimately plans to have three fully functional ccmrfs . dod would , if necessary , draw on additional general military forces over and above the ccmrf to provide assistance in the event of one or more major cbrne incidents . dod has operational plans for cbrne consequence management . however , dod has not integrated its plans with other federal government plans , because the concept and strategic plans associated with the integrated planning system mandated by presidential directive in december 2007 have not been completed . unlike most federal agencies , dod has had cbrne consequence management operational plans for over 10 years . dod , northcom , and its components have prepared individual plans that address cbrne consequence management following dod's well - established joint operation planning process . this process establishes objectives , assesses threats , identifies capabilities needed to achieve the objectives in a given environment , and ensures that capabilities ( and the military forces to deliver those capabilities ) are distributed to ensure mission success . joint operation planning also includes assessing and monitoring the readiness of those units providing the capabilities for the missions they are assigned . dod and northcom routinely review and update their plans as part of dod's joint planning system . for example , the most recent northcom cbrne consequence management plan was completed in october 2008 . dod and northcom have also developed such planning documents as execute orders that are key to linking immediate action to those plans , as well as scenario - based playbooks to guide the planning , operations , and command and control of military forces for cbrne efforts . the department of homeland security ( dhs ) is leading a governmentwide effort to develop an integrated planning system that would link the plans of all federal agencies involved in incident response , including dod's ; however , this effort is not yet complete . while much in the way of federal guidance has been developed , to be most effective , policy documents must be operationalized by further detailing roles and responsibilities for each entity that may be involved in responding to high - risk or catastrophic incidents . in december 2007 , homeland security presidential directive 8 , annex 1 , mandated that the secretary of homeland security , in coordination with the heads of other federal agencies with roles in homeland security , develop an integrated planning system to provide common processes for all of the entities developing response plans .