ii. ) doe also provided a number of technical comments , which we incorporated in this report as appropriate . to examine indirect cost - rate trends at each of the five largest doe laboratories , we analyzed each laboratory's indirect cost - rate data for fiscal years 2000 through 2004 . specifically , we interviewed laboratory financial officials and analyzed documents to determine how each laboratory calculated its overall indirect costs rate by ( 1 ) classifying costs as direct or indirect and ( 2 ) collecting indirect costs into pools and distributing them among other cost pools or directly to program sponsors . furthermore , because doe and its management and operating contractors use functional support cost data to help assess certain activities , we analyzed these rates for the five laboratories for fiscal years 2000 through 2004 , along with the results of peer reviews performed at each laboratory . we surveyed laboratory financial officials on the reliability of the indirect and functional support cost data , covering issues such as data entry access , quality control procedures , and the accuracy and completeness of these data . follow - up questions were added whenever necessary . in addition , we reviewed all data provided by the laboratories , investigated instances where we had questions regarding issues such as categories or amounts , and made corrections as needed . on the basis of this work , we determined that the financial data provided were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report . we presented percentage changes in the overall indirect cost rates for fiscal years 2000 through 2004 that the five laboratories reported . the purchases are automatically routed through an approval system . oak ridge consolidated its new radio system , which is used by security and maintenance staff , with other doe facilities in the area , reportedly saving $900,000 on purchase prices plus $475,000 in annual costs . laboratory officials told us that opportunities exist for further cost savings through reduced staff time and better prices by consolidating procurements with each contractor's parent organization , other doe facilities , or other federal agencies' facilities in the same region . idaho officials cited the potential for reducing costs for using consolidated procurements with nearby military bases and other facilities . an nnsa procurement official noted that laboratories could save through increased use of integrated contractor procurement team agreements , noting that some procurement officials may not be aware of available opportunities . in an era of federal budget constraints , it is crucial to efficiently manage support costs at doe laboratories , thereby maximizing funds available for laboratory missions . doe and its contractors have taken steps to reduce support costs , but additional opportunities exist . to help decision makers analyze support costs across the laboratories , several years ago doe began to require laboratories to report functional support costs . however , peer reviews have revealed some problems with these data and challenges remain in comparing costs , in part because of ambiguity in the definitions for some categories of support costs . to encourage contractors to reduce support costs , doe also piloted a program to award contract years for performance improvement and cost savings .