epa provided written comments . both agencies expressed agreement with the findings and recommendations in the report . epa and usda also provided technical comments that we incorporated into the report as appropriate . epa's written comments are presented in appendix ii . appendix i contains further details of our scope and methodology . discharge permits establish limits on the amounts and types of pollutants that can be released into waterways . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . to determine the problems epa faced in administering the cafo program and the potential challenges the states and epa may face when implementing revisions to its cafo regulations , we surveyed all 10 epa regional offices . our survey asked regional officials to provide information on program management and oversight of authorized states' cafo programs , resources dedicated to the program , problems epa has faced administering the program , and the potential challenges the states and epa might face in implementing revisions to the cafo program . in addition , we interviewed epa officials in 4 of the 10 regions . we judgmentally selected the 4 regions that represent 23 states with an estimated 70 percent of large animal feeding operations that could be designated as cafos under the revised regulations . because epa and most states do not know precisely how many animal feeding operations should have discharge permits , we used usda's estimate of the number of potential cafos based on livestock type and the number of animals on the farm from the 1997 census of agriculture . these regions and their represented states are region 3 – philadelphia: delaware , maryland , pennsylvania , virginia , and region 4 – atlanta: alabama , florida , georgia , kentucky , mississippi , north carolina , south carolina , and tennessee ; region 5 – chicago: illinois , indiana , michigan , minnesota , ohio , and region 7 – kansas city: iowa , kansas , missouri , and nebraska . to determine how the 44 authorized states and the u.s. virgin islands administer the program and to obtain their views on the challenges they might encounter in implementing the revised regulations , we interviewed program officials in four authorized states — iowa , north carolina , pennsylvania , and wisconsin . under the clean water act , concentrated animal feeding operations that discharge pollutants to surface waters must obtain permits from epa or authorized states . however , unlike municipal and most industrial facilities that are allowed to discharge some waste , concentrated animal feeding operations are required to construct and operate facilities that do not release any waste to surface waters , except in extraordinary circumstances .