ii ) . dod's response ( see app . iii ) acknowledged the importance of prioritizing its critical assets and stated that it published dod directive 3020.40 , defense critical infrastructure program , in august 2005 . this directive called for the development of policy and program guidance for dod - wide critical infrastructure , including criteria and methodology to identify and prioritize these assets . at the time of our review , this effort was being conducted through the defense critical infrastructure protection program under the office of the assistant secretary for homeland defense . in addition , this office was also directed to conduct an assessment of all of the activities that contribute to the department's ability to achieve mission assurance to identify program gaps and other problems that could interfere with mission assurance . according to program officials , the framework for prioritizing dod's critical infrastructure was expected to be published in august 2006 but has not yet been formally adopted . it is unclear when the assessment of program gaps will be completed . it is also unclear to what extent the assistant secretary for homeland defense will address aspects of critical infrastructure protection related to overseas facilities identified as critical to warfighting missions . as we and others have observed for several years , notwithstanding the emergence of adversaries that can use chemical and biological weapons , the fielding of collective protection equipment at both critical overseas fixed facilities and major expeditionary warfighting assets remains limited and inconsistent . assessing the need and priority for such equipment is difficult because of the significant uncertainties in the intelligence about the nature of the chemical and biological threat . more detailed information on our scope and methodology is provided in appendix i . dod's program to provide collective protection is managed by the joint project manager for collective protection under the joint program executive office for chemical and biological defense ( jpeo ) . these regulations also describe requirements for coverage of specific functions , including command and control , medical facilities , and dormitories and dining facilities , and the level of protection required for each . during our discussions at the combatant commands we noted that the other services often had different views on the costs and benefits of the air force requirement . for example , intelligence reports indicate that one country is trying to extend the range and accuracy of some of its existing ballistic missiles and is also developing a solid propellant medium range missile with a range of at least 2,000 kilometers . similarly , intelligence reports indicate that another of the primary threat countries continues to pursue an intercontinental ballistic missile and continues to develop extended range scuds and variants for its medium range missiles that will likely enhance its warfighting capabilities and complicate u.s. missile defense systems . intelligence officials believe that terrorists , primarily al qaeda , continue to try to acquire chemical and biological agents and therefore pose a threat to overseas dod installations . while the actual status of al qaeda's acquisition and development of chemical and biological agents is unclear and its access to effective delivery methods presently is limited , some intelligence agencies expect this threat to increase .