miss . ala. ark . d.c. md . va. w.va. la . ppendix ii: number of hbcus eligible to ticipate in capital financing program by as of august 31 , 2006 ) . in addition to those named above the following individuals made important contributions to the report: jeff appel , assistant director ; tranchau nguyen , analyst - in - charge ; carla craddock ; holly gerhart ; lauren kennedy ; sue bernstein ; margie armen ; christine bonham ; jessica botsford ; michaela brown ; richard burkard ; carlos diz ; kevin jackson ; tom mccool . tenn. tex . ( see app . we interviewed all 13 program participants that originated loans prior to 2006 , and a purposive sample of 21 nonparticipants . we selected nonparticipating schools based on ( 1 ) location , ( 2 ) type ( 2-year and 4-year , public and private ) , and ( 3 ) enrollment size . our selection of nonparticipating schools was made to obtain a variety of institutional perspectives and was not intended to be representative . during the course of our review , we conducted site visits to 5 schools , 3 of which were institutions affected by the hurricanes in 2005 , and the other 2 institutions were program participants . our interviews with program participants also included another institution affected by the 2005 hurricanes . we conducted our work from may 2005 to august 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . congress established the hbcu capital financing program in 1992 under title iii , part d , of the higher education act of 1965 , as amended , to provide hbcus with access to low - cost capital to help them to continue and expand upon their educational missions . when approved , the loan goes through a closing process during which certain terms and conditions may be negotiated . table 1 describes key loan terms and conditions to which schools are subject . the federal credit reform act of 1990 , along with guidance issued by omb and accounting standards , provides the framework agencies are to use in calculating the federal budget costs of federal credit programs , such as the hbcu capital financing program . ( see app . ii for locations of hbcus eligible to participate in the program. ) program funds , raised through bonds issued by the dba and purchased by the ffb , are lent to eligible schools with qualified capital projects . loan proceeds may be used for — among other things — repairing , renovating , or in exceptional circumstances , constructing and acquiring new instructional or residential facilities , equipment , or research instrumentation . additionally , schools are able to refinance prior capital loans . education guarantees loan repayment . although education administers the program , the dba is responsible for many of the program's operations and is subject to departmental oversight . specifically , the dba works with prospective borrowers to develop loan applications and monitors and enforces loan agreements . the loan process consists of multiple steps .