( see fig . the level of information amtrak collects and uses to monitor its food and beverage service and report results to external or internal stakeholders inhibits accountability for its performance . externally , amtrak does not report food and beverage expenditure information in its monthly performance reports or its annual consolidated financial statements . while amtrak reports the combined revenue of its food and beverage services in its monthly performance reports , it does not do so for its food and beverage expenses . by combining revenue , it is difficult for managers to determine the amount of revenue attributable to food services compared to beverage services . by not reporting expenses , it is difficult to determine how much is spent on food and beverage service . this lack of information inhibits amtrak's ability to assign accountability for performance internally or allow for any external accountability to key stakeholders . other transportation companies we studied have a different accountability structure for their food and beverage service . because via rail has a fixed subsidy from the federal canadian government , via rail's management has an inherent incentive to control its costs in all areas of its operation , including its food and beverage service . the alaska railroad receives bi - weekly reports from its contractor detailing its labor and food costs that show , among other things , contractor performance against the contractual cost caps . food and beverages have been served onboard amtrak trains since amtrak was created . amtrak's eleven commissaries are located around the country and are responsible for receiving , warehousing and stocking food , beverages , and other items for amtrak's onboard dining and café service . until january 1999 , amtrak ran these commissaries with its own employees . since then , amtrak has contracted out the responsibility for the commissaries and for ordering and stocking all food , beverages , and related items under a contract that expires in september 2006 . gate gourmet ( the contractor ) , is also a supplier of food and beverages to several major airlines . during fiscal years 2002 through 2004 , the 3-year period we focused on in our audit work , amtrak paid gate gourmet between $59 and $64 million a year in reimbursements and fees . gate gourmet personnel operate amtrak - owned commissaries and order , receive , store , and stock trains with food , beverages , and other related items such as table linens and napkins . food and beverage stock are charged to amtrak employees who account for the food en route . when a train arrives at its final destination , all remaining stock items are returned to a commissary . gate gourmet charges amtrak for the items used , as well as for labor , management , and other fees . the contract requires that gate gourmet provide amtrak an independently audited annual report within 120 days following the expiration of each contract year . amtrak's model for handling its food and beverage service is similar to other passenger transportation companies , with some important differences . northwest airlines has outsourced their kitchen and commissary operations and have food and beverages delivered to each airplane before each flight .