we would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have . a number of bills have been introduced in this congress to address this issue . the senate budget committee's proposal to reform the congressional budget process would automatically adjust the debt limit to conform to levels established in the budget resolution . in contrast to the debt limit , fiscal rules can support efforts to achieve fiscal sustainability by imposing numerical limits or targets on the budget to guide fiscal policy . fiscal rules are intended to influence decisions about spending and revenue as they are made . the senate budget committee's proposal to reform the congressional budget process is an example of one such approach . this legislation would specify target ratios for debt as a share of gdp and track legislation against that target . as congress continues to consider options , two key points should be emphasized . an agreed - upon goal can help policymakers justify and frame their choices . with that in mind , a fiscal target that establishes a common goal for controlling the size of the federal debt relative to the economy — as well as well - designed rules that put the federal government on a path to achieve that target — could form part of a long - term fiscal plan to put the government on a sustainable fiscal path . the longer action is delayed , the greater and more drastic the changes will have to be , placing an additional burden on future generations . while changes in spending and revenue to ensure long - term fiscal sustainability require legislative actions to alter fiscal policies , executive agencies can also take actions to contribute toward a sustainable fiscal future . although executive actions alone cannot put the u.s. government on a sustainable fiscal path , it is important for agencies to act as stewards of federal resources . these actions include reducing improper payments , which agencies estimate totaled $175 billion in fiscal year 2019 ; addressing the $381 billion annual net tax gap ; better managing fragmentation , overlap , and duplication across the federal government ; and improving information on federal programs and fiscal operations to aid agency decision - making . chairman enzi , ranking member sanders , and members of the committee , this completes our prepared statement . for further information on this testimony , please contact susan j. irving , senior advisor to the comptroller general , debt and fiscal issues , who may be reached at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or irvings@gao.gov ; robert f. dacey , chief accountant , who may be reached at ( 202 ) 512-3406 or daceyr@gao.gov ; or dawn b. simpson , director , financial management and assurance , who may be reached at ( 202 ) 512-3406 or simpsondb@gao.gov . contact points for our congressional relations and public affairs offices may be found on the last page of this statement . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .