both npp and c1 are planned to support the afternoon orbit . should the noaa - 19 satellite fail before npp is launched , calibrated , and operational , there would be a gap in satellite data in that orbit . further , the delays in c1 mean that npp will not be the research and risk reduction satellite it was originally intended to be . instead , it will have to function as an operational satellite until c1 is in orbit and operational — and if c1 fails on launch or in early operations , npp will be needed to function until c3 is available , currently planned for 2018 . the delay in the c2 satellite launch affects the early morning orbit . there are three more dmsp satellites to be launched in the early and midmorning orbits , and dod is revisiting the launch schedules for these satellites to try to extend them as long as possible . however , an independent review team , established to assess key program risks , recently reported that the constellation of satellites is extremely fragile and that a single launch failure of a dmsp , npoess , or the npp satellite could result in a gap in satellite coverage from 3 to 5 years . although the program's approved cost and schedule baseline is not achievable and the polar satellite constellation is at risk , the executive committee has not yet made a decision on how to proceed with the program . program officials plan to propose new cost and schedule baselines in june 2009 and have reported that they are addressing immediate funding constraints by deferring selected activities to later fiscal years in order to pay for viirs and cris problems ; delaying the launches of npp , c1 , and c2 ; and assessing alternatives for mitigating the risk that viirs will continue to experience problems . without an executive - level decision on how to proceed , the program is proceeding on a course that is deferring cost growth , delaying launches , and risking its underlying mission of providing operational weather continuity to the civil and military communities . while the npoess executive committee has made improvements over the last several years in response to prior recommendations , it has not effectively fulfilled its responsibilities and does not have the membership and leadership it needs to effectively or efficiently oversee and direct the npoess program . specifically , the dod executive committee member with acquisition authority does not attend committee meetings — and sometimes contradicts the committee's decisions , the committee does not aggressively manage risks , and many of the committee's decisions do not achieve desired outcomes . specifically , the individual with the authority to make acquisition decisions does not attend committee meetings , the committee does not aggressively manage risks , and many of the committee's decisions do not achieve desired outcomes . until the committee's shortfalls are addressed , important decisions may not be effective and issues involving cost increases , schedule delays , and satellite continuity may remain unresolved . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes our statement .