5 standards . to calculate the fiscal year end financial statement assets and liabilities for probable plans , plan information such as form 5500 filings , asset statements , annuity purchases , contributions , and estimated dates of plan termination are entered into the ipvfb system as of the estimated date of plan termination and fiscal year end . this system adjusts the liabilities from the plan's assumptions , such as mortality , interest , and expected retirement age , to standard assumptions used by pbgc , and then produces a report that provides pbgc staff with information on how the assets and liabilities are brought forward from the actuarial valuation report date to the date of the financial statements . pbgc officials reported that the agency's process for estimating its probable claims is reviewed by its financial auditors as part of its annual audit of its financial statements . as noted earlier , the auditors have issued unqualified audit opinions for the last 13 years . pbgc officials also told us they help ensure high levels of accuracy by using the most current data available as the starting point in their valuation process , but there's room for improving the timeliness of the data . for example , pbgc has 4010 data for the largest plans that it designates as probable claims , but even those data are 3 ½ months old when received , and they are received only once per year . on occasion , pbgc is able to obtain more current actuarial valuation reports , but it is not able to do this regularly for all plans on the probables list . pbgc officials also said since single - employer probable claims are estimates , factors that are not fully determinable can cause the actual claims pbgc receives to differ from its probable estimates . according to these officials , when they calculate their probable estimates , they usually do not have complete data on the provisions of the plan , the characteristics of plan participants , the exact date of plan termination , the precise value of plan assets and liabilities at that termination date , or the level of recoveries from the plan's sponsor , all of which may change over time . additionally , potential changes in pbgc's valuations , knowledge of specific plan provisions , and participant characteristics combine in ways that can cause the actual claims from these plans to deviate from the estimates , regardless of the timeliness of the data used in preparing the estimates . when a probable claim becomes an actual claim , pbgc officials said they adjust the probable claim estimate to that of the actual claim amount as of the date of plan termination . if a plan is removed from the probables list for a reason other than termination , the previously estimated claim is removed from the probable claims total and reclassified , often as a reasonably possible claim . pbgc data showed its total probable claims estimates ( $21.8 billion ) for all plans that eventually terminated were within one percentage point of the actual claim amount ( $21.9 billion ) . ninety - five percent of the $22.9 billion in resolved probable claims was in plans that terminated with pbgc .