collection . both cbp and tsa officers scanned a machine - readable travel document presented by a passenger to collect biographic data . if the document did not scan correctly , the officers were instructed to enter the biographic data manually into the device . the officers then used the mobile or portable device to collect an index and middle fingerprint or a four - print image , respectively . processing . once the device indicated that the collected prints were of sufficient quality , the cbp and tsa officers directed the passenger to continue onto the departing aircraft or through the normal checkpoint security screening . transmission . us - visit staff uploaded the information from the devices to a dedicated workstation and transmitted the data to ident via a secure network connection . once transmitted , the data were matched to existing records . dhs approved a report on the pilot results in october 2009 . we are statutorily required to review this report . according to program officials , planning for a target solution for air and sea poes will begin once the pilots have been completed and after the final rule has been published . according to the us - visit deputy director , an official date for publishing the final rule has not been established . in general , program officials said that the final rule is to specify how and when an operational air / sea exit solution will be implemented . the purpose of the temporary worker visa exit pilot is to capture the final departure of certain h2 visa temporary workers at two land border crossings . the pilot is to use kiosks adapted for outdoor use to record the exit of h - 2a and h - 2b visa holders who ( 1 ) previously entered and are now departing the united states through either san luis , arizona , or douglas , arizona , and ( 2 ) are required to record their final departure with cbp . in december 2008 , dhs issued two federal register notices announcing the implementation of the pilot , one addressing h - 2a visa holders and one addressing h - 2b visa holders . according to the notices , the pilot was to be deployed in august 2009 . however , according to the us - visit comprehensive exit project manager , the pilot was suspended during the testing subprocess due to lack of cbp funding . the cbp program manager for admissibility and passenger programs told us that the pilot is now scheduled for deployment in december 2009 . both the us - visit program office and cbp are involved in the pilot . the program office is responsible for project management and kiosk design , development , and operations and maintenance . cbp is to support the development and deployment of the kiosks , and is to operate the pilot . as with the air exit pilots , exit information collected from departing travelers is to be transmitted to ident , where it is to be matched against existing records . assembly testing was completed in may 2009 , with all planned requirements and test cases executed .