rent . financial institution operators pay rent for atm facilities at locations not in an institution facility , and independent operators pay rent for retail or other locations , such as grocery stores or gas stations . hardware and software investments . operators purchase , install , and upgrade atm software and equipment , including the atm terminals and physical security equipment , such as bolting devices which secure the machines to walls or the floor . cash services . operators must take steps to ensure that atms are adequately stocked with cash and , therefore , spend time and resources monitoring transaction levels in order to accurately forecast future cash needs . cash is delivered to the atm via armored carrier . independent operators also need to pay to access a supply of cash from a bank vault . maintenance and repairs . maintenance includes cleaning the machinery , making routine repairs , and restocking of supplies ( such as receipt paper ) , as well as more significant repairs , which can incur higher costs for tools , parts , and labor . physical security and insurance . physical security costs are those incurred to keep the atm and the surrounding lobby or area safe and include items such as lighting and cameras . insurance costs include those policies that cover the cash in the machines . infrastructure and processing . operators need to install and maintain the telecommunications infrastructure necessary for atm operations and transaction processing . processing costs include fees associated with transaction processing ( switch fees ) and costs associated with interbank settlement and account posting . network fees . atm operators pay membership or license fees to the eft networks in order to route transactions on the networks . network fees also include any fees the atm operator pays for membership in one or more surcharge - free networks . taxes and licenses . in addition to property and sales taxes , atm operators are sometimes required to pay for state and local licenses , on either a one - time or recurring basis . regulatory and compliance costs . regulatory and compliance costs include paying for the required atm signage alerting customers to any fees , as well as the costs of regulatory inspections and reviews . fraud prevention and fraud losses . fraud prevention costs are those related to activities aimed at detecting and preventing atm fraud . fraud losses are those incurred by the atm operator when fraud occurs , including cash theft and atm robberies . bank sponsorship . bank sponsorship is a cost borne only by independent atm operators , which , as previously discussed , must have a financial institution that sponsors their membership in the eft networks . atm operators we surveyed and spoke with indicated that key drivers of operating costs varied . for example , in our survey , large banks reported much higher costs for some categories , as a percentage of total costs , than did midsize banks and credit unions . likewise , in some cost categories there was a wide range of reported per - atm costs , while in other categories , the per - atm costs were fairly consistent .