, a non - m&o contract ) . in addition to the y - 12 site , the same contractor provides , under a separate contract , protective forces for other important , nearby operations in doe's oak ridge reservation , such as a major environmental cleanup of hazardous materials . it is unclear how protective forces will be provided for doe's oak ridge reservation under a consolidated m&o contract . furthermore , because of increased complexity under a consolidated contract , some nnsa officials said that federal oversight of a consolidated contract may need to be enhanced . specifically:  nnsa does not have an accurate total cost baseline of its ongoing and planned construction projects . for example , we reported in february 2011 that nnsa had identified 15 ongoing capital improvement projects as necessary to ensure future viability of the stockpile stewardship program but did not have estimated total costs or completion dates for all projects . as we also reported in november 2010 , nnsa has a history of inaccurately estimating the cost of major construction projects , including recent inaccurate estimates for facilities included in the estimate for potential cost saving . y - 12 and pantex have over 1,000 protective forces combined . any further reductions would threaten the success of the mission of the sites . some site officials also said that other indirect functions , such as security and oversight , would not experience any efficiency under a consolidated contract because those functions would still require the same number of staff at each specific site regardless of the management structure . for other indirect services , such as information technology and human resources , which make up a small portion of the total ftes , the opinions of site officials were mixed , with some acknowledging the possibility of some reductions , while others were skeptical of any reductions in ftes . nnsa announced in 2010 that the incoming contractor of the consolidated m&o contract would have the flexibility to restructure the workforce , which has led to employee concerns at both sites that may present challenges to nnsa . according to one nnsa official , although included in other doe contracts , nnsa typically has not included such a provision of workforce flexibility in past contract restructuring ; instead it has traditionally accepted the same terms as the previous contractor with regard to human resources issues . this strategy seeks to maintain a safe and reliable but smaller nuclear deterrent than in the past . more specifically , the united states has agreed to reduce the size of its strategic nuclear weapon stockpile from a maximum of 2,200 to 1,550 weapons . this stockpile is composed of seven different weapons types , including air - delivered bombs , ballistic missile warheads , and cruise missile warheads . as the stockpile is being reduced , the administration pledged additional funds to modernize and operate the nuclear security enterprise , to include the refurbishment of weapons currently in the stockpile and the construction of important new production facilities to support these refurbishments . nnsa's fiscal year 2012 stockpile stewardship and management plan provides details of nuclear security enterprise modernization and operations plans over the next two decades .