fellowships . the congress should explore greater flexibilities to allow federal agencies to enhance their skills mix by leveraging the expertise of private and not - for - profit sector employees through innovative fellowship programs , particularly in critical occupations . through such fellowships , private and not - for - profit professionals could gain federal experience without fully disassociating themselves from their positions , while federal agencies could gain from the knowledge and expertise that these professionals would bring during their participation in the program . obviously , appropriate steps would have to be taken to address any potential conflicts . this concept could also be used to allow federal workers to participate in fellowship programs with private and not - for - profit sector employers . the federal government spends about of $200 billion a year contracting for goods and services . we are concerned with having the right people with the right skills to successfully manage federal contracts . we all agree that dealing with this issue will not be easy . the government is facing ever - growing public demands for better and more economical delivery of products and services . at the same time , the ongoing technological revolution requires a workforce with new knowledge , skills , and abilities . and at the moment , agencies must address these challenges in an economy that makes it difficult to compete for people with the competencies needed to achieve and maintain high performance . this situation is aptly illustrated by the problems found in the growing area of acquiring services . federal agencies spend billions of tax dollars each year to buy services ranging from clerical support and consulting services to information technology services , such as network support , to the management and operation of government facilities , such as national laboratories . our work continues to show that some service procurements are not being done efficiently , putting taxpayer dollars at risk . in particular , agencies are not clearly defining their requirements , fully considering alternative solutions , performing vigorous price analyses , or adequately overseeing contractor performance . further , it is becoming increasingly evident that agencies are at risk of not having enough of the right people with the right skills to manage service procurements . consequently , a key question we face in the federal government is whether we have today , or will have tomorrow , the ability to acquire and manage the procurement of increasingly sophisticated services the government needs . the amount being spent on services is growing substantially . last year alone , the federal government acquired more than $87 billion in services — a 24-percent increase in real terms from fiscal year 1990 . in fact , government purchase of services now accounts for 43 percent of all federal contracting expenses — surpassing supplies and equipment as the largest component of federal contract spending . another dimension to this issue is that federal agencies are increasingly contracting out for information technology services .