mexico . the engineer monitoring the mexico transaction determined that , while all three satellites are not yet fully operational , the government of mexico continues to project a ground terminal allocation of 40 percent military and 60 percent civilian as the basis for its dual - use compliance . the mexican government submitted an annual end - use certification and report for 2014 listing the civilian and military entities to which a total of 115,424 terminals would be allocated and the number of terminals allocated to each entity ; 46,324 ( 40 percent ) were allocated to military entities . this information is identical to that submitted by the mexican government for 2013 . ex - im officials stated that any end - use monitoring the bank might conduct would likely involve meeting with the u.s. military attaché in mexico and obtaining information from a small sample of terminals . the officials acknowledged that once all the satellites are operational , it will be very difficult to ascertain actual end use , since that would involve monitoring over 100,000 ground terminals , obtaining logs showing bandwidth usage , and examining the bandwidth use associated with each terminal . they said the engineer responsible for monitoring this transaction would instead base his annual determination on the percentage of ground terminals allocated to military entities , although they identified limitations with using this percentage measure . however , the officials said that , based on pre - approval vetting with the u.s. military attaché in mexico , the bank determined that it is highly unlikely that the satellites would be used for mostly military purposes . according to the bank's board memorandum authorizing the mexico satellite transaction , and as we noted in our august 2014 report , the mexican secretariat of communications and transportation – - and not the mexican military – - is operating the satellites . one of the mobile service satellites was destroyed during a failed launch in may 2015 , leaving two satellites – - the fixed service satellite launched in 2012 and already in use , and one more mobile service satellite with a planned launch in the fall of 2015 . according to the engineer , the three - satellite system requires only one mobile service satellite to operate at a time , with the other functioning as a spare ; the two mobile service satellites would thus be able to exchange operational and spare roles as needed . he said the government of mexico has not yet determined whether to replace the destroyed satellite . eutelsat . no annual determination regarding end use is required for the eutelsat transaction because , as we noted in our august 2014 report , once the satellite became airborne in 2013 , the number and capacity ( bandwidth ) of the military transponders on the satellite could not be modified . as we previously reported , these transponders , which are dedicated to nonlethal military use by the government of qatar , were not financed by ex - im and represent only 6 of the satellite's 46 transponders and less than half its total transponder capacity .