iv. ) in dhs's response , the director of the departmental gao / office of inspector general liaison office concurred with our recommendations . exercises that include internet disruptions can help to identify issues and interdependencies that need to be addressed . however , dhs has not yet identified planned activities and milestones or identified which group should be responsible for incorporating into its plans and initiatives lessons learned from the regional and cyber storm exercises . without a coordination process , plans , and milestones , there is less chance that the lessons learned from the exercises will be successfully transferred to operational improvements . dhs also provided information on initial actions it is taking to implement our recommendations . while dhs has various initiatives under way — including efforts to update the national response plan , task forces assessing changes to ncs , working groups on responding to cyber incidents , and exercises to practice recovery efforts — the relationships and interdependencies among these various efforts are not evident . for example , plans to update the national response plan to better reflect the internet infrastructure are related to task force efforts to suggest changes to ncs to deal with the convergence of voice and data technologies . however , it is not clear how these initiatives are being coordinated . furthermore , the national cyber response coordination group , the internet disruption working group , and the north american incident response group are all meeting to discuss ways to address internet recovery , but the interdependencies among the groups have not been clearly established . if you have any questions on matters discussed in this report , please contact us at ( 202 ) 512-9286 and at ( 202 ) 512-6412 , or by e - mail at pownerd@gao.gov and rhodesk@gao.gov . additionally , it is not evident that lessons learned from the various cyber - related exercises are being incorporated in the planned revision of the national response plan or the ongoing efforts of the various working groups . without a thorough understanding of the interrelationships among its various initiatives , dhs risks pursuing redundant efforts and missing opportunities to build on related efforts . dhs officials acknowledged that they have not yet fully coordinated the various initiatives aimed at enhancing the department's ability to help respond to and recover from a major internet disruption , but they noted that the complexity of this undertaking and the number of entities involved in internet recovery make this effort challenging . although dhs has various initiatives under way to improve internet recovery planning , it faces key challenges in developing a public / private plan for internet recovery , including ( 1 ) innate characteristics of the internet that make planning for and responding to a disruption difficult , ( 2 ) a lack of consensus on dhs's role and on when the department should get involved in responding to a disruption , ( 3 ) legal issues affecting dhs's ability to provide assistance to restore internet service , ( 4 ) reluctance of the private - sector to share information on internet disruptions with dhs , and ( 5 ) leadership and organizational uncertainties within dhs .