gao - 11-463t . washington , d.c.: march 16 , 2011 . high - risk series: an update . gao - 11-278 . washington , d.c.: february 2011 . cyber threats can be unintentional or intentional . unintentional threats can be caused by software upgrades or maintenance procedures that inadvertently disrupt systems . intentional threats include both targeted and untargeted attacks from a variety of sources , including criminal groups , hackers , disgruntled employees , foreign nations engaged in espionage and information warfare , and terrorists . the potential impact of these threats is amplified by the connectivity between information systems , the internet , and other infrastructures , creating opportunities for attackers to disrupt telecommunications , electrical power , and other critical services . for example , in may 2008 , we reported that the tennessee valley authority's ( tva ) corporate network contained security weaknesses that could lead to the disruption of control systems networks and devices connected to that network . we made 19 recommendations to improve the implementation of information security program activities for the control systems governing tva's critical infrastructures and 73 recommendations to address specific weaknesses in security controls . tva concurred with the recommendations and has taken steps to implement them . as government , private sector , and personal activities continue to move to networked operations , the threat will continue to grow . recent reports of cyber attacks illustrate that the cyber - based attacks on cyber - reliant critical infrastructures could have a debilitating impact on national and economic security . in june 2011 , a major bank reported that hackers broke into its systems and gained access to the personal information of hundreds of thousands of customers . through the bank's online banking system , the attackers were able to view certain private customer information . in march 2011 , according to the deputy secretary of defense , a cyber attack on a defense company's network captured 24,000 files containing defense department information . he added that nations typically launch such attacks , but there is a growing risk of terrorist groups and rogue states developing similar capabilities . in march 2011 , a security company reported that it had suffered a sophisticated cyber attack that removed information about its two - factor authentication tool . according to the company , the extracted information did not enable successful direct attacks on any of its customers ; however , the information could potentially be used to reduce the effectiveness of a current two - factor authentication implementation as part of a broader attack . in february 2011 , media reports stated that computer hackers broke into and stole proprietary information worth millions of dollars from the networks of six u.s. and european energy companies . mr. chairman , this completes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittee have at this time . if you have any questions regarding this statement , please contact gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov . other key contributors to this statement include michael gilmore ( assistant director ) , bradley becker , kami corbett , and lee mccracken .