dod concurred with the three recommendations . most recently , in our february 2016 report , we found , among other things , that dod program offices we reviewed generally maintained data on current and estimated future spending needs for contracted service requirements , but did not identify spending needs beyond the budget year , since there was no requirement to do so . this limited dod's leadership insight into future spending on contracted services . we recommended that the secretaries of the army , navy , and air force revise their programming guidance to collect information on how contracted services will be used to meet requirements beyond the budget year . we also recommended that the secretary of defense establish a mechanism , such as a working group , to ensure the military departments' efforts to integrate services into the programming process and to develop forecasts on service contract spending provided the department with consistent data . dod partially concurred with both recommendations but did not indicate any planned actions to implement the recommendations . dod has not fully implemented the three key leadership positions — fdes , clls , and ssms — that were identified in dod's january 2016 instruction and which were to enable dod to more strategically manage service acquisitions . dpap - sa officials noted that the officials appointed to be fdes had multiple responsibilities , and considered their fde roles as secondary . we then compared differences between military department and command obligations by each service portfolio . we performed electronic testing for errors in accuracy and completeness and reviewed related documentation , and we found that the fpds - ng data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of identifying dod's spending on contracted services by military departments and their major commands . based on these data , we selected the air force materiel command , army materiel command , and naval air systems command as the focus for our review . at each of the three military departments and the selected major commands , we interviewed acquisition and / or contracting officials , reviewed applicable srrb policies and procedures , and to the extent available , data on the number , timing , and outcomes from srrbs held at the selected major commands between 2015 and 2016 , as well as services health assessments . the results of our findings are not generalizable to all of dod military departments and military commands but provide insight into acquisition of services by dod . we conducted this performance audit from february 2016 to august 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we spoke to dpap - sa and military department officials about the challenges of implementing these positions . to assess the military departments' implementation of srrbs , we used federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) data to select one major command within each military department with large fiscal year 2015 obligations for contracted services , which was the latest year available when we initiated our review . as such , the instruction notes that unit , organization , and installation commanders are responsible for the appropriate , efficient , and effective acquisition of contracted services by their organizations .