the total number of plans was 118 . 24 sec - identified consultants and our client list with plans that were non - terminated and ongoing between 2000 and 2004 . these arrangements can create a number of problems . as is the typical case with panel data , we have a large number of cross - sections ( pension plans ) and a relatively small number of time periods . therefore we specify the composite error structure for the disturbance term as follows: ( 2 ) εit = α + ηit where α = plan - specific error component which captures the unobserved heterogeneity across plans ( either as a fixed - or random - effect ) . what policies and procedures does the pbgc have in place to identify and recover losses attributable to conflicts of interest in plans it trustees ? does the department of labor's ( labor ) employee benefits security administration ( ebsa ) have procedures in place to detect conflicts of interest among service providers and fiduciaries for plans now trusteed by pbgc ? to what extent do ebsa , pbgc , and sec coordinate their activities to identify and investigate conflicts of interest ? to determine what is known about the existence of conflicts of interest in the context of single employer private sector db plans , we interviewed a variety of professionals with expert knowledge of the issue , including agency officials , forensic auditors , accountants , attorneys , financial industry representatives , and academics . we also analyzed form 5500 data , nelson's directory of plan sponsor data , nelson's directory of pension consultants data , sec examination data , pensions and investments periodicals , and data received from the pbgc associated with terminated db plans . in addition , we analyzed standard and poors ( s&p ) rate of return and asset allocation data for ongoing and terminated plans . to determine the policies and procedures pbgc has in place on conflicts of interest , we interviewed pbgc and ebsa officials and reviewed pbgc documentation related to this issue . to determine the procedures ebsa has in place to detect and investigate conflicts of interest at service providers or plan fiduciaries , we reviewed ebsa's enforcement materials , our previously issued reports on ebsa's enforcement program , and interviewed ebsa officials . to determine ebsa's , pbgc's , and sec's coordination efforts , we interviewed officials at all three agencies and reviewed previously issued reports that provided related information on this issue . we conducted our work between february 2006 and may 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . see appendix i and appendix ii for more information on our scope and methodology . erisa is the primary federal law governing the sponsorship and operation of private sector employee pension plans , including db plans . title i of erisa gives labor the primary authority to enforce requirements governing the conduct of fiduciaries of pension and other employee benefit plans . ebsa is the labor agency responsible for administering and enforcing title i. erisa has requirements relating to the standard of conduct of plan fiduciaries and also prohibits certain transactions between fiduciaries and parties in interest .