( see app . i for examples of information collected and contained in pmis. ) the purpose of the 2-year pilot program is to determine the feasibility of using private screening companies rather than federal screeners . initially , tsa required private screening companies to adhere to all of the procedures and protocols used for federal screeners . however , tsa recently provided the pilot contractors with some flexibility , such as allowing them to determine and maintain their own staffing levels and make independent hiring decisions . while tsa has not yet determined how to evaluate and measure the performance of the pilot program airports , it plans to award a contract by october 1 , 2003 , to compare the performance of pilot screeners with federal screeners and determine the reasons for any differences . tsa officials said that the office of management and budget requested that they include in their evaluation ways to allow more innovation by contract screening companies . although atsa allows airports to apply to opt - out of using federal screeners beginning in november 2004 , tsa has not begun to plan for the possible transition of airports from a federal system to a private screening company . airports council international officials said that numerous airports have contacted them expressing an interest in obtaining more information to assist in their decision regarding opting - out . the dot oig described these tests as unlike the techniques that terrorists would employ . in 1997 , faa incorporated simulated improvised explosive devices into its compliance testing and performed , on average , more than 2,000 of these test each year . in addition to compliance tests , faa's special headquarters based testing unit , often called the red team , conducted more realistic tests using harder to detect threat objects by agents not known to screeners . tsa's oiapr has conducted fewer covert tests than conducted by faa , but considers its testing methods more rigorous than either of faa's compliance or red team tests because they more closely approximate techniques terrorists might use . oiapr officials further said that their tests are intentionally designed to have a high probability of failure in an effort to identify vulnerabilities and areas needing improvement . additionally , unlike testing conducted under faa , oiapr staff that perform the tests reported that they provide immediate feedback to screeners , their managers , and the fsds to explain how they beat the system and provide instant remedial training . we plan to review oiapr's operational testing in more detail during the remainder of our evaluation . based on an anticipated increase in staff from about 100 in fiscal year 2003 to 200 in fiscal year 2004 , oiapr plans to conduct twice as many covert tests next year . in addition , tsa recently established 5 mission support centers located throughout the country , which according to tsa , will be staffed with oiapr personnel available to conduct additional covert tests . these centers will also be staffed with mobile testing teams that will work with fsds in their region to conduct screener training using some of the test objects oiapr uses in its covert tests .