obesity . nhanes data included measures of the height and weight of children aged 2 through 20 . obesity in children aged 2 through 19 was defined as having a body mass index ( bmi ) equal to or greater than 95th percentile of age and sex - specific bmi , based on cdc growth charts for the united states ; obesity in children age 20 was defined as having a bmi of 30 or higher . girls who were pregnant were not included in the obesity analysis . children or their parents were also asked if the child had been diagnosed as overweight prior to participating in the survey . high blood pressure . nhanes data included up to four blood pressure readings for children aged 8 through 20 . we calculated average systolic and diastolic blood pressure based on the second , third , and fourth readings . high blood pressure in children aged 8 through 17 was defined as equal to or greater than 95th percentile of age , height , and sex - specific average systolic or diastolic blood pressure , based on blood pressure tables from hhs's national heart , lung , and blood institute . high blood pressure in children aged 18 through 20 was defined as having an average systolic blood pressure reading of 140 millimeters of mercury ( mmhg ) or higher , or having an average diastolic blood pressure of 90 mmhg or higher . high blood cholesterol . nhanes data included measures of total blood cholesterol in children aged 6 through 20 . high total blood cholesterol in children aged 6 through 20 was defined as greater than or equal to 200 milligrams per deciliter ( mg / dl ) . for adults aged 21 through 64 , we used nhanes data to estimate the percentage who were obese , the percentage with high blood pressure , the percentage with high blood cholesterol , the percentage with diabetes , and the percentage with a combination of these conditions . we used cdc definitions of these health conditions . of adults with each of these conditions , we also estimated the percentage who reported that their condition had not been diagnosed by a health care professional prior to the survey ( see tables 3 and 4 ) . obesity . nhanes examinations of adults included height and weight measurements . obesity for adults was defined as having a bmi of 30 or higher ( pregnant women were not included in the obesity analysis ) . high blood pressure . nhanes examinations of adults included up to four blood pressure readings . average systolic and diastolic blood pressure readings were calculated as described for children ( see footnote 62 ) . high blood pressure for adults was defined as having an average systolic blood pressure reading of 140 mmhg or higher , having an average diastolic blood pressure reading of 90 mmhg or higher , or taking blood pressure lowering medication . high blood cholesterol . nhanes laboratory tests for adults included measurement of blood cholesterol . high total blood cholesterol for adults was defined as 240 mg / dl or more . diabetes .