before data collection . the first use listed in the figure — validate and update the address list — is one on which the bureau is already working . the bureau is drawing on address lists and map information from state , local , and tribal governments to update its own address list continuously throughout the decade , reducing the need for a more costly door - to - door canvassing during the 2 years prior to the census , as was done for the 2010 census . according to bureau officials , the bureau is about to begin research on how better to use records to identify group quarters , such as dormitories , prisons , nursing homes , or homeless shelters ; and to target its outreach , that is , encourage cooperation with the census . the bureau uses special procedures to enumerate at these places , and administrative records could potentially reduce the time and effort spent getting ready for them . during data collection . in addition to reducing the nrfu fieldwork , the bureau is considering using administrative records to help ensure quality control of fieldwork such as by providing a near - real - time check on interviews of households more at risk of being missed in the census . this could reduce fieldwork and respondent burden or enable quality control reinterviews of respondents to target other types of quality concerns . the bureau is also researching how administrative records can be used to help process responses it receives either on paper or over the internet that do not have a census id number on them ( this activity is called non - id processing ) . the bureau may receive such responses from households that may have lost or never received mailings or other advance communication from the bureau . the bureau has done some testing on this use — in 2015 in the savannah , georgia , media market area , the bureau invited test participants to respond over the internet . the bureau demonstrated that a large collation of administrative records from many sources was effective in helping the bureau correct or fill in missing address information , which enabled the bureau to better locate where those responses should be counted . the bureau has other ongoing research into how other records may help the bureau validate responses or the identities of those who submit responses as part of this processing . after data collection . if the bureau still does not have information on a housing unit after collecting data during field operations , it will attempt to impute the data — it has done this since 1970 . according to bureau officials , the bureau plans to use administrative records to help improve imputation of three related types of data the bureau fills in for these housing units . these data fields are ( 1 ) whether or not a unit is occupied , ( 2 ) what the count of the unit might be , and ( 3 ) the demographic characteristics of the residents . finally , the bureau is considering how administrative records might help the bureau evaluate the accuracy of the census .