omb has not implemented these recommendations . omb has three different guidance publications that agencies can consult in the process of developing information collection submissions , according to omb officials . the three guidance publications address unnecessary duplication to varying degrees . the draft , implementing guidance for omb review of agency information collection , provides , among other things , instructions to agencies about how to identify unnecessary duplication of proposed information collections with existing available information sources . omb's questions and answers when designing surveys for information collections discusses when it is acceptable to duplicate questions used in other surveys . the publication also encourages agencies to consult with omb when they are proposing new surveys , major revisions , or large - scale experiments or tests , before an information collection is submitted . for example , when bls was developing its disability questions for the cps , bls officials stated that they consulted omb on numerous occasions . for example , according to data presented in a cornell university study that used survey questions to define and subsequently compare different disability measures across surveys , the sipp 2002 estimate of people with sensory disabilities for ages 18-24 was more than six times the nhis estimate for that year for ages 18-24 . in commenting on this report , the doc and hhs acknowledged that comparing the nhis and sipp with respect to sensory disabilities is problematic . hhs officials noted that the confusion caused by these different estimates derives mostly from the lack of a single definition of disability , which leads to data collections that use different questions and combinations of information to define disability status . because the concept of disability varies , with no clear consensus on terminology or definition , and there are differing estimates , several federal and international groups are examining how the associated measures of disability could be improved . hhs's disability workgroup , which includes officials from hhs and the department of education , examines how disability is measured and used across surveys . the task of another federal group , the subcommittee on disability statistics of the interagency committee on disability research , is to define and standardize the disability definition . the washington group on disability statistics ( wgds ) , an international workgroup sponsored by the united nations in which omb and nchs participate , is working to facilitate the comparison of data on disability internationally . the wgds aims to guide the development of a short set or sets of disability measures that are suitable for use in censuses , sample - based national surveys , or other statistical formats , for the primary purpose of informing policy on equalization of opportunities . the wgds is also working to develop one or more extended sets of survey items to measure disability , or guidelines for their design , to be used as components of population surveys or as supplements to specialty surveys . hhs added that the interest in standardizing the measurement of disability status is also driven by the desire to add a standard question set to a range of studies so that the status of persons with disabilities can be described across studies .