fees . fees may fall within several source categories . therefore , treasury does not have a single government - wide total for fees . it does present government - wide totals for various source categories , including , sale of products and fees for permits and regulatory and judicial services , for example . treasury also reports some fees under non - fee categories , such as miscellaneous taxes and excise taxes . we previously reported that the principles and practices of information architecture — a discipline focused on organizing and structuring information — offer an approach for developing such an inventory to support a variety of uses , including increased transparency for federal programs . a program inventory creates the potential to aggregate , disaggregate , sort , and filter information across multiple program facets . for example , from a user's perspective , a program could be tagged to highlight whether it includes activities to collect fees , fines , or penalties . then , a user interested in this data facet could select a tag ( eg , fees ) that could generate a list of programs that also have fees , fines , or penalties . while the program inventory is broader than agency collections of fees , fines , and penalties and would include programmatic descriptions , it would increase transparency by enabling congress and the public to identify and isolate all programs that include , as a source of funding or a key data element , a fee , fine , or penalty to inform oversight and target additional requests for information to agencies . federal agencies are authorized to collect hundreds of billions of dollars from fees , fines , and penalties each year that fund a wide variety of programs , but congress and the american public do not have government - wide data on these collections that would provide increased transparency and facilitate oversight . omb's max database contains some disaggregated data labeled as fees , fines , and penalties , but omb does not make these data publicly available . without more disaggregated , government - wide , accessible data on collections of fees , fines , and penalties , such as by agency , congress and the public do not have a complete and accurate picture of federal finances , the sources of federal funds , and the resources available to fund federal programs . in addition , improving the data omb currently reports related to fees , fines , and penalties could help the user better understand the data and the potential limitations . first , until omb describes how it identifies accounts with fees including that the government - wide totals of fees it reports in analytical perspectives may include collections that are not fees and exclude some fee collections , some users will likely be unaware that reported totals could be over - or under - estimates . second , without omb instruction to agencies to regularly review and update implementation of the criteria for designating accounts that contain fees , accounts could be designated incorrectly if the makeup of the collections changes . therefore , omb cannot provide reasonable assurance that the total amount of fees it reports is accurate .