army . the army's 2012 product support manager concept of operations , calls for a defined career path for psms that targets progressive leadership growth , with focused education and experience requirements to shape and develop psms into future it also outlines a “notional career senior leaders and executives.roadmap” for the newly created psm position . however , the army notes in its product support manager concept of operations that this roadmap is still in its infancy and states that there is currently no defined comprehensive career path in place to develop , train , and support future psms . furthermore , an army official told us that , as of march 2014 , the army does not have a plan with actions , milestones , objectives , or resources dedicated to implementing a psm career path . yet , according to this official , the army is actively working to address long - term psm development and management planning issues by meeting to discuss these items . washington , d.c.: june 27 , 2013 . program evaluation: strategies to facilitate agencies' use of evaluation in program management and policy making . gao - 13-570 . washington , d.c.: june 26 , 2013 . defense acquisitions: assessments of selected weapon programs . gao - 13-294sp . washington , d.c.: march 28 , 2013 . weapons acquisition reform: reform act is helping dod acquisition programs reduce risk , but implementation challenges remain . gao - 13-103 . washington , d.c.: december 14 , 2012 . defense logistics: improvements needed to enhance oversight of estimated long - term costs for operating and supporting major weapon systems . gao - 12-340 . washington , d.c.: february 2 , 2012 . defense management: dod needs better information and guidance to more effectively manage and reduce operating and support costs of major weapon systems . gao - 10-717 . washington , d.c.: july 20 , 2010 . defense acquisitions: fundamental changes are needed to improve weapon program outcomes . gao - 08-1159t . washington , d.c.: september 25 , 2008 . defense logistics: opportunities to improve the army's and the navy's decision - making process for weapons system support . gao - 02-306 . washington , d.c.: february 28 , 2002 . navy and marine corps . the navy has also provided a draft “notional development career ladder” for life - cycle logistics to each of its various systems commands as a starting point for developing a psm career path . officials from one of the navy's systems commands told us that they are concerned about the future of , and succession planning for , psm positions and that , to address this concern , the command is implementing the draft career ladder and using it to develop a draft talent - management document . according to a senior official within the department of the navy , the systems commands need to implement a fundamental career structure for psms , with specific learning objectives laid out . additionally , according to department of the navy officials , while the systems commands have indicated that efforts are ongoing , a completion date for these efforts has not been determined .