inst . v. donovan , 452 u.s. 490 , 513 n.31 ( 1981 ) . standards on butadiene , methylene chloride , hexavalent chromium , silica , and diacetyl . when osha performs the economic feasibility analysis , it concludes that a standard is economically feasible if the affected industry or industries will maintain long - term profitability and competitiveness . to do this , staff and contractors , by analyzing information they collect when visiting worksites , must assess the extent to which employers in the affected industries can afford to implement the required controls . in addition to the site visits , osha staff sometimes conducts industry - wide surveys to determine baseline practices and collect other relevant information needed for the technological and economic feasibility analyses . according to osha officials , the process of developing a survey and having it approved by omb takes a minimum of 1 year . in addition to the feasibility analyses , osha staff generally must also conduct economic analyses . first , osha must assess the costs and benefits of significant standards as required by executive order 12866 . second , under the small business regulatory enforcement fairness act of 1996 , if osha determines that a potential standard would have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities , such as businesses , it is one of three federal agencies that must initiate a panel process that seeks and considers input from representatives of the affected small businesses.several months of work that many other federal regulatory agencies do not have to complete in order to issue regulations . agency officials told us they want to consult with small businesses , but that the provisions laid out the small business panel process takes in the requirement make it too formal a process and are duplicative of the public hearings they hold after publishing the proposed rule . finally , according to omb guidelines , if a potential standard is projected to have an economic impact of more than $500 million , osha must initiate a peer review of the underlying scientific analyses . after completing the above steps , osha submits the preamble and text of the potential standard to omb for review . notice of proposed rulemaking in the federal register to alert the public that osha intends to issue a new final standard and to invite interested parties to comment on the proposed standard . although osha is only required under the osh act hold public hearings upon request , as a general practice , officials told us that osha holds such hearings and has issued regulations governing its hearing procedures.administrative law judge presides over the hearings , and stakeholders have the opportunity to submit evidence to support their views on specific provisions of the proposed standards . the administrative law judge may also permit cross - examination by stakeholders or osha attorneys to bolster or challenge testimony presented during the hearing . finally , stakeholders can submit data and other written documents subsequent to the hearing that osha must consider when crafting the final standard . executive order 12866 requires that omb review all significant regulatory actions prior to their publication in the federal register .