( see fig . specifically , the oig issued a total of 102 audit products in these two mission areas , which included reviews of the efficiency and effectiveness of management and program operations during the 3-year period . these usda missions received a relatively large number of audits as a result of the oig's emphasis on the recovery act funds associated with their programs . the usda oig reported investigations within each mission area and the identification of fraud within usda's programs , prosecutions where warranted , and agency administrative action where necessary . the oig reported completing a total of 878 investigative cases during the 3-year period with 292 investigations in fiscal year 2009 , 247 in fiscal year 2010 , and 339 in fiscal year 2011 . in addition , during this 3-year period , the oig's investigative activities resulted in 1,587 convictions . most of these convictions were the result of investigations in food , nutrition , and consumer services ( fncs ) — usda's largest mission area in terms of total budgetary resources — with 706 convictions , mostly related to charges of fraud in the supplemental nutrition assistance program . investigations of the marketing and regulatory programs mission area resulted in 668 convictions , which , when combined with those in fncs , accounted for about 86 percent of all convictions during the 3-year period . ( see fig . the natural resources and environment ( nre ) mission received total fiscal year 2011 budgetary resources of about $13.2 billion , or about 7 percent of usda's total budget . component agencies include the forest service ( fs ) and the natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) , which participate in the overall nre mission to help ensure the health of the land through sustainable management . fs and nrcs work to prevent damage to natural resources and the environment and promote good land management . the rural development ( rd ) mission had total budgetary resources of about $8.9 billion in fiscal year 2011 , or about 5 percent of usda's total budget . the rd mission is to help improve the economy and quality of life in all of rural america by providing financial programs to support essential public facilities and services such as water , sewer , electric , and telephone systems ; housing ; health clinics ; and emergency service facilities . the rd mission promotes economic development by providing loans to businesses through banks , credit unions and community - managed lending pools . other usda mission areas and administrative offices received about $9.5 billion , or approximately 5 percent of usda's total budgetary resources . these mission areas are research , education and economics ( ree ) , marketing and regulatory programs ( mrp ) , and the food and safety inspection service ( fsis ) . the ree mission had fiscal year 2011 total budgetary resources of approximately $3.3 billion , and includes several agencies that are dedicated to creating a safe , sustainable , and competitive food and fiber system , as well as building strong communities and families . the mrp mission had fiscal year 2011 total budgetary resources of about $3.3 billion .