( recommendation 1 ) . in written comments reproduced in appendix ii , dod concurred with comments to the recommendation , and provided separate technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . rpa aircrews consist of a pilot and a sensor operator . the air force in most cases assigns officers to fly its rpas . the air force relied solely on manned aircraft pilots to fly remotely piloted aircraft until 2010 when it established a rpa pilot career field ( designated as air force specialty code 18x ) for officers trained to fly only rpas . as of december 2013 , approximately 42 percent of the rpa pilots were temporarily assigned , manned aircraft pilots and manned aircraft pilot training graduates . both of those groups of rpa pilots are temporarily assigned to fly rpas with the assumption that after their tour they will return to flying their manned aircraft . by comparison , as of september 2018 , manned aircraft pilots and manned aircraft pilot training graduates comprised only 17 percent of the rpa pilots . the division also maintains a variety of computer models and databases to analyze promotion , retention , accession , compensation and separation policy alternatives . additionally , it is responsible for providing official aircrew personnel projections for use in various management analyses . the air force personnel center , one of three field - operating agencies reporting to the deputy chief of staff of the air force , manpower , personnel and services , conducts military and civilian personnel operations such as overseeing performance evaluations , promotions , retirements , separations , awards , decorations and education . the center also directs the overall management and distribution of both military and civilian personnel . based on our analysis of air force promotion data , the percentage of rpa pilots promoted were generally similar in comparison to the promotion rates of pilots in other career fields since 2013 . however , it is important to note that since the population of eligible rpa pilots to be considered for promotion was smaller than other pilot populations , the promotion of one or two rpa pilots could have a large effect on their promotion rate . for example , the rpa pilot promotion rates were within 10 percentage points of the promotion rates for the other types of pilots in each year of those years in 8 out of 10 promotion boards to major and to lieutenant colonel held during that time frame . rpa pilot promotion rates from captain to major were generally similar as the promotion rates for other pilots from 2014 through 2017 , as shown in figure 2 . for example , in 2014 , 94 percent of eligible rpa pilots ( 29 of 31 ) , bomber pilots ( 47 of 50 ) , fighter pilots ( 189 of 201 ) and 91 percent of eligible mobility pilots ( 355 of 388 ) were promoted from captain to major . this is an improvement in promotion rates for rpa pilots compared to 2006 through 2012 , where rpa pilot promotion rates fell below those for all other pilots in 5 of the 7 promotion boards held .