gao - 04-232t . washington , d.c.: november 5 , 2003 . airport passenger screening: preliminary observations on progress made and challenges remaining . gao - 03-1173 . washington , d.c.: september 24 , 2003 . one of the most substantial of these is passenger screening . passenger screening involves the use of metal detectors , x - ray machines , explosive trace detection machines , and physical searches to examine passengers and their baggage to identify threat objects . passenger screening has historically been an area of concern . as we reported in 1987 , and again in 2000 , passenger screeners who conducted these examinations have had difficultly in detecting weapons and other dangerous objects . at the time we issued these reports , air carriers were responsible for performing passenger screening . with the passage of atsa , this responsibility has now become the responsibility of tsa . tsa is also responsible for ensuring the security of air cargo , limiting access to restricted areas of airports to authorized personnel , securing airport perimeters , and conducting background checks for airport personnel , among other responsibilities . tsa has implemented numerous initiatives designed to enhance aviation security , but it has collected limited information on the effectiveness of these initiatives , particularly its passenger screening program . atsa requires that tsa establish acceptable levels of performance and develop annual performance plans and reports to measure and document the effectiveness of its security initiatives . although tsa has developed these performance tools as required by atsa , the tools currently focus on tsa's progress toward meeting atsa deadlines , rather than on the effectiveness of its programs and initiatives . although tsa has collected limited data on the effectiveness of its initiatives , it is taking several steps to collect objective data to assess its performance . although there are a number of methods that tsa can use to measure the effectiveness of its passenger screening program , none are being fully utilized . as we reported in september 2003 , the primary source of information collected on screeners' ability to detect threat objects is covert testing conducted by tsa's office of internal affairs and program review . however , tsa does not consider the results of these covert tests as a measure of performance , but rather a “snapshot” of a screener's ability to detect threat objects at a particular point in time and as a system - wide performance indicator . at the time we issued our report , the office of internal affairs and program review had conducted 733 covert tests of passenger screeners at 92 airports . as a result , only a small percentage of tsa's passenger screeners had been subject to a covert test . in addition to conducting covert tests at screening checkpoints , tsa conducts tests to determine whether the current computer - assisted passenger screening system is working as designed ; threat objects are detected during the screening of checked baggage ; and access to restricted areas of the airport is limited only to authorized personnel . while the office of internal affairs and program review has conducted about 2,000 access tests , it has conducted only 168 computer - assisted passenger screening system and checked baggage tests .