distance education students are older . as figure 1 demonstrates , students who took all their courses through distance education tended to be older , on average , when compared to other students . distance education students are more likely to be married . these differences included the following . figure 2 shows that graduate and undergraduate students that took all of their courses through distance education are more likely to be married than those taking no distance education courses . undergraduates taking distance education courses are more likely to be female . women represented about 65 percent of the undergraduate students who took all their courses through distance education . in contrast , they represented about 56 percent of undergraduates who did not take a distance education course . for graduate students , there was no significant difference in the gender of students who took distance education courses and those who did not . distance education students are more likely to work full - time . as figure 3 shows , a higher percentage of distance education students work full - time when compared to students who did not take any distance education courses . to be eligible for federal funds , a postsecondary institution or program must be accredited by an agency recognized by education as a reliable authority on quality . education recognizes 58 separate accrediting agencies for this purpose , of which only 38 are recognized for title iv student aid purposes . the 58 accrediting agencies operate either regionally or nationally , and they accredit a wide variety of institutions or programs , including public and private , non - profit two - year or four - year colleges and universities ; graduate and professional programs ; proprietary vocational and technical training programs ; and non - degree training programs . some accrediting agencies accredit entire institutions and some accredit specialized programs , departments , or schools that operate within an institution or as single purpose , freestanding institutions . the hea and regulations issued by education establish criteria under which education will recognize an accreditation agency as a reliable authority regarding the quality of education . the hea states that accrediting agencies must assess quality in 10 different areas , such as curriculum , student achievement , and program length . under the hea , an accrediting agency is required to include distance education programs when assessing quality . in doing so , an accrediting agency must consistently apply and enforce its standards with respect to distance education programs as well as other educational programs at the institution . our analysis in this area is not as far along as it is for the other topics we are discussing today . we plan to review a number of accreditation efforts to determine the way in which accrediting agencies review distance education programs . we expect that our work will address the following issues: how well accrediting agencies are carrying out their responsibilities for reviewing distance education . the hea does not contain specific language setting forth how distance learning should be reviewed .