ins did not provide a timeframe for these proposals . ins has not established criteria for its investigative units at the district offices and its isd operations units at the service centers to use in selecting immigration benefit fraud investigations to pursue . for example , the service centers have no standard operating procedures or guidance for distinguishing which leads should be investigated . without such guidance , ins cannot be assured that the highest - priority cases are opened and that limited resources are being maximized . although some officials told us that the service centers are performing a key function , are innovative , and provide information and analysis for significant cases , the operations units at the service centers do not have standard procedures for determining which leads have priority over hundreds of others . at the california service center , the officers stated that they are overwhelmed with cases . and ( 4 ) what performance measures does ins have in place to gauge the results of its benefit fraud enforcement activities ? to address the objectives of our review , we reviewed relevant reports , laws , and regulations . ( 3 ) how does ins address its dual responsibility of timely application processing and the detection and deterrence of fraudulent applications ? in addition , we interviewed ins officials at headquarters , three regional offices , five district offices , and four service centers . we chose these locations because they represent a wide cross section of the country and because they handled approximately 85 percent of all applications received by ins in fiscal year 2000 . specifically , to address the first three questions , we interviewed ins officials in headquarters , regions , district offices , and service centers and we obtained and reviewed pertinent reports and documents . to address the fourth question , we obtained and reviewed government performance and results act ( gpra ) requirements and ins performance reports and we obtained and analyzed ins prosecution and investigation data for fiscal years 1998 through 2000 . see appendix i for a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology . we performed our work from november 2000 through august 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the attorney general . ins is responsible for ensuring that persons eligible for immigration benefits receive them in a timely manner while aliens who are ineligible are denied benefits . some ineligible applicants attempt to obtain immigration benefits through fraudulent means . immigration fraud falls into two broad categories — benefit application fraud and document fraud . benefit application fraud involves the willful misrepresentation of a material fact to gain an immigration benefit in the absence of lawful entitlement . benefit application fraud includes immigration benefit fraud schemes such as marriage fraud , in which an ineligible alien makes a false claim to a bona fide marriage with an eligible petitioner in order to obtain immigration benefits , and occupational preference fraud , in which businesses in the united states claim falsely that aliens are needed for employment because of their education , technical knowledge , or experience and that such people are not available in the u.s. workforce .