unattended . without enhanced physical security , education will continue to be at risk for further computer equipment losses . we also have concerns about huds accountability for computer and related equipment purchased with purchase cards because of the large volume of purchases for which it did not have appropriate documentation . in these cases , hud likely does not know what was purchased , why it was purchased , whether there was a legitimate government need for the item purchased , and where the item is now . for example , hud employees used their purchase cards to purchase portable assets such as computer equipment and digital cameras , totaling over $74,500 , for which they have provided either no support or inadequate support . further , in its purchase card remedial action plan , which i will discuss further shortly , hud stated that not all property is entered in its automated property inventory system . when these purchases are not entered in an agencys inventory system , they become more vulnerable to loss or theft . in our follow - up work , we plan to determine whether these items are included in huds inventory and are being appropriately safeguarded . in april 2002 , omb issued a memorandum requiring all agencies to develop remedial action plans to manage the risk associated with purchase card usage . agencies were required to submit their plans to the office of federal procurement policy no later than june 1 , 2002 . both hud and education submitted their plans to omb on time . while educations plan was accepted by omb and addressed the findings and recommendations in our september 2001 interim report and final education report , huds plan was rejected because it lacked a timeline for when the corrective actions would be implemented . this plan also did not address key weaknesses we identified . does not specifically identify who is responsible for developing or implementing any of the proposed improvements . we will be issuing a separate letter to hud that will include recommendations to address these and other issues we identified during our review of its purchase card program . in contrast , educations plan specifically addresses the findings and recommendations in our september 2001 interim report and final education reports . these recommendations included ( 1 ) emphasizing policies on appropriate use of the purchase card and cardholder and approving official responsibilities , ( 2 ) ensuring that approving officials are trained on how to perform their responsibilities , and ( 3 ) ensuring that approving officials review purchases and their supporting documentation before certifying the statements for payment . education took actions to respond to these recommendations , such as ( 1 ) reducing monthly and single purchase spending limits , ( 2 ) blocking over 300 mccs , ( 3 ) implementing a new approval process , and ( 4 ) issuing new policies and procedures . however , during our follow - up work at education , we found that weaknesses remained that continued to leave the department vulnerable to fraudulent and improper payments and lost assets .