dod concurred with all of these recommendations . seven of the preceding recommendations were made earlier this year , and we recognize that it will take time for dod to implement them . however , dod's attention to each of these recommendations is important to improving its long - term sustainment planning . in summary , dod's costs to purchase the f - 35 are expected to exceed $406 billion , and the department expects to spend more than $1 trillion to sustain its f - 35 fleet . thus , dod must continue to grapple with affordability as it takes actions to increase the readiness of the f - 35 fleet and improve its sustainment efforts to deliver an aircraft that the military services and partner nations can successfully operate and maintain over the long term within their budgetary realities . dod's continued attention to our recommendations will be important as it balances these goals . we will continue to monitor dod's efforts to implement our recommendations . chairmen garamendi and norcross , ranking members lamborn and hartzler , and members of the subcommittees , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . if you or your staff have questions about this testimony , please contact diana maurer , director , defense capabilities and management , at ( 202 ) 512-9627 or maurerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony are alissa czyz and kasea hamar ( assistant directors ) ; jon ludwigson , vincent buquicchio , tracy burney , desiree cunningham , jeff hubbard , justin jaynes , amie lesser , sean manzano , jillena roberts , michael silver , maria staunton , tristan t. to , cheryl weissman , and elisa yoshiara . f - 35 joint strike fighter: action needed to improve reliability and prepare for modernization efforts . gao - 19-341 . washington , d.c.: april 29 , 2019 . f - 35 aircraft sustainment: dod needs to address substantial supply chain challenges . gao - 19-321 . washington , d.c.: april 25 , 2019 . f - 35 joint strike fighter: development is nearly complete , but deficiencies found in testing need to be resolved . gao - 18-321 . washington , d.c.: june 5 , 2018 . my statement today will focus on sustainment . sustainment involves the activities necessary to operate aircraft after they are fielded — such as maintenance , supply chain management , training , and engineering support . sustainment costs typically comprise about 70 percent of a weapon system's life - cycle cost . in particular , we have reported on significant challenges that dod faces in sustaining a growing f - 35 fleet . as a result of these challenges , f - 35 performance has not met warfighter requirements . mission capability — that is , the percentage of total time when the aircraft can fly and perform at least one mission — was 52 percent from may through november 2018 , as compared with a warfighter minimum requirement of 75 percent .