fta . fta performs audits of the tri - state oversight committee to determine whether the state oversight agency is carrying out its safety oversight program and to examine ways in which the overall program can be improved . national transportation safety board ( ntsb ) . ntsb has the authority to conduct investigations of accidents and make recommendations . the ntsb is currently investigating a november 2004 crash involving two metrorail trains ; it expects to issue a report on the results of this investigation in the fall of 2005 . apta . apta's bus and rail safety audits review the adequacy of transit agencies' system safety program plans and the extent to which the plans have been implemented . in addition , we plan to review the role of wmata's board of directors in providing oversight of wmata's management and operations . as noted earlier in this statement , wmata is governed by a board of directors — composed of individuals appointed by each of the local jurisdictions wmata serves — which sets policies and oversees all of wmata's activities , including budgeting , operations , development , expansion , safety , procurement , and other activities . to control costs and ensure results — especially for high - cost transportation infrastructure projects — congress , the administration , and gao have long recognized the importance of instituting spending safeguards and management oversight for the state and local governments and transportation agencies that receive federal funding . for example , certain federal policies have historically controlled the uses of federal transportation funds , prohibiting the use of these funds for operating expenses and requiring that the federal funds be matched to ensure the use of some local funds for capital infrastructure projects . in addition , a number of past , ongoing , and planned federal and local efforts provide insight into the benefits of management oversight and how it can be carried out . for example , in the 1980s , state legislation enhanced opportunities for new york city's ailing metropolitan transit authority to generate additional revenue while providing increased oversight to ensure accountability . furthermore , fta's pmo program is designed to help ensure that grantees building major capital projects have the qualified staff and procedures needed to successfully plan and carry out those projects . we have also reported that safeguards should accompany any increased federal funds provided to the district of columbia to address the structural imbalance between its costs and revenue - raising capacity . finally , the surface transportation reauthorization bills currently before congress include provisions to enhance management oversight controls for projects receiving federal funds , including establishing a new program to monitor the use of federal highway funds . although we have not evaluated the application of these oversight mechanisms to wmata , we believe they provide a number of options for congress to consider as it weighs the question of providing additional federal funding to wmata . the federal government has generally discouraged federal transit grants from being used to fund transit operating expenses , although policy in this area has shifted over time . landmark legislation in 1964 established a program of federal capital expenditure grants to state and local governments .