bep had 209 police officers as of march 2003 . it also employed 36 people to provide administrative support for its security operations . in addition , bep employed 79 security specialists , investigators , and security managers who bep does not count as police officers , but who are licensed and trained to carry firearms and can provide back - up for the police . bep conducts most of its own background investigations , while the mint contracts out this work . the mint and bep police primarily provide security by guarding entry and exit at the agencies' facilities and conducting electronic surveillance . in contrast to the secret service , which is concerned primarily with protecting individuals and , as part of that mission , controlling public access into protected facilities , the mint and bep police are focused on preventing employees from taking coins and currency from the facilities . both the mint and bep police use outside experts to conduct threat assessments regarding their facilities and to make recommendations for security improvements . the mint and bep police provide security for production facilities that are not located in the same cities . the mint police provide protection at the primary coin production facilities in denver and philadelphia ; the facilities in san francisco and west point , which produce numismatic coins ; the ft. knox facility , where gold and other precious metals are stored ; and the mint's washington , d.c. , headquarters . the bep police provide protection at bep's washington , d.c. , headquarters and at currency production facilities in washington , d.c. , and ft. worth . because both the mint and bep protect money producing facilities , the two agencies have considered merging their police forces . according to the mint , a combined police force could exercise greater flexibility in deploying security personnel in response to emergencies . however , the mint also said that ( 1 ) because of the geographic dispersion of the mint's and bep's production facilities , the number of police positions that could be eliminated through a merger of the police forces would be limited and ( 2 ) all mint and bep police officers would have to be trained in the security aspects of both the coin and currency production processes . kelly anderson reported in february 2000 that 19 of the secret service's recommendations and 7 of the kpmg recommendations needed additional effort . in february and march 2003 , we found that bep had fully implemented 14 of the 19 secret service recommendations and is in the process of implementing another . bep indicated that it did not intend to fully implement the other 4 recommendations ( 3 of the 4 were partially implemented ) for cost and other reasons , which we did not believe to represent major gaps in security . we selected a random sample of 20 other secret service recommendations that were identified as being high risk and kpmg recommendations pertaining to that facility and verified that they had been implemented . three of the secret service recommendations directly pertained to the police force . none of these recommendations pertained to improvements in the police force , for example , in terms of the officers' training or skills .