needs assessment . as described previously , gsa officials told us they typically meet agencies' warehouse space needs by identifying storage specifications for warehouse contents . gsa regional officials told us that when looking to provide warehouse space , gsa works with customer agencies to understand their missions and assess their needs . guided by agencies' specific storage needs , gsa works with each agency to meet their needs on a case - by - case or asset - by - asset basis . alternatives evaluation . next , gsa evaluates alternatives by seeking out available government - owned warehouse space first , given its lower cost to the government and ease of occupancy . if government - owned space is not available within the tenant - specified area , gsa considers occupying vacant space currently leased from private lessors , and if such suitable space is not available , then gsa considers leasing new space from a private lessor . gsa regional officials told us that they also conduct feasibility studies — to help decision makers evaluate project alternatives — when warehouses or other assets are large and costly . for example , gsa officials told us that they were embarking on a feasibility study for the previously mentioned 150,000-square foot warehouse in lakewood , colorado , formerly occupied by nara to determine the feasibility of converting it into office space . in its landlord role , gsa has taken steps to apply capital - planning practices related to needs assessment and alternatives evaluation ; however , gsa has done this on an asset - by - asset basis and has not prioritized warehouses or developed a long - term plan . gsa has about a third of all warehouse space among civilian agencies , totaling about 29- million square feet . as such , managing warehouses based on priorities and identifying steps that benefit tenant agencies and taxpayers would better position gsa to fulfill its role as a steward of these assets and partner in helping agencies achieve their missions . it would also help gsa begin to overcome what are often seen as intractable challenges , such as a reliance on costly , long - term leasing , or taking action to dispose of aging and obsolete assets . prioritization , for example , could help gsa address obsolete warehouses in its inventory . as mentioned above , government - owned warehouse space in the gsa inventory is aging and becoming obsolete . this trend is likely to push even more warehouses into excess status and in need of disposal . gsa could prioritize warehouses to determine those in most critical need of an alternative plan , such as disposal . this would allow gsa to be proactive in managing its warehouse inventory . furthermore , gsa has relied on leasing to support long - term mission needs . we have previously found that building ownership often costs less than leasing , especially for long - term space needs .