apr . 2009 aug. 2009 apr . 2009 aug. 2009 and complete as of august 2009 . this table includes units funded by a $15 million appropriation for the redevelopment of permanent housing damaged by hurricane katrina . hud awarded these funds to the housing authority of new orleans . major contributors to this report were daniel garcia - diaz , assistant director ; vanessa dillard ; shamiah kerney ; and lisa moore . vii ) . data on the extent to which rental units funded through the new markets tax credit program ( go zone ) were complete were not readily available . to assess the reliability of agency data on the numbers and location of homeowner and rental units funded as well as the amount of assistance provided , we ( 1 ) performed electronic testing for obvious errors in accuracy and completeness ; ( 2 ) reviewed related documentation , including audit reports on data verification for some programs we reviewed ; and ( 3 ) worked with agency officials or contractors to identify any data problems . when we found discrepancies , such as unpopulated fields or data entry errors , we notified agency officials or contractors and worked with these officials to correct the discrepancies before conducting our analysis . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report . to identify challenges to homeowners and rental property owners , we reviewed studies and reports about housing recovery in the areas affected by the hurricanes , interviewed the administrators of the programs we reviewed , interviewed organizations that worked with disaster victims to obtain permanent housing , and analyzed data on the timeliness of funding availability and application processing . to describe the timeliness of funding availability , we interviewed program administrators , reviewed prior gao and other reports , and obtained documentation of the dates on which hud accepted plans for cdbg - funded programs . also , in examining application processing times for cdbg - funded programs , we obtained data from program administrators on each loan or grant awarded . we determined the median number of days between the date the application was received by the state and the date funds were awarded ( for the homeowner programs ) or the closing occurred ( for the small rental programs ) . we excluded outliers and records with missing data to determine the median number of days elapsed between these points . further , we summarized available information from program administrators and other reports on factors that may have contributed to processing delays . to identify potential options for mitigating the challenges we identified , we reviewed recommendations in studies and reports , suggestions from program administrators and organizations that worked with disaster victims to obtain permanent housing , and information on the congressional intent of post - disaster housing assistance , including the stafford act and fema's disaster housing strategy . we discussed these options and their potential limitations .