we provided a draft of this report to energy for comment . energy's claims process has several steps . first , claimants file applications and provide all available medical evidence . energy then develops the claims by requesting records of employment , medical treatment , and exposure to toxic substances from the energy facilities at which the workers were employed . if energy determines that the worker was not employed by one of its facilities or did not have an illness that could be caused by exposure to toxic substances , the agency finds the claimant ineligible . when we received the second data extract , containing data through the end of calendar year 2003 , we matched it to the first one to determine how many additional cases had been received between july 1 , 2003 , and december 31 , 2003 , and to determine if any cases were missing . however , since this insurer is not bound by energy's orders and it does not have a formal agreement with either energy or the contractors to not contest these claims , there is nothing to guarantee that the insurer will continue to process claims in this manner . about 20 percent of cases in the 9 states we analyzed are likely to be contested . therefore , in some instances , these cases may be less likely to receive compensation than a comparable case for which there is a willing payer , unless the claimant is able to overcome challenges to the claim . in addition , contested cases can take longer to be resolved . for example , one claimant whose claim is being contested by an insurer was told by her attorney that because of pretrial motions filed by the opposing attorney , it would be 2 years before her case was heard on its merits . specifically , the cases that lack willing payers involve contractors that ( 1 ) have a commercial insurance policy , ( 2 ) use a state fund to pay workers' compensation claims , or ( 3 ) do not have a current contract with energy . for example , if both the widow and child of a deceased energy employee file claims , both claims will be associated with a single case , which is linked to the energy employee . in our case - level file , energy provided the earliest signature date , so that we would know when the first claim was signed . illness data are also collected at the claim level . in our case - level file , energy provided all the illnesses claimed by all claimants . we then aggregated the illness data to determine which illnesses were claimed on each case . we interviewed key energy officials and contractors and reviewed available system documentation , such as design specifications and system update documents . once the first data extract was received from energy , we tested the data set to determine that it was sufficiently reliable for our purposes . specifically , we performed electronic testing to identify missing data or logical inconsistencies and reviewed determination letters for cases that had physician panel determinations .