, had exited from the program or not ) . span is the database used by the trust . we performed general checks on these files to look for invalid data such as social security numbers that are invalid or have not been assigned . because of a lack of documentation describing the data fields in detail , particularly for span , we held several discussions with corporation officials and contractor staff to resolve technical issues associated with the data files and to identify data fields to use in our reliability test . we also learned about the controls over the sources of data and external factors that could affect the estimates . for more information see appendix ii . ( 3 ) has the corporation made management and operational changes that ensure enrollments will not be suspended in the future and that address the strengthen americorps program act requirements ? to answer these questions we used a multifaceted methodology . we performed a detailed reliability assessment of the trust database by comparing information in the database with original enrollment and exit forms . we obtained enough documentation to compare key information on 363 of 400 cases in our sample , or an estimated 157,045 of the 172,434 enrollments in the 2000 to 2002 program years . we examined the model used by the trust to estimate its funding requirements and reviewed reports of auditors and contractors related to the model . we surveyed all 148 americorps grantees for their views on the corporation's new enrollment and oversight policies as well as the training and technical support provided by the corporation , and obtained a response rate of 71 percent . we also reviewed applicable laws , analyzed corporation data , reviewed relevant documents and reports from the corporation's inspector general , and interviewed knowledgeable officials . we conducted our work between march and december 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . for more details about our scope and methodology , see appendix i . the corporation is part of the usa freedom corps , a white house initiative to foster a culture of citizenship , service , and responsibility , and help all americans answer the president's call to service . the corporation maintains administrative field offices in almost every state . americorps was created in 1993 and is one of three national service programs the corporation oversees: the senior corps , americorps , and learn and serve america . americorps consists of three programs: americorps state and national ( state and national ) , americorps vista ( volunteers in service to america ) , and americorps nccc ( national civilian community corps ) . americorps programs for tribes and territories are included in state and national programs . the corporation makes grants from its program appropriations to help grant recipients carry out national service programs . these include programs that tutor and mentor youth , build affordable housing , teach computer skills , clean parks and streams , run after - school activities , help communities respond to disasters , and those that are related to homeland security .