( see fig . for example , the individuals with disabilities education act established a special education research and innovation program as well as technical assistance centers to improve services and results for children with disabilities . the rehabilitation act established a national institute for disability and rehabilitation research . the regional labs are required to collaborate and coordinate with each other , education - funded technical assistance providers , and oeri institutes , and to share and plan joint activities with other education - funded state , and federal programs . they are also required to establish a network for sharing information , planning activities involving multiple regions , and working on national projects . peer review is well accepted and widely used for assessing the merit of research proposals and the scientific soundness of research . unlike the r&d centers , research is only a relatively small part of what regional labs do . their other activities dissemination and technical assistance would have been more appropriately evaluated using methods other than peer review . the peer review processes that education used to evaluate the r&d centers and regional labs have shortcomings that limited the usefulness of the findings . first , the peer review process used has the potential for bias because the r&d centers and the regional labs selected most of the products that were reviewed . second , the processes were cumbersome . for example , education required each member of a review team to write an individual assessment report and to review all contracts , contract modifications , progress reports , and annual updates for a three - year period . in addition , with regard to the comprehensive centers , the customer satisfaction survey evaluations of the comprehensive centers did not provide information on individual centers . traditionally , education has used peer review to evaluate activities carried out by oeri , including those conducted by the r&d centers and the regional labs . the educational research , development , dissemination , and improvement act of 1994 codified this practice by requiring oeri to develop peer review standards for evaluating and assessing the performance of recipients of grants , cooperative agreements , and contracts that exceed $100,000 , as well as for selecting proposals for funding and identifying exemplary and promising educational programs . historically , peer review has been used extensively in the selection of proposed research projects and , to a lesser extent , to evaluate research and development programs . collaboration also results when a single organization operates both an r&d center , regional lab , or a comprehensive center . for example , staff from the western regional lab and the northern california comprehensive center participated in a workgroup that developed a guide on how schools could better obtain student perspectives and suggestions to improve school planning . as shown in figure 9 , both the western regional lab and the northern california comprehensive center are run by the same parent organization . five of the 10 parent organizations that run a regional lab also run a comprehensive center . one of the 12 parent organizations that operates an r&d center also operates a comprehensive center .