focused reviews . another way the mhs uses its managed care support contractors to promote improved quality of care across purchased care providers is through focused reviews . during these reviews , the managed care support contractors review the medical records for a selected patient population to determine the extent to which a specified quality concern is a widespread problem . for example , in 2015 one contractor reviewed the medical records of 96 beneficiaries to determine the frequency of obstetric trauma , an injury related to vaginal deliveries . if a focused review determines that there is a widespread quality problem , the contractor may implement a quality improvement initiative designed to prompt all of its network providers to address that concern , as opposed to targeting specific providers . analyses of hospital compare data . the mhs also requires the contractors to conduct an annual examination of the performance of hospitals in their networks on the different quality measures reported on medicare's hospital compare . however , the managed care support contractors have considerable flexibility in deciding how to structure these analyses and how to follow - up on results . consequently , the two managed care support contractors have adopted different analytical approaches to define and identify hospitals with relatively low performance . for example , the managed care support contractors chose to examine different quality measures and use different criteria to identify hospitals with relatively low performance . in their most recent annual reports issued during 2017 , both managed care support contractors indicated that they were considering contacting the lower performing hospitals to prompt remedial action , but because no action had yet occurred , the reports leave open what steps were ultimately taken and how these hospitals responded . nonetheless , these activities suggest that the managed care support contractors have the ability to use hospital compare to analyze and address individual provider performance on a standard set of quality measures . however , the mhs has not specified how this process should proceed , leaving it to the managed care support contractors to decide what and how much they will do in conducting these analyses of individual hospitals . value - based purchasing pilots . the mhs has recently begun to test different approaches to incentivize purchased care providers to deliver high quality care through several value - based purchasing pilots . for example , in february 2018 the mhs launched a maternity care pilot that pays providers more for better performance on specified quality measures . the pilot also implements a ‘steerage model' approach that identifies higher performing providers in directories provided to patients by indicating providers as “gold stork” or “silver stork.” these pilots may provide the mhs another way to influence the quality of care provided by certain subsets of its purchased care providers . mhs officials stated that although dod has not arrived at specific goals , it plans to expand these pilots to cover around 20 to 25 percent of its purchased care services by 2020 .