postmerger oversight . ferc's postmerger oversight relies on its existing enforcement mechanisms — primarily self - reporting and a limited number of compliance audits . ferc indicates that it places great importance on self - reporting because it believes companies can actively police their own behavior through internal and external audits , and that the companies are in the best position to detect and correct both inadvertent and intentional noncompliance . ferc officials told us that they expect companies to become more vigilant in monitoring their behavior because ferc can now levy much larger fines – – up to $1 million per day per violation – – and that a violating company's actions in following this self - reporting policy , along with the seriousness of a potential violation , help inform ferc's decision on the appropriate penalty . key stakeholders have raised concerns that internal company audits tend to focus on areas of highest risk to the company profits and , as a result , may not focus specifically on affiliate transactions . one company official noted that the threat of large fines may “chill” companies' willingness to self - report violations . between the enactment of epact – – when congress formally highlighted its concern about cross - subsidization – – and our february 2008 report , no companies had self - reported any of these types of violations . to augment self - reporting , ferc plans to conduct a limited number of compliance audits of holding companies each year , although at the time of our february 2008 report , it had not completed any audits to detect whether cross - subsidization is occurring . in 2008 , ferc's plans to audit 3 of the 36 companies it regulates — exelon corporation , allegheny , inc. , and the southern company . if this rate continues , it would take ferc 12 years to audit each of these companies once , although ferc officials noted that they plan audits one year at a time and that the number of audits may change in future years . we found that ferc does not use a formal risk - based approach to plan its compliance audits – – a factor that financial auditors and other experts told us is an important consideration in allocating audit resources . instead , ferc officials plan audits based on informal discussions between ferc's office of enforcement , including its division of audits , and relevant ferc offices with related expertise . specifically: reviewing mergers and acquisitions . ferc's merger and acquisition review relies primarily on company disclosures and commitments not to cross - subsidize . ferc - regulated companies that are proposing to merge with or acquire a regulated company must submit a public application for ferc to review and approve . if cross - subsidies already exist or are planned , companies are required to describe how these are in the public interest by , for example identifying how the planned cross - subsidy benefits utility ratepayers and does not harm others . ferc also requires company officials to attest that they will not engage in unapproved cross - subsidies in the future .