recruiters we interviewed expressed the same opinion . dod has found that the public's perceptions about military enlistment have changed because youth and their parents believe that deployment to a hostile environment is very likely for servicemembers with some types of military specialties . officials further stated that adults who influence a prospective applicant's decision about whether to join the military are increasingly fearful of the possibility of death or serious injury to the applicant . recruiters also must overcome specific factors that routinely make their job hard . ( 3 ) what procedures are in place to address individuals involved in recruiting irregularities ? our work covers recruiting irregularities that affect all services' active and reserve component enlisted personnel . for the purposes of this report , we define recruiter irregularities as those willful and unwillful acts of omission and improprieties that are perpetrated by a recruiter or alleged to be perpetrated by a recruiter to facilitate the recruiting process for an applicant . these recruiter irregularities range from administrative paperwork errors , to actions such as failing to disclose disqualifying eligibility criteria or instructing applicants not to reveal medical conditions or prior civil litigation , to criminal violations committed by a recruiter who is subsequently prosecuted under articles of the uniform code of military justice . criminal violations may include such actions as sexual harassment and falsifying documents . we performed our work primarily at the service recruiting commands and dod's military entrance processing command . ( 2 ) what factors within the current recruiting environment may contribute to recruiting irregularities ? to answer our objectives , we examined dod and service policies , regulations , and directives related to recruiting . we also reviewed data dod compiled on recruiters and survey results on their opinions about their jobs . we also interviewed dod and service recruiting officials , and recruiters in each service . however , we did not review irregularities within dod's national guard components because the national guard bureau does not maintain centralized data . although we identified weaknesses in the available data , we determined that , for the purposes of this report , the data were reliable for providing limited information on recruiter irregularities . we conducted our work from september 2005 through august 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . further details on the scope and methodology are described in appendix i . subject to the authority , direction , and control of the secretary of defense , each military service ( army , navy , marine corps , and air force ) has the responsibility to recruit and train a force to conduct military operations . in fiscal year 2006 , dod committed over $1.5 billion to its recruiting effort . each service , in turn , has established a recruiting command responsible for that service's recruiting mission and functions . the services' recruiting commands are similarly organized , in general , to accomplish the recruiting mission . figure 1 illustrates the organization of the recruiting commands from the senior headquarters level through the recruiting station where frontline recruiters work to contact prospective applicants and sell them on military service .