wireless . land - based , or terrestrial , wireless broadband service connects a home or business to the internet using a radio link . some companies are offering fixed wireless broadband service throughout cities . also , mobile telephone carriers have begun offering broadband mobile wireless internet service , allowing subscribers to access the internet with their mobile phones or laptops in areas throughout cities where their provider supports the service . what is the status of broadband deployment and adoption in developed countries ? what actions have selected countries taken to increase broadband deployment and adoption ? how do recommendations outlined in the national broadband plan reflect the actions of selected countries to increase broadband deployment and adoption ? to address the first question , we obtained information on broadband deployment and adoption in the 30 countries that were members of oecd as of january 1 , 2010 , through a review of oecd's ranking of broadband subscribers per 100 inhabitants , and we analyzed key demographic and socioeconomic data identified by fcc as potentially affecting broadband deployment and adoption in all 30 countries . to address the second question , we selected 7 countries from the original 30 countries — canada , france , japan , the netherlands , south korea , sweden , and the united kingdom — for further analysis and comparison with the united states , using a case study approach . these countries were among those that had instituted policies or practices credited with increasing broadband deployment , adoption , or both , and had economic or demographic characteristics somewhat similar to those of the united states . to determine the actions these selected countries have taken to increase broadband deployment and adoption , we obtained and analyzed relevant policies , plans , and guidance issued by responsible government agencies , regulatory authorities , and broadband providers in our 7 selected countries and actions taken by these countries' governments and other stakeholders to increase broadband deployment and consumer adoption . we identified these actions through semistructured interviews with public - and private - sector stakeholders in the 7 countries and placed these actions in five categories . actions in the first two categorizes serve primarily to increase deployment , while those in the remaining three categories are largely intended to increase adoption , although some actions may promote both deployment and adoption . furthermore , to better understand stakeholders' views on the effectiveness of these actions , we interviewed national and local government officials and representatives of broadband providers and consumer interest groups in each of the selected countries . to address the third question , we analyzed the national broadband plan's recommendations , which the plan's executive summary groups in four broad areas , and compared these areas with the five categories in which we placed the selected countries' actions . we also compared individual recommendations with specific actions taken in the selected countries and spoke with relevant fcc officials about how the actions recommended in the plan align with the five identified categories . we did not evaluate the potential impact or effectiveness of the recommendations . we conducted this performance audit from june 2009 to september 2010 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .