training and education . the workgroup noted that cdc's training systems , competency and proficiency testing , and time - in - laboratory requirements varied greatly across the agency's laboratories . the workgroup recommended a comprehensive review and unification of training and education best practices across all cdc laboratories to improve laboratory science and safety . communications and staff feedback . the workgroup noted cdc's need for comprehensive communication improvements to provide a transparent flow of information across the laboratory community regarding laboratory science and safety . the workgroup recommended that cdc should include clearer communication flow diagrams , point - of - decision signs , and improved notification systems to distribute information to neighboring laboratories when an event such as a potential exposure occurs . in addition , in january 2015 , an external advisory group completed its review of laboratory safety at cdc and identified recommendations that reinforced the internal workgroup's findings and recommendations . for example , this advisory group found that cdc lacked a clearly articulated safety mission , vision , or direction and recommended the creation of a biomedical scientist position in the cdc director's office . as we conduct our ongoing review of federal management of high - containment laboratories , we are assessing cdc's progress in implementing the recommendations from its internal and external workgroups . our preliminary observations show that cdc has taken some steps to implement workgroup recommendations and address weaknesses in laboratory oversight but has not addressed some recommendations or fully implemented other activities . for example , cdc reported that , in response to the recommendation to develop overarching biosafety policies , it is developing policies for specimen transport and laboratory training . in addition , cdc developed a new procedure for scientists leaving the agency to account for any biological specimens they may have been researching , which the agency rolled out in february 2015 . this procedure was among those policies the workgroup recommended to be included in overarching agency policies . however , as of july 2015 , cdc has not developed other agency - wide policies that include comprehensive requirements for laboratory biosafety , such as policies that outline requirements for appropriate laboratory documentation and for laboratories to maintain site - specific operational and emergency protocols , to fully address the workgroup recommendation . to address the recommendation made by the external advisory group to create a senior - level biomedical scientist position , cdc created a new laboratory science and safety office within the office of the cdc director and established the position of associate director for laboratory science and safety to lead the new office . the primary responsibility of the associate director is to establish additional agency - level policies for laboratory safety and communicate cdc's safety efforts to agency staff . as of july 2015 , cdc had not yet filled this position with a permanent staff member . in addition , cdc is taking other steps intended to improve the management of high - containment laboratories but has not yet completed these activities . for example , in its 2013 policy for sample and specimen management , cdc included a directive for the agency to implement an electronic inventory management system .