v ) . hhs described steps it is taking to improve the shop program based on lessons learned from the first year of operation and emphasized the future role shops could play to produce more competition in the small group health insurance markets as the shops improve and mature . hhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact john e. dicken at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or dickenj@gao.gov . availability of employee choice . some stakeholders stated that the employee choice feature , when fully implemented in all states , will be a key value proposition for the shops . for instance , cms officials said that employers will likely value being able to offer employees a choice from among multiple plan and issuer options — an ability that small employers typically have not been able to offer . employer group representatives reported that their members consider employee choice to be an important benefit of the shops , as employees will be able to decide on their own the coverage that best suits their needs and , if necessary , will have the option to spend more to purchase more comprehensive plans . evidence from kentucky and rhode island , whose shops offer , but do not require , the use of employee choice , further suggests that employers may value this feature . as discussed previously , according to state exchange officials , the majority of employers in kentucky and rhode island that enrolled in the shops chose to offer their employees the choice of multiple plans . however , some issuer representatives and other stakeholders were uncertain about the value of employee choice , noting that it is challenging for issuers to implement and that too many choices may be overwhelming for employers and employees . representatives from national issuer and insurance commissioner groups reported that it is time consuming and expensive for issuers to build the information technology systems required for premium aggregation and other issuer - specific functions necessary for employee choice . in addition , issuers and other stakeholders have reported concerns regarding whether employee choice would lead to adverse selection among plans in the shop — a concern that has , in part , led some states to delay their implementation of employee choice until 2016 . exchange officials in one state noted that an essential element of shop viability will be ensuring the shops are financially sustainable . they and other sb - shop exchange officials we interviewed said that their states have proposed or finalized funding mechanisms in place .