these case examples are for illustration only . to determine the extent to which the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) has a sound basis for its determinations that more than 4,000 formerly used defense sites ( fuds ) need no further department of defense ( dod ) study or cleanup and for designating those properties as “no dod action indicated” ( ndai ) , we reviewed and analyzed a statistical sample of 603 ndai files at nine corps districts . table 2 shows the property name , the fuds number , and whether we found , based on our review of the evidence in the file , that the corps had a sound basis for its ndai determination . in those cases where we do not believe that the corps has a sound basis , the table includes an explanation for our finding . our questioning of an ndai determination does not mean that the property is contaminated ; rather , it indicates that the corps' file did not contain evidence that the corps took steps to identify and assess potential hazards at the property that would support the ndai determination . in the table , we use abbreviations for the four types of hazards: building demolition and debris removal ( bd / dr ) ; hazardous , toxic , and radioactive waste ( htrw ) ; containerized hazardous , toxic , and radioactive waste ( con / htrw ) ; and ordnance and explosive waste ( oew ) . in addition to those named above , ian ferguson , ken lightner , sherry mcdonald , and aaron shiffrin made key contributions to this report . also contributing to this report were doreen s. feldman , susan w. irwin , cynthia norris , and sidney schwartz . the general accounting office , the investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . you can print these documents in their entirety , including charts and other graphics . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . in addition , we verified 100 percent of the responses to questions and sub - questions on the dci that were key to supporting our findings . the information presented in this report consists , in part , of statistical estimates based on our review of randomly selected files .