gao - 13-84 . washington , d.c.: november 16 , 2012 . dod generally agreed with our recommendations . in another instance , we found that dod , state , and the u.s. agency for international development used different terminology to describe similar efforts during our review of dod's humanitarian assistance efforts . for example , according to dod officials , dod uses the term “humanitarian assistance” to describe its strategically planned assistance . in contrast , the u.s. agency for international development and state refer to immediate , life - saving relief as “humanitarian assistance” but other capacity - building efforts as “development assistance.” dod officials explained that the terminology they use is derived from their legislative authority to perform humanitarian assistance , and dod and u.s. agency for international development officials said that dod uses “humanitarian assistance” rather than “development assistance” to ensure that the department is not perceived as performing development efforts that are outside of its legislatively - prescribed areas of responsibility . further , dod officials who are engaged in implementing some of dod's humanitarian assistance efforts told us that differences in terminology can create challenges among agencies in understanding the scope and nature of each others' efforts . state officials said that differing terminology creates challenges to setting goals or objectives when planning with other agencies . as a result , we recommended and they agreed that dod , state , and the u.s. agency for international development collaborate to develop guidance that provides a common understanding of the terminology used for their humanitarian and development assistance efforts . in a 2013 follow - up on our recommendation , dod officials stated that they have continued to regularly engage officials at state and the u.s. agency for international development through working groups and briefings to minimize confusion over terminology , but did not identify any actions taken to develop guidance on the differences in the agencies' terminology . national strategies have emphasized the importance of building partner capacity using an interagency and whole of government approach , but mechanisms for coordinating activities and sharing information within dod and across agencies have not been consistently implemented . our work shows that dod has taken steps to work with other agencies on activities , such as embedding representatives from their agencies at its combatant commands , but challenges remain . agencies have different organizational structures , planning processes , and funding sources to plan for and conduct their building partner capacity efforts , which can hinder interagency collaboration . given these organizational differences , coordination mechanisms that can facilitate interagency collaboration are needed to achieve integrated approaches to building partner capacity efforts . our work has found that dod has led or participated in coordinating activities and taken steps to share and integrate information for building partner capacity activities through some of the programs at its geographic combatant commands . for instance , u.s. southern command is a geographic combatant command that operates in the americas and the caribbean , areas primarily affected by challenges such as corruption , crime , transnational terrorism , natural disasters , and poverty that impact the security and stability of the region .