gao - 06-238 . washington , d.c.: january 23 , 2006 . omb has implemented both our recommendations . in our report on third party contactors' uses of ssns , we recommended that congress consider possible options for addressing the gaps in existing federal requirements for safeguarding ssns shared with contractors . the current gaps do not provide incentives for companies to commit to protecting personal information . each industry is subject to different federal oversight and is often left to decide what established practices for safeguarding ssns and other consumer information it wishes to follow . we suggested that one approach congress could take would be to require industry - specific protections for the sharing of ssns with contractors where such measures are not already in place . for example , congress could consider whether the telecommunications act of 1996 should be amended to address how that industry shares ssns with contractors . alternatively , we suggested that congress could take a broader approach . for example , in considering proposed legislation that would generally restrict the use and display of ssns , congress could also include a provision that would explicitly apply this restriction to third party contractors . we stated that with either approach , congress would want to establish a mechanism overseeing compliance by contractors and enforcement . in our report on the display of ssns on identification cards and in public records , we recommended that omb identify all those federal activities that require or engage in the display of 9-digit ssns on health insurance , identification , or any other cards issued to federal government personnel or program beneficiaries , and devise a governmentwide policy to ensure a consistent approach to this type of display . although ssa has authority to issue policies and procedures over the social security cards that it issues , it does not have authority over how other federal agencies use and display ssns . rather , it is up to individual government agencies to have their own policies for the cards issued under their authority . the lack of a broad , uniform policy allows for inconsistent , but persistent exposure of the ssn . omb has not yet taken action on our recommendation but said at the time we issued our report they would consider it . with regard to ssn exposure in public records , we again noted that it would be constructive for a representative group of federal , state , and local officials to develop a unified approach to safeguarding ssns used in all levels of government , particularly those displayed in public records . finally , with regard to private sector entities , such as information resellers reselling personal information , including ssns , we noted that there are few restrictions placed on these entities ability to obtain , use , and resell ssns for their businesses . the federal laws that have some restrictions can be interpreted broadly . the broad interpretation combined with the uncertainty about the application of the exceptions suggest that reselling personal information — including ssns — is likely to continue .