( see fig . enrollment in demonstration ppos was relatively low . of the 10.1 million eligible medicare beneficiaries living in demonstration ppo counties , about 98,000 , or less than 1 percent , had enrolled by october 2003 . the terms of the agreements varied . each agreement specified an expected “medical loss ratio” ( mlr ) , the percentage of a plan's annual revenue ( comprised of monthly payments from cms and any enrollee premiums ) that would be spent on medical expenses . generally , plans could designate the remaining percentage of revenue for administrative expenses , profit , and other contingencies . for the 12 organizations in the medicare ppo demonstration that had risk - sharing agreements with cms , medical expenses represented a median 87 percent of plan revenue . cms agreed to share a designated percentage , negotiated separately with each plan , of any difference between the plan's actual mlr and the expected mlr that fell outside a range around the expected mlr , known as a risk corridor . for each plan , the designated percentage with which it would share risk with cms was identical whether the actual mlr was greater or lower than the expected mlr . for example , a plan's contract might have specified an mlr of 87 percent , a percentage of shared risk of 50 percent , and a risk corridor of 2 percent above and below the expected mlr ( see fig . if that plan's actual medical expenses exceeded 89 percent of its revenue , cms would pay the plan 50 percent of the amount by which the actual mlr exceeded 89 percent . if the plan's actual mlr was lower than 85 percent of its revenue , the plan would pay cms 50 percent of the amount that the actual mlr fell below 85 percent . in order to allow organizations with hmo licenses to offer ppo - model health plans without having to meet the more stringent quality assurance requirements of m+c hmos , cms had organizations sign pffs contracts and also waived certain m+c payment requirements . of the 33 plans in the medicare ppo demonstration , 13 were offered by organizations with hmo licenses . under m+c requirements , a ppo offered by an organization licensed as an hmo would have to adhere to the more stringent quality assurance standards applicable to hmos . cms indicated that it could permit licensed hmos to establish ppo - type networks without being subject to the more stringent quality assurance requirements applicable to hmos by structuring their plans as pffs plans . cms contracted with all plans participating in the medicare ppo demonstration as m+c pffs plans because m+c did not prohibit organizations licensed as hmos from offering pffs plans . although m+c requires pffs plans to pay each class of provider uniformly , cms waived this payment - related requirement , thereby enabling these plans to establish provider networks by paying providers differently depending on whether they belonged to their networks . cms also waived the m+c limits on beneficiary cost sharing . an m+c plan may set beneficiary cost - sharing requirements that differ from those in ffs medicare , but these requirements are subject to statutory limits that vary by plan type .