gao - 09-393 . washington , d.c.: april 21 , 2009 . airline industry: potential mergers and acquisitions driven by financial competitive pressures . gao - 08-845 . washington , d.c.: july 31 , 2008 . we also analyzed airline schedule data . we assessed the reliability of these data by ( 1 ) performing electronic testing of required data elements , ( 2 ) reviewing existing information about the data and the system that produced them , and ( 3 ) interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we conducted this audit work in may 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . on may 3 , 2010 , united and continental announced an agreement to merge the two airlines . the new airline would retain the united name and headquarters in chicago while the current continental chief executive officer would keep that title with the new airline . the proposed merger will be financed exclusively through an all - stock transaction with a combined equity value of $8 billion split roughly with 55 percent ownership to united shareholders and 45 percent to continental shareholders . the airlines have not announced specific plans for changes in their networks or operations that would occur if the proposed merger is not challenged by doj . the airline industry has experienced considerable merger and acquisition activity since its early years , especially immediately following deregulation in 1978 ( fig . 1 provides a timeline of mergers and acquisitions for the seven largest surviving airlines ) . a flurry of mergers and acquisitions during the 1980s , when delta air lines and western airlines merged , united airlines acquired pan am's pacific routes , northwest acquired republic airlines , and american airlines and air california merged . in 2001 , american airlines acquired the bankrupt airline twa , in 2005 america west acquired us airways while the latter was in bankruptcy , and , in october 2008 , delta acquired northwest . certain other attempts at merging in the last decade failed because of opposition from doj or from employees and creditors . for example , in 2000 , an agreement was reached that allowed northwest to acquire a 50 percent stake in continental ( with limited voting power ) to resolve the antitrust suit brought by doj against northwest's proposed acquisition of a controlling interest in continental . a proposed merger of united airlines and us airways in 2000 also resulted in opposition from doj , which found that , in its view , the merger would violate antitrust laws by reducing competition , increasing air fares , and harming consumers on airline routes throughout the united states . although doj expressed its intent to sue to block the transaction , the parties abandoned the transaction before a suit was filed .