existing resources . in april 2009 , the secretary of defense proposed a significant restructuring of the fcs program to lower risk and address more near - term combat needs . the secretary noted significant concerns that the fcs program's vehicle designs — where greater information awareness was expected to compensate for less armor , resulting in lower weight and higher fuel efficiency — did not adequately reflect the lessons of counterinsurgency and close - quarters combat operations in iraq and afghanistan . as such , the secretary recommended accelerating fielding of ready - to - go systems and capabilities to all canceling the vehicle component of the fcs program , reevaluating the requirements , technology , and approach , and re - launching the army's vehicle modernization program , and addressing fee structure and other concerns with current fcs contracting arrangements . in june 2009 , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics issued an acquisition decision memorandum that canceled the fcs acquisition program , terminated manned ground vehicle development efforts , and laid out plans for follow - on army brigade combat team modernization efforts . dod directed the army to transition to an army - wide modernization plan consisting of a number of integrated acquisition programs , including one to develop ground combat vehicles . subsequently , the army has been defining its ground force modernization efforts per the secretary's decisions and the june 2009 acquisition decision memorandum . although the details are not yet complete , the army took several actions through the end of calendar year 2009 . it stopped all development work on the fcs manned ground vehicles — including the non - line of sight cannon — in the summer of 2009 and recently terminated development of the class iv unmanned aerial vehicle and the countermine and transport variants of the multifunction utility / logistics and equipment unmanned ground vehicle . for the time being , the army is continuing selected development work under the existing fcs development contract , primarily residual fcs system and network development . in october 2009 , the army negotiated a modification to the existing contract that clarified the development work needed for the brigade modernization efforts . the army is implementing dod direction and redefining its overall modernization strategy as a result of the secretary of defense's decisions to significantly restructure the fcs program . it is transitioning from the fcs long - term acquisition orientation to a shorter - term approach that biannually develops and fields new increments of capability within capability packages . it now has an approved acquisition program that will produce and field the initial increment of the fcs spinout equipment , which includes unmanned aerial and ground vehicles as well as unattended sensors and munitions , and preliminary plans for two other major defense acquisition programs to define and develop follow - on increments and develop a new gcv . the army also plans to integrate network capabilities across the army's brigade structure and to develop and field upgrades to other existing ground force equipment . the first program , increment 1 , is a continuation of previous fcs - related efforts to spin out emerging capabilities and technologies to current forces .