it is the most comprehensive accession package for any wto member . as part of this package , china agreed to ensure that its legal measures would be consistent with its wto obligations . about 10 percent of the more than 600 commitments that we identified in china's accession package specifically obligate china to enact , repeal , or modify trade - related laws and regulations . moftec officials estimated that it would take a year or two to complete this entire reform process , while some provincial officials estimated 2-3 years . second , china is undertaking reform of its judicial processes to ensure that they are compatible with its wto commitments . the supreme people's court informed us that since china's accession it has been revising hundreds of judicial interpretations about laws that do not conform to wto rules . it is worth noting that china's reform efforts , which have been ongoing for more than 20 years , have included substantial legal developments that could be described as rule of law related . a majority of businesses answering our survey expected these rule of law commitments to be difficult for china to implement relative to its other wto commitments . businesses cited a number of reasons for this relative difficulty , including ( 1 ) the cultural “sea change” required to increase transparency ; ( 2 ) a reluctance to crack down on intellectual property right violations stemming from a fear of destabilizing the labor force ; and ( 3 ) the challenge of implementing laws , rules , and regulations consistently among provinces and within and among ministries . similarly , in our interviews , company officials noted the magnitude of wto - related reforms , including those that would strengthen the rule of law . they said that successful implementation would require long - term effort . commensurate with the expected difficulty in carrying out reforms , we heard numerous specific individual complaints from u.s. companies , including concerns about vague laws and regulations that create uncertainty for foreign businesses ; lack of transparency , which denied foreign companies the ability to comment on particular draft laws or regulations or to respond to administrative decisions ; conflicting and inconsistent interpretations of existing laws and regulations from chinese officials ; unfair treatment by , and conflicts of interest , of chinese regulators ; and uneven or ineffective enforcement of court judgments . china also agreed to eliminate dual pricing practices as well as differences in treatment provided to goods produced for sale in china and those produced for export . ( see the appendix for examples of rule of law - related commitments included in china's wto accession agreement. ) chinese government officials have stated their commitment to make wto - related reforms that would strengthen the rule of law . furthermore , china's plans for reform go beyond conforming its laws and regulations to china's wto commitments and include a broad legal review , as well as reforms of judicial and administrative procedures . chinese officials with whom we spoke discussed the numerous challenges they face in these areas and said that these reforms will take time to implement . they also stated their need for outside assistance to help them with their reform efforts .