rate increases . rate increases also appear unlikely to generate sufficient revenues to fund a major delivery fleet replacement because under the postal accountability and enhancement act of 2006 , such increases are now generally limited by an inflation - based price cap on usps's market - dominant products — products that generate close to 90 percent of its revenue . moreover , even if the price cap did not constrain rate increases , large rate increases could be self - defeating because they could potentially trigger large , permanent declines in mail volumes . debt financing . usps's outstanding debt at the end of fiscal year 2010 was $12 billion , and it expects to use the remaining $3 billion of its $15 billion in borrowing authority in fiscal year 2011 to fund non - vehicle - related expenditures . by statute , usps is generally not subject to federal contracting and budgeting laws . as a result , usps officials told us that usps has the authority to accept grant funding and to enter into joint procurements and other partnerships to assist in a major delivery fleet replacement . however , usps's use of federal or state grants could have public policy implications , because usps is supposed to be self - sustaining and to cover its operating costs with post - related revenues . in addition , fair competition issues or concerns about sharing sensitive procurement information could arise if usps actively pursued a partnership or joint procurement . usps and doe officials stated that there are few opportunities for usps to receive federal grant funding to help it purchase vehicles , in part because federal grants are typically targeted to state , local , or city governments , or to nonprofit or educational organizations . in the past , usps has obtained state or local grants for limited numbers of alternative fuel vehicles or related infrastructure , and in one case it received some financial assistance from doe . specifically , in 1999 , usps partnered with a number of entities , including the california south coast air quality management district , doe , and others , on an agreement formed to reduce air pollution in california . this agreement included about $9 million in funding subsidies from these entities to purchase 500 electric vehicles from the ford motor company ( ford ) as well as to install charging stations for these vehicles . usps paid an additional $11.6 million to ford for these vehicles . according to usps officials , the $9 million in outside funding — a small fraction of the estimated $5.8 billion to replace the largest portion of its delivery fleet — is the largest amount of outside funding usps has received for vehicle acquisitions . the project was terminated after about 2 years because of battery problems , as discussed previously in this report . senior usps officials also stated that there is little likelihood that a joint procurement arrangement could help finance a delivery fleet replacement .