gao - 18-158 . washington , d.c.: dec. 21 , 2017 . navy readiness: actions needed to address persistent maintenance , training , and other challenges affecting the fleet . we assessed the reliability of each of the data sources . the navy provided information based on our questions regarding data reliability , including information on an overview of the data , data - collection processes and procedures , data quality controls , and overall perceptions of data quality . the navy provided documentation of how the systems are structured and what written procedures are in place to help ensure that the appropriate information is collected and properly categorized . additionally , we interviewed navy officials to obtain further clarification on data reliability , discuss how the data were collected and reported , and explain how we planned to use the data . we also conducted our own error checks to look for inaccurate or questionable data , and we discussed with officials any data irregularities we found . we conducted these assessments on the following data for attack submarines: navy deployed and surge - ready submarines from fiscal years 2011 through 2018 ; maintenance timeliness from fiscal years 2000 through 2018 ; idle time from fiscal years 2008 through 2018 ; operating and support costs from fiscal years 2011 through 2017 ; and cannibalization rates from 2012 through 2017 . some of these data were used in prior reports , and their reliability had previously been assessed . after further assessing any data that we had not recently used , we determined that they were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of summarizing attack submarine readiness trends and related information . we interviewed officials , and where appropriate obtained documentation , at the following locations: office of the chief of naval operations undersea warfare division ( n97 ) warfare integration division ( n83 ) u.s. fleet forces command commander , submarine force , u.s. atlantic fleet commander , submarine squadron 4 commander , regional support group groton commander , submarine force , u.s. pacific fleet commander , submarine squadron 1 commander , submarine squadron 7 commander , submarine squadron 15 naval sea systems command ( navsea ) logistics , maintenance , and industrial operations ( navsea 04 ) program executive office , submarines attack submarine program office ( pms 392 ) submarine maintenance engineering , planning , and procurement ( submepp ) supervisor of shipbuilding , conversion , and repair ( supship ) newport news , virginia navy education and training command submarine learning facility norfolk navy board of inspection and survey norfolk naval shipyard , norfolk , virginia pearl harbor naval shipyard and intermediate maintenance facility , pearl harbor , hawaii portsmouth naval shipyard , kittery , maine newport news shipbuilding , virginia , operated by huntington ingalls industries electric boat , groton , connecticut , operated by general dynamics the performance audit upon which this report is based was conducted from august 2017 to october 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .