all were notified . july 1 , 2006 , department of commerce: documents and database copied by a former employee , exposing 934 employees a former employee copied sensitive letters and a database of employee information . the database included information on 883 cases and the letters had medical information on 51 employees . july 27 , 2006 , department of transportation: laptop stolen from car of dot inspector general , exposing information on approximately 133,000 a laptop containing personally identifiable information of approximately 133,000 florida pilots , commercial drivers , and other florida residents was stolen from a government - owned vehicle . august 1 , 2006 , department of defense: laptop falls off motorcycle , losing personally identifiable information of 30,000 a laptop containing personally identifiable information on 30,000 applicants , recruiters , and prospects fell off a motorcycle belonging to a navy recruiter . august 3 , 2006 , department of veterans affairs: desktop computer stolen , exposing financial records of approximately 18,000 patients a desktop computer was stolen from a secured area at a contractor's facility in virginia that processes financial accounts for va . the desktop computer was not encrypted . notification letters were mailed and credit monitoring services offered . september 6 , 2006 , department of veterans affairs: laptop stolen , exposing patient information on an unknown number of individuals a laptop attached to a medical device was stolen . the information on an unknown number of individuals was exposed . notification letters and credit protection services were offered to 1,575 patients . january 22 , 2007 , department of veterans affairs: external hard drive missing or stolen , exposing records on 535,000 veterans and 1.3 million non - va physician provider records an external hard drive was discovered missing or stolen , exposing records on 535,000 veterans and 1.3 million non - va physician provider records from a research facility in birmingham , alabama . notification letters were sent to veterans and providers , and credit monitoring services were offered to those individuals whose records contained personally identifiable information . in addition to the individual named above , shaun byrnes , barbara collier , susan czachor , kristi dorsey , nancy glover , joshua hammerstein , anthony molet , david plocher , charles vrabel ( assistant director ) , and jeffrey woodward were key contributors to this report . most agencies had weaknesses in each of these categories . accordingly , we have designated information security as a governmentwide high - risk issue in reports to congress since 1997 — a designation that remains in force today . the primary laws that provide privacy protections to personal information are the privacy act of 1974 and the e - government act of 2002 ; these laws describe , among other things , agency responsibilities with regard to personally identifiable information , which include providing security . the security of information held by the federal government is specifically addressed by fisma , which requires agencies to develop , document , and implement agencywide programs to provide security for their information and information systems , including personally identifiable information .