we concluded that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . after reviewing the credentials files in our sample , we reviewed with contractor staff all instances of documentation we were unable to locate . to identify industry standards for verifying credentials , we interviewed representatives and reviewed documentation from urac , an accreditation organization . to examine the extent to which vha oversees the contractors responsible for verifying the credentials of pc3 and choice physicians , we reviewed va's contracts with health net and triwest , as well as agency documents related to vha's oversight of the contractors . we also interviewed vha officials regarding vha's oversight activities of health net's and triwest's verification of pc3 and choice physicians' credentials . we compared vha's oversight activities and mechanisms with federal internal control standards for monitoring . to examine vha's own processes for verifying choice physicians' credentials , and oversight of responsible vha staff , under the recently implemented vha choice provider agreements , we reviewed agency documents and interviewed vha staff regarding credentials verification procedures and oversight activities . we compared vha's processes for verifying choice physicians' credentials with the contractors' processes for verifying choice physicians' credentials . we compared vha's oversight activities related to the vha choice provider agreements with federal internal control standards for monitoring and risk assessment . we also interviewed officials at the five vha medical facilities that participated in the initial implementation phase of vha choice provider agreements . we conducted this performance audit from november 2015 to september 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . pc3 and choice are among several va community care programs , each of which has varying eligibility requirements and types of services offered . while the amount of claims va paid for the treatment of veterans under pc3 decreased by about half over the past year , the amount has more than tripled for the treatment of veterans under choice . pc3 was not specifically enacted by law , but was created by va under existing statutory authorities to provide veterans with needed care that is not feasibly available from a vha medical facility . va originally required its pc3 contractors , health net and triwest , to each develop regional networks , made up of community providers of specialty care , mental health care , limited emergency care , and maternity and limited newborn care . va and the contractors began implementing pc3 in october 2013 , and it was fully implemented nationwide as of april 2014 . in august 2014 , va expanded pc3 to allow community providers of primary care to join health net's and triwest's networks . veterans may be eligible to obtain care under pc3 when they are unable to access a particular service from a vha medical facility , either because the service is not offered or the veteran would have to travel a long distance to obtain it from a vha medical facility .