dod . dod officials cited student surveys and after - action reports — which are summaries of the training events , training outcomes , challenges encountered , and further actions to be taken that are prepared by course facilitators — as examples of m&e – related efforts: at diils , course facilitators use surveys to solicit student feedback on courses and on the relevance of the course materials . they also use after - action reports , which , according to officials , provide continuity and capture lessons learned from human rights training in partner countries for diils facilitators who will be traveling to those countries in the future . at ccmr , according to ccmr officials , training facilitators prepare after - action reports for each course that involves human rights content . they also solicit input from the security cooperation officers in the country where the training took place . at the u.s. africa command , officials also said that they prepare after - action reports on diils – provided mandated human rights training , which they share with diils . officials said these reports often discuss improvements needed with regard to logistics planning for human right training that dod provides in african countries . state . examples of related m&e efforts that state has conducted include a multi - year survey of imet and evaluations of some security assistance programs . for example , state and dod funded a survey of imet graduates which dod entities conducted and covered the period from 2007 through 2014 . the multi - year survey measured , among other things , if graduates reported an improved understanding of internationally recognized human rights . according to dod officials , dod is beginning to develop a new m&e approach for dod's security assistance programs . however , dod has not established a timeline for evaluating the effectiveness of human rights training for foreign security forces that is often included as part of such assistance . ( see fig . during the exercise , students encounter armed and unarmed criminals , along with civilians . the simulation is intended to create real – world human rights scenarios for students to assess and apply lessons learned from classroom – based human rights training . center for civil – military relations ( ccmr ) : ccmr is a dod organization within the naval postgraduate school . ccmr was designed to support the goals of e - imet and strengthen civil – military relationships through a variety of education and training programs . additionally , ccmr focuses on defense institution building activities provided under dod's title 10 authority . like diils , ccmr delivers in - residence programs and mobile education training . examples of ccmr's human rights training: ccmr officials said that human rights – related material is included in many ccmr programs , although it is not always an explicit focus . for example , although the maritime security program does not explicitly focus on human rights , ccmr staff said that human rights – related topics are integrated into various aspects of the program . to identify outside experts , we asked stakeholders , including current government officials , to recommend other stakeholders we should speak with ( i.e. , snowball sampling ) .