performance reports . categorical grants . epa generally awards these grants — which epa also refers to as continuing environmental program grants — noncompetitively , mostly to states and indian tribes to operate environmental programs that they are authorized by statute to implement . for example , under the clean water act , states and tribes can establish and operate programs for the prevention and control of surface water and groundwater pollution . epa determines the amount of funding each grantee receives based on agency - developed formulas or program - specific factors . in fiscal year 2015 , epa awarded about $1.09 billion of $3.95 billion ( about 28 percent ) of grant funds as categorical grants , according to epa data . discretionary grants . epa awards these grants — competitively or noncompetitively — to eligible applicants for specific projects , with epa program and regional offices selecting grantees and funding amounts for each grant . epa primarily awards these grants to states , local governments , indian tribes , nonprofit organizations , and universities for a variety of activities , such as environmental research , training , and environmental education programs . according to epa data , in fiscal year 2015 , epa awarded about $0.513 billion of $3.95 billion ( about 13 percent ) of grant funds as discretionary grants . epa also awarded $0.09 billion of $3.95 billion ( about 2 percent ) of grant funds to special appropriations act projects for specific drinking water and wastewater infrastructure projects in specific communities . multiple federal and epa requirements — established in laws and regulations — and epa guidelines apply to monitoring the results of individual epa grants and , more broadly , the results of epa grant programs . the following requirements and guidelines form the basis of how epa aligns individual grants to achieve the agency's public health and environmental objectives: federal laws: authorizing statutes for certain epa grant programs , most notably the clean water act , require states — which receive grants from epa to capitalize state clean water revolving funds — to report annually to epa on how they have met the goals and objectives identified in their intended use plans for their revolving funds . epa regulations: epa regulations require grantees to submit performance reports to epa as specified in their grant agreements at least annually and typically no more frequently than quarterly . under epa's regulations , the grantee's performance should be measured in a way that will help improve grant program outcomes , share lessons learned , and spread the adoption of promising practices . additionally , under epa's regulations , the agency should provide grantees with clear performance goals , indicators , and milestones , and should establish reporting frequency and content that allow epa to build evidence for program and performance decisions , among other things . agency - wide policies and guidance: epa policies , such as its environmental results directive , call for grant work plans and performance reports to link to the agency's strategic plan and include outputs and outcomes .