human rights clearance . opic's governing legislation directs it to consult with the secretary of state and take into account all available information concerning the effect of a project on human rights and fundamental freedoms in the host country . opic's policies require that it screen projects using a process mutually agreed upon by opic and state , which state documented in a 2006 memorandum . the memorandum designates which agency is responsible for providing human rights reviews , depending on the current status of human rights violations in a country and project characteristics such as sector and degree of host government involvement . this status is documented in the human rights sensitivity list maintained by opic and reviewed quarterly by state . the list includes all the countries in which opic is authorized to conduct activities and is divided into three categories based on the human rights situation in each country . the responsibility for conducting the review is based on the project country categorization and other information . opic documents when a human rights clearance has been conducted for each project , regardless of which agency provides the clearance . opic officials said that the purpose of this human rights clearance document is only to confirm that a clearance occurred , in accordance with the statutory requirement to consult with state on the effect of a project on human rights in the host country . according to opic officials , when opic conducts the human rights review , it bases the clearance approval on a review of human rights issues and the documentation of that review in other clearance documents . worker rights clearance . in accordance with its governing legislation , opic will only support projects in countries that have , or are taking steps to adopt , laws that uphold internationally recognized worker rights . the environmental and social policy statement includes guidance for determining if a country meets labor eligibility requirements . opic considers as eligible any country on the generalized system of preferences list , because that status indicates they meet certain internationally recognized worker rights . according to officials , oip also reviews and documents human rights issues that specifically concern labor rights , such as forced and child labor issues , as part of the worker rights clearance process . in 2010 , opic introduced the special consideration classification for projects with a higher risk of violating labor rights . thirteen percent of the number of commitments opic made during this period — representing 67 percent of the total dollar value — were for amounts greater than $50 million . several commitments were approved by the board for reasons other than monetary value . for commitments requiring board approval , opic is to solicit input from its board members — eight members from the private sector and seven from the federal government , including opic , the departments of commerce , labor , state , treasury , usaid , and ustr . prior to board meetings , opic provides board members with key project documents . according to officials from opic , state , treasury , usaid , and ustr , it is routine for board members to discuss specific issues regarding the projects among themselves and with opic prior to the meetings .