pairs . girls in elementary , middle , or high school who are african american or other minorities . pairs meeting in the community for 2 hours a week for at least 9 months . youth in grades 8-12 from public & charter schools with average academic records . ( 3 ) how does education monitor program implementation ? ( 4 ) what are education's and grantees' plans to assess program outcomes ? to answer these questions , we reviewed the literature on the elements , policies , and procedures associated with successful mentoring . for this report , we are defining successful mentoring as those efforts that have the elements needed to establish , operate , and sustain mentoring . we relied heavily on a 2003 publication developed by an expert panel that described the elements of effective mentoring and reviewed several studies upon which the publication was based . we found that these studies generally supported the elements identified in the 2003 publication . however , the rigor of these studies varied , ranging from studies that included random assignment of participants to control groups , to more descriptive case studies . see appendix i for a list of studies that discuss the elements of successful mentoring . we also reviewed the grant applications of the 121 mentoring grantees education currently funds to determine the extent to which the program descriptions contained in applications aligned with the elements , policies , and procedures associated with successful programs . to better understand how grantees implemented such elements , we visited 11 grantees . we selected these grantees to reflect a diversity of mentoring approaches and geographic areas . our initial work led us to explore whether established and new grantees approached implementation differently and whether lessons could be learned from their experiences . as a result , we ensured that the 11 grantees we visited also included a mixture of relatively new mentoring efforts — 6 grantees with fewer than 5 years of experience mentoring youth and 5 established grantees that had been operating for 5 years or more . we visited one grantee in california , delaware , florida , georgia , idaho , illinois , nebraska , new mexico , new york , ohio , and wisconsin . during our visits with grantee staff , we covered a range of topics , including mentor recruitment , screening , and training ; mentoring approach ; goals for youth ; plans for evaluation ; and education's monitoring of its programs . in most instances , we spoke with mentors about their mentoring experiences and the kinds of support and training they received . we also observed mentoring , noting the nature of the interaction between mentors and youth , including the kinds of activities and discussions that occurred between them . in addition , we reviewed education's monitoring policies and procedures and interviewed education officials about how they monitor the mentoring grantees . we also reviewed the monitoring documentation that education maintains on grantees and discussed education's monitoring with the grantees that we visited . using the online single audit act database , we compiled summary reports of audit findings on all mentoring grantees that had fiscal years 2001 and 2002 audits .