gao - 09-500r . washington , d.c.: april 9 , 2009 . the study will be coordinated with dot . dot does not have special programs to address brac growth . however , a number of existing federal transportation grant programs provide funding that state and local governments can use to help address brac - related transportation challenges . federal laws and requirements specify an overall approach for transportation planning agencies to use in planning and selecting projects for federal funding . under this process , localities — acting through metropolitan planning organizations — and states develop long - range plans and short - range programs to identify transportation needs and projects . brac - related projects must be incorporated into metropolitan area long - range transportation plans and transportation improvement programs — for improvements located in metropolitan area — as well as state transportation improvement programs , before federal funding may be used . decisions about which projects are to be funded take place at the state and local level . as a result , brac - related projects must compete with other state , regional , and local transportation priorities . because of the short brac growth time frames , communities near the affected bases have estimated that they have less funding than they need for critical , short - term , growth - related transportation projects . according to our analysis of the data 17 growth communities provided to oea , these communities had identified , as of august 2008 , sources for about $0.5 billion of the $2.0 billion they indicated they would need for 46 short - term transportation projects . transportation projects constituted about 93 percent of the short - term infrastructure funding needs identified by communities . since february 2009 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( the recovery act ) has provided additional funding for transportation projects . recovery act funds may be used for brac - related projects , but the projects already need to be advanced in the normal development cycle , because these funds must be obligated very quickly or states risk losing them . the act requires that dot obligate for each state , by june 30 , 2009 , 50 percent of the highway funds made available to each state , and 100 percent of these funds by march 1 , 2010 . if these requirements are not met for a state , the unobligated funds are to be redistributed to other states . thus , even though brac transportation projects ideally should be completed more quickly than typical highway projects , the time frames for using recovery act funds may be too short for some brac projects . however , states are using recovery act funds for brac - related transportation projects at two of the eight bases we visited — eglin air force base and fort belvoir . florida is using $46 million in recovery act funds for an intersection grade separation project near eglin air force base and virginia is using about $60 million in recovery act funds for its fairfax county parkway project . texas and maryland officials did not report applying recovery act funds for any of the 46 transportation projects oea officials identified as related to military growth .