this conflict extends to the use of both frequencies . fcc regulations required the winning bidder to negotiate with the coast guard for the use of frequencies for ais but did not specify any particular frequency . in march 2001 , in response to fcc's auction requirements , maritel and the coast guard signed a memorandum of agreement ( moa ) that allowed the use of channel 87b for ais in u.s. waters . maritel terminated the moa in may 2003 , however , after disagreements arose over interpretations of the moa's provisions , including technical properties of the frequencies that the coast guard could use for ais . after termination of the moa , maritel asserted that the coast guard had no authority to use channel 87b for ais , but the coast guard maintains that an fcc announcement still gives it that authority . with respect to channel 88b , maritel asserts , in general , that it obtained through the fcc auction the exclusive rights to channel 88b in certain areas within approximately 75 miles of the u.s. - canadian border , and it has petitioned fcc for a declaratory ruling to that effect . the coast guard , ntia , and the department of transportation disagree and assert , in general , that channel 88b has already been allocated on a primary basis to the federal government . the total cost and time frame for the development of a nationwide ais remain uncertain . as of june 2004 , the coast guard's efforts to install ais equipment nationwide had followed two tracks: first , installing ais quickly in the 10 vts areas and , second , launching a widespread planning effort for the rest of the nation's navigable waters . having taken advantage of existing facilities , electronic systems , and plans for ais development to enhance safety in the 10 vts areas , the coast guard plans to complete ais implementation in those areas by december 2004 . at the same time , the coast guard has begun to plan for u.s. waters outside the vts areas , defining the goals , technical requirements , and waterways and vessels to be covered under a nationwide ais . the coast guard expects planning for the technical requirements to be completed between december 2004 and february 2005 . the coast guard also estimates that the nationwide system could cost between $62 million and $165 million . according to the coast guard , the cost estimate is preliminary , because geographic and other factors are expected to significantly affect the cost of installation at different locations , and the impacts are yet to be determined . the first effort in the coast guard's two - track ais development has involved installing , testing , and operating ais equipment in the 10 vts areas . to enable monitoring of vessels carrying ais , the coast guard accelerated onshore ais installation under way in its navigation safety program . a combination of existing facilities , equipment , plans , and funding has allowed rapid establishment of ais in the vts areas .