the office of the u.s . global aids coordinator ( ogac ) requires country teams to report the number of individuals reached through specific prevention programs , but assessing overall progress toward reaching prevention goals presents major challenges . ogac requires that country teams report on indicators such as the number of individuals reached by the program . ogac plans , over time , to estimate progress toward the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) prevention goal by using u.s. census bureau statistical modeling of countries' hiv / aids prevalence trends , but these estimates may not be available for several years and will not link averted infections to specific types of prevention programs . ogac had initially planned to use an alternative modeling approach that linked results to types of programs within the countries , but it dropped that approach because of limited research data on the effectiveness of particular prevention activities . ogac requires country teams to report several performance indicators , which generally capture the number of individuals reached or trained for each prevention program aimed at sexual transmission . specifically , for abstinence / faithfulness ( ab ) activities they report on the number of individuals reached through community outreach that promotes hiv / aids prevention through abstinence and / or being faithful , number of individuals reached through community outreach that promotes hiv / aids prevention through abstinence , and number of individuals trained to promote hiv / aids prevention programs through abstinence and / or being faifthful . for “other prevention” activities , they report on the number of targeted condom service outlets , number of individuals reached through community outreach that promotes hiv / aids prevention through other behavior change beyond abstinence and / or being faithful , and number of individuals trained to promote hiv / aids prevention through other behavior change beyond abstinence and / or being faithful . ogac tracks similar indicators for prevention programs outside the sexual transmission area . these include four indicators for prevention of mother - to - child transmission ( pmtct ) , two for blood safety , and one for safe injections . ogac plans , over time , to estimate progress toward the pepfar goal of averting 7 million infections by 2010 by using a statistical model of epidemiological trends developed by the u.s. census bureau . the model will compare “expected” hiv incidence rates in particular countries with “actual” incidence rates and use those comparisons to estimate the number of infections that have been averted through pepfar and related prevention programs . this model attempts to estimate the number of infections averted over time , but it cannot attribute this change to any specific intervention or to the success of particular types of programs . specifically , the model estimates entail the following elements for each country: establish “baseline” projections of hiv incidence for future years , using country data on prevalence rates through 2003 to make projections . this baseline prevalence is what would theoretically occur in the country in the absence of interventions such as pepfar . the prevalence data used to make these projections are obtained primarily from surveys in prenatal clinics .