the commercial operation owned the aircraft but did not have insurance on it . after the company sold the plane , hangar , and other assets , the case was settled for about $40,000 , which did not cover the victim's medical expenses , which were estimated to be more than $1 million , according to an aviation attorney . all 11 aviation attorneys we spoke with , however , also commented that , based on their experience , accidents involving underinsured owners or pilots are more prevalent than those where there is no liability insurance . and findings of probable cause . ntsb also coordinates accident disaster - assistance activities , including providing information and assistance to accident victims ( or their survivors ) , in the aftermath of an accident . the office of the secretary of transportation ( ost ) within dot is responsible for ensuring that commercial air carriers meet minimum liability insurance coverage amounts for liability , as required under federal law , and faa has assumed this role pursuant to a memorandum of understanding with ost . the related regulatory requirement , which became effective in 1982 , establishes minimum liability insurance requirements for air carriers . the objectives of this report were to describe ( 1 ) existing liability insurance requirements for general aviation ( ga ) aircraft owners and operators in the united states ; ( 2 ) available data on the range of premiums charged by selected insurance providers for ga liability insurance and factors that influence those costs ; and ( 3 ) factors that selected stakeholders stated should be considered in determining whether to adopt a federal liability insurance requirement for ga aircraft owners and operators . to identify existing liability insurance requirements , we conducted a survey of aviation officials in all 50 states and a legal analysis of state statutes and regulations identified by such officials to determine the number of states with existing liability insurance requirements for ga aircraft owners and operators . we developed two questions in the survey instrument , asking each state about any liability insurance or aircraft financial - responsibility requirements for ga aircraft owners and pilots , and we requested citations of their state statutes , regulations , or policies . we pre - tested the two - question survey instrument with state aviation officials from california and virginia — two states we initially found to have provisions relating to liability insurance — and alabama and alaska — two states that did not have insurance requirements . commuter air carriers and air taxi operators are also required under federal regulations to have minimum liability insurance . while federal insurance requirements exist for commercial modes of transportation , the states generally regulate the business of insurance . no federal requirement exists for ga liability insurance , although as discussed later in this report , some states have liability insurance or similar requirements . some countries require liability insurance for ga aircraft .