we made these changes . additionally , cfsa recommended that we discuss the policy implementation trends earlier in the report , and asked that we note the time period for the cases included in the hhs review , which we did . cfsa also asked that we explain that the data we collected and analyzed generally covered the october 1999 to mid - 2002 period . we did not make this change . as explained in the scope and methodology section of the report , we reviewed and analyzed a variety of data related to all active foster care cases . ( 3 ) what has cfsa done to enhance its working relationship with the d.c. family court and what factors have affected these efforts ? to address these questions , we selected three sets of measures to assess cfsa's performance . first , we examined cfsa's progress in implementing nine asfa requirements that were related to the safety and well - being of foster children . second , we assessed the extent to which cfsa met or exceeded eight selected performance criteria established during its probationary period . third , we assessed the extent to which caseworkers implemented six foster care policies related to their day - to - day responsibilities . we analyzed data in the district's automated child welfare information system , known as faces ; reviewed laws , regulations , and reports ; examined case files ; and interviewed officials . we obtained and analyzed automated data from faces on all foster care cases that were at least 6 months old as of november 30 , 2002 . we selected asfa requirements and cfsa policies directly related to the safety and well - being of foster children . we selected foster care performance criteria from among those cfsa had to meet in order to end the probationary period that , in our judgment , most directly related to the safety and permanent placement of children in foster care . we reviewed federal and local laws , regulations , foster care policies recommended by various organizations , and reports on cfsa's implementation of the district's foster care program and selected cfsa policies that covered several key foster care management functions . we included hhs's evaluation of how cfsa implemented asfa requirements in our assessment of the agency's performance . we independently verified the reliability of data in faces ; however , cfsa had not entered into faces detailed information on the data elements we needed for our analysis with respect to about two - thirds of the district's active foster care cases — mostly cases that originated prior to faces going on - line in october 1999 . to obtain information on policy implementation , we also examined foster care case files . we interviewed cfsa executives , managers , and supervisors ; family court judges , attorneys from occ ; and officials from organizations that recommend policies applicable to child welfare programs . we conducted our work between september 2002 and may 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . see appendix i for additional information on our scope and methodology .