releasing political prisoners . lastly , burma's new government needs to release all remaining political prisoners or risk facing increased international scrutiny and pressure . the burmese assistance association for political prisoners asserts that as of july 31 , 2016 , at least 83 political prisoners remained in jail , along with 202 activists awaiting trial for political actions . in addition , u.s. officials have also cited a low level of capacity as a major challenge for burma's new government . usaid officials told us that many of the members of the new government have little to no experience governing . as a result , there is a need for capacity building . u.s. democracy assistance in burma is primarily provided by usaid's mission in burma office of democracy and governance ( usaid / dg ) , usaid's bureau of democracy , conflict , and humanitarian assistance's office of transition initiatives ( usaid / oti ) , and state's bureau of democracy , human rights , and labor ( state / drl ) . usaid / dg and usaid / oti maintain staff at the u.s. embassy in burma , while state / drl manages its projects in the country from its headquarters in washington , d.c. , and through the human rights officer at the embassy , consistent with state / drl practice . usaid / dg: supports u.s. foreign policy in burma by promoting democracy and respect for the rule of law and human rights , building transparent and accountable governance systems , supporting independent media , and fostering a vibrant , tolerant civil society . usaid / oti: supports u.s. foreign policy objectives by promoting stability , peace , and democracy through fast , flexible , short - term assistance targeted at key political transition and stabilization needs . usaid / oti works to enhance the ability of key stakeholders to engage in the peace process , support civil society to advance reforms , and reduce the influence of drivers of intercommunal conflict . state / drl: supports u.s. foreign policy by promoting democracy , protecting human rights and international religious freedom , and advancing labor rights globally . the burma democracy strategy developed by usaid and state in 2015 includes five strategic goals: 1 . develop the capacity of influential entities to employ principles of a well - governed democratic state that is inclusive , accountable , and responsive to its people . support and strengthen civil society , and strengthen societal foundations and institutions at all levels to reflect the will , concerns , and participation of the burmese people . encourage responsible investment and greater respect for human rights by the private sector . support burma's peace process , while engaging the military on human rights issues . promote tolerance and support legitimate and sustainable processes , which enable domestic stakeholders to pursue national reconciliation and the establishment of a stable , inclusive democratic union . usaid and state also rely on two other , broader u.s. strategies when developing their democracy projects for burma , according to u.s. officials .