figure 3 illustrates this process . the recipients of hud's technical assistance are generally those entities or organizations that administer hud's programs . they also vary by program and include state and local governments , public and indian housing agencies , tenants of federally subsidized housing , and property owners receiving federal housing subsidies . the providers of technical assistance can be hud officials but typically are entities or organizations that receive funding from hud to deliver such assistance . providers , which also vary by program , include community - based , for - profit , and nonprofit organizations ; public and indian housing agencies ; housing finance agencies ; and resident service organizations . we visited with technical assistance providers in selected locations across the country to observe the various methods used by each of the five program offices to deliver technical assistance to recipients . in the following examples , each case details the recipients , providers , and purpose of the technical assistance provided . applicants submit contract proposals or funding applications to hud staff who make recommendations to each program office's selecting officials . these officials then make the final selections and announce the awards . contract proposals are managed through hud headquarters or designated contracting offices , while applications for grants or cooperative agreements for some technical assistance programs are submitted to both headquarters and the field office in which the applicant is seeking to provide services . any award , regardless of the type of funding instrument , has a fixed performance period . the contract request for proposal or nofa will stipulate the proposed period of performance and indicate whether additional funding can be provided beyond the period of performance without further competition . the five offices that administer technical assistance have basic oversight procedures in place . such procedures usually include monitoring the technical assistance provider's performance by reviewing payment requests and financial reports , and providing a written evaluation of the technical assistance provider's performance . most program offices require technical assistance providers to submit quarterly , annual , or close - out reports , or a combination of these reports , on the status of their technical assistance programs , which are to be reviewed by hud program staff . headquarters or field office staff may be directly responsible for oversight , depending on which office administers the technical assistance , though headquarters offices are ultimately responsible for ensuring that appropriate oversight is conducted . hud does not offer any central guidance on , or require its program offices to directly measure , the impact or outcomes of the technical assistance programs they administer . the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) requires that program officials develop performance measures and track performance relative to the goals in their strategic and annual plans . however , according to the director of hud's office of departmental operations and coordination , this requirement does not apply to the related technical assistance programs . in his view , if the technical assistance supports the program and the program is doing well , then the technical assistance is having a positive impact .