the teams spent a few days at each post . for example , a team was in tbilisi for 2 days , paris for about 3 days , and mexico city for 5 days . some team members and representatives of the interagency rightsizing committee told us that 2 to 5 days at an embassy was too little time to permit detailed analysis of workload or to fully explore alternative ways of conducting business , such as regionalizing operations or outsourcing administrative functions . this is partly attributable to the size and complexity of embassy operations at the posts visited . four of the embassies — bangkok , mexico city , new delhi , and paris — are among the largest and most complex in the world . though smaller , the remaining two embassies both have substantial numbers of u.s. and foreign national employees , from multiple agencies . the ambassador who led three of the pilot studies told us that a comprehensive review of staff levels would take much longer than the 2 to 5 days the teams spent at the embassies , and that the pilot studies were not designed for that purpose . however , he believed that the length of visit was sufficient to identify potential functions that warranted additional study to determine if staffing levels should be adjusted . the interagency committee's june 2000 report to the under secretary of state summarizing results of the pilot studies concluded that it was impractical to develop a staffing methodology that would be applicable to all posts , as opap had recommended , because no two posts are sufficiently similar . in addition , the report questioned the need for additional rightsizing of overseas posts , stating that agencies had adjusted staff levels during the 1990s in response to budget constraints to ensure that only the most essential overseas functions were performed . as a result , the report concluded that agencies had already performed rightsizing . the report also concluded that planned rightsizing reviews of additional posts over 5 years should not be conducted , as the benefits of rightsizing may not outweigh the costs of conducting the reviews . regarding opap's recommendation to establish an interagency board to review staff levels at overseas posts , the committee's report concluded that an interagency advisory board could be helpful as a forum to discuss programmatic issues with major overseas staffing implications and to provide informal and nonbinding advice to agencies and ambassadors . however , some agencies opposed the establishment of an interagency board , even on an advisory basis , because they believed it was unnecessary and would limit agency independence in making staffing decisions . although the interagency committee did not recommend major changes in staff levels as a general theme in its june 2000 report , it did recommend that the regional financial service centers in bangkok and paris be relocated to the united states , and that several other potential opportunities for staff level reductions be explored . in addition , the report raised concerns about heavy embassy staff workloads , an issue not specifically addressed by opap .