we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . more information on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from august 2016 to july 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the bureau's address canvassing operation updates its address list and maps , which are the foundation of the decennial census . an accurate address list both identifies all households that are to receive a notice by mail requesting participation in the census ( by internet , phone , or mailed - in questionnaire ) and serves as the control mechanism for following up with households that fail to respond to the initial request . if the bureau's address list and maps are inaccurate , people can be missed , counted more than once , or counted at the wrong location . however , our prior work has shown that developing an accurate address list has been both labor - intensive and costly — in part because people can reside in unconventional dwellings , such as converted garages , basements , and other forms of hidden housing . for example , as shown in figure 1 , what appears to be a single - family house could contain an apartment , as suggested by its two doorbells . in order to account for the complexity of the nation's housing stock , the bureau uses different procedures for canvassing and enumerating different types of living arrangements . these different types of living arrangements include housing units ( eg , multi - unit structures and single - family units ) and group quarters ( such as nursing facilities and college residence halls ) . the bureau also uses different procedures for canvassing and enumerating different areas of the country , depending on the predominant way that people receive their mail in those areas . the bureau generally uses methods that rely on individuals self - responding to either notices or questionnaires in areas where mail is generally delivered to the same individual locations where people live , and it calls these areas “self - response” areas . in other areas where mail is typically delivered at post office boxes or along rural routes , the bureau relies on door - to - door visits to canvass and deliver notices and questionnaires or to conduct interviews . the bureau refers to these areas as update / enumerate areas , where the bureau canvasses the addresses in the areas while enumerating the residents . the bureau also uses similar procedures in sparsely settled and isolated parts of alaska , which often require special travel or other arrangements . during address canvassing , the bureau verifies that its master address list and maps are accurate so the tabulation for all housing units and group quarters is correct .