( see app . ii for our results using more optimistic assumptions. ) the collective improvement in the status of the owners' trust funds ( under most likely assumptions ) since our last report is due to three main factors . first , all or parts of the estimated decommissioning costs were prepaid for 15 plants when they were sold to new owners . for example , the seller prepaid $396 million when the pilgrim 1 nuclear plant was sold in 1998 for the plant's scheduled decommissioning in 2012 . second , for 16 other plants , nrc approved 20-year license renewals , which will provide additional time for the owners to make contributions and for the earnings to accumulate on the decommissioning fund balances . third , owners earned a higher rate of return on their trust fund accounts than we projected in our 1999 report . more importantly , the critical issue is that nrc should do more to develop an effective method for assessing the adequacy of nuclear power plant owner's trust funds for decommissioning . under nrc's current method , it combines the trust funds for all co - owners of a nuclear plant and then assesses the adequacy of decommissioning funds on a plant - wide basis . however , as our analysis indicates , combining the trust funds of several owners can produce misleading results because those co - owners with more than sufficient funds can appear to balance out those with less than sufficient funds . in addition , as a practical matter , owners have contractual agreements to pay for their share of decommissioning , and the trust funds are generally not transferable among owners . unless nrc separately evaluates the adequacy of each co - owners' decommissioning trust fund , the agency's existing process would appear to require some co - owners to pay more than their fair share of decommissioning costs . we believe this would be inconsistent with nrc's stated policy of generally not looking to one co - owner to bail out another . for example , the average return on the trust funds of owners who responded to our survey was about 8.5 percent ( after - tax nominal return ) per year , from 1998 through 2000 , instead of the approximately 6.25 percent per year we had assumed . the higher return was a result of the stronger than expected performance of financial markets in the late 1990s . since that time , however , the economy has slowed and financial markets — equities in particular — have generally performed poorly . in addition , we agree that nrc has not established criteria for taking action when it finds cases of unacceptable levels of financial assurance . therefore , the owner provided additional assurance in the form of a parent guarantee . however , the owner sought and subsequently received approval from its state regulator to use a higher real rate of return . after receiving the approval , the owner withdrew its parent guarantee since under the higher rate , the projected trust funds were sufficient to cover estimated decommissioning costs . these results would change under alternative economic assumptions .