ii ) . additionally , each country was designated a major drug transit and / or major illicit drug producing country from fiscal years 2014 through 2016 by presidential determination . the site visits were selected to serve as informative examples , and the findings are not generalizable across the western hemisphere . because the caribbean and offshore islands near the u.s. coastline are transit points for the drug trade and are used by criminal organizations to launder illicit proceeds , we also contacted and interviewed u.s. and government officials responsible for aml efforts in the bahamas . for additional information concerning our scope and methodology , see appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from may 2016 to august 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . requests are typically made in connection with the foreign supervisor's supervision of the u.s. institution's operations in their jurisdiction or the u.s. institution's proposal to establish a cross - border office in the foreign jurisdiction . information sharing also takes place through in - person visits and exchange of staff . for example , a representative from a financial regulator in the bahamas we spoke with said that a high - level official from his agency visited the united states and met with u.s. regulators to discuss aml issues related to concerns over correspondent accounts with foreign banks , a challenge in the bahamas . specifically , there is concern that u.s. banks are terminating or not entering into correspondent account relationships with banks in certain regions of the world over concerns about money laundering and other risks . this regulator from the bahamas told us that u.s. counterparts were able to help him understand aml standards in the united states and how foreign institutions can meet those standards to help allay the concerns of u.s. financial institutions . in addition , some u.s. regulators said that they occasionally host staff from foreign regulatory agencies to serve in detail positions . these staff may come for a few weeks or a couple of months and gain on - the - job skills , including those related to aml detection practices that they can take back to their country . similarly , staff from some u.s. financial regulatory agencies may be seconded to foreign financial regulatory agencies . for example , fdic has seconded staff to the financial services volunteer corps to support aml projects overseas . almost all of the u.s. financial regulators we spoke with reported that they had provided some aml training to western hemisphere countries in the last 5 years . some of the training has been provided in conjunction with other u.s. government agencies or multilateral agencies , and some has been provided independently . training has focused on various aspects of building and maintaining an aml regime , including conducting examinations and reporting suspicious activity in accordance with fatf standards .