aoc variances . in west virginia , 85 percent ( or 181 permits ) of the 212 permits issued from january 2000 through july 2008 required the operator to recl aim the land to aoc . the remaining 15 percent ( or 31 permits ) contained 33 aoc variances . figure 19 shows the number of permits issued to reclaim the land to aoc , compared with permits issued with aoc variances . we believe that presenting data from the earlier years — and their limitations — decreases the likelihood of misuse or misinterpretation because the limitations on the data are not disclosed on the web sites from which the public accesses smis and eris . in addition to our analysis of kentucky's smis database and west virginia's eris database , we took a number of other steps to gain an understanding of surface coal mining in appalachia . specifically , we reviewed relevant federal and state laws , regulations , and policy guidance on surface coal mining and reclamation and visited mining sites — both active and reclaimed — in kentucky and west virginia . we also met with officials from the department of the interior's office of surface mining reclamation and enforcement ( osm ) , including regional officials from their charleston , west virginia , and lexington , kentucky , field offices , as well as officials from the west virginia department of environmental protection , the kentucky department for natural resources , and others knowledgeable about coal mining in appalachia . we conducted our work from march 2008 to december 2009 in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that are relevant to our objectives . the framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work . we believe that the information and data obtained , and the analysis conducted , provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions in this report . the following are gao's comments on the letter dated november 10 , 2009 , from the assistant secretary , land and minerals management . we share the department's concern that , following publication of our report , some of the data we present could be presented elsewhere without proper context or qualification . we include in our report — and clearly identify — data which we know do not convey a representative picture of past mining characteristics or decisions . ( some , but not all of these data were collected prior to 1990. ) these data , along with most of the other data presented in our report , come from kentucky's and west virginia's publicly accessible databases . we believe that the extensive discussions that we had with kentucky and west virginia officials brought to light for the first time — at least in a comprehensive fashion — the full extent of the limitations associated with these data . documenting the results of these discussions is an important aspect of this study .