web sites . a third source of information for medicare providers is the internet . the agency imposes minimum requirements on carriers to maintain web sites . of 10 carrier web sites we examined , 8 did not meet all of the web site requirements , which include , among others , the inclusion of a frequently - asked - questions web page and the capability for providers to send e - mail inquiries to customer service . these 8 also lacked the required links to both the cms and medicare web sites . many lacked user - friendly features: 7 did not have “site maps,” which list the web site's contents , and although 6 sites had search functions , only 4 worked as intended . five sites contained outdated information . although these results cannot be generalized to all carriers , the carriers we reviewed serve tens of thousands of physicians and the results are consistent with some of the concerns recently expressed by physicians in the medical group management practice association . our study , to be issued this fall , seeks to identify the actions cms can take to ensure that carriers improve the consistency and accuracy of their communications with providers ; it will also assess the adequacy of carriers' budgets to conduct these activities . cms faces several limitations in its efforts to manage medicare effectively . these include divided management focus , limited capacity , lack of a performance - based management approach , and constraints impeding the agency's ability to hold medicare contractors accountable . cms' management focus is divided across multiple programs and responsibilities . despite medicare's estimated $240-billion price tag and far - reaching public policy significance , there is no official whose sole responsibility it is to run the medicare program . in addition to medicare , the cms administrator and senior management are responsible for oversight of medicaid and the state children's health insurance program . they also are responsible for individual and group insurance plans' compliance with standards in the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 in states that have not adopted conforming legislation . finally , they must oversee compliance with federal quality standards for hospitals , nursing homes , home health agencies , and managed care plans that participate in medicare and medicaid , as well as all of the nation's clinical laboratories . the administrator is involved in the major decisions relating to all of these activities ; therefore , time and attention that would otherwise be spent meeting the demands of the medicare program are diverted . a restructuring of the agency in july 1997 inadvertently furthered the diffusion of responsibility across organizational units . the intent of the reorganization was to better reflect a beneficiary - centered orientation throughout the agency by dispersing program activities across newly established centers . however , after the reorganization , many stakeholders claimed that they could no longer obtain reliable or timely information . in addition , hcfa's responsiveness was slowed by the requirement that approval was needed from several people across the agency before a decision was final . the recent change from hcfa to cms reflects more than a new name .