mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . we identified three key findings regarding development . first , development occurred at some point during the period 1987-2007 on about 26 percent of offshore and 6 percent of onshore leases in the sample . production was less frequent , with about 12 percent of offshore leases and 5 percent of onshore leases ultimately achieving production . second , shorter leases were generally developed more quickly than longer leases , but not as frequently during the term of the lease . finally , for those leases that eventually produced oil or gas , a substantial amount of the initial drilling activity — about 25 percent onshore — took place after the scheduled expiration of the lease , following a lease extension . mms and blm employ different practices for deciding which federal properties to lease and when , determining the initial length of the lease , and determining the price at which the leases are sold . in addition , some states and private resource owners use more tools than the federal government , including incentives for early development or penalties for later development , to encourage rapid development , particularly of leases that are deemed to be likely to contain significant oil and gas resources . in this regard , we found that interior could do more to encourage faster development of certain federal oil and gas leases that are relatively more likely to have significant oil and gas resources . on september 3 , 2008 we reported that the federal government receives one of the lowest shares of revenue for oil and gas resources compared with other countries . for this and other reasons , the united states is an attractive country for investment in oil and gas development . specifically , in 2007 , the revenue share that the federal government collects on oil and gas produced in the gulf of mexico ranked 93rd lowest of 104 revenue collection regimes around the world that were studied . however , despite significant changes in the oil and gas industry over the past several decades , interior has not systematically re - examined how the federal government is compensated for extraction of oil and gas for over 25 years . in contrast , some other countries have recently increased their shares of revenues as oil and gas prices rose and , as a result , will collect between an estimated $118 billion and $400 billion , depending on future oil and gas prices . on june 5 , 2008 we reported thatin 1995 , a time when oil and natural gas prices were significantly lower than they are today , congress passed the outer continental shelf deep water royalty relief act ( dwrra ) , which authorized mms to provide “royalty relief” on oil and gas produced in the deep waters of the gulf of mexico from certain leases issued from 1996 through 2000 .