gsa cited concerns with our methodology . our methodology applied gsa's policies and data directly from original documents and sources , and our cost estimation methodology balanced higher and lower cost construction spaces to create a conservative estimate of the costs associated with the extra space in courthouses . we believe that our findings are presented in a fair and accurate way and illustrate how past problems with the courthouse program could affect future courthouse projects . twenty - seven of the 33 federal courthouses constructed since 2000 exceed their congressionally authorized size , resulting in about 1.7 million more square feet than authorized . fifteen of the 33 courthouses exceed their congressionally authorized size by 10 percent or more . in all 7 of the case study courthouses , the increases in building common and other space were proportionally larger than the increases in tenant space , leading to a lower building efficiency than gsa's target of 67 percent . efficiency is important because , for a given amount of tenant space , meeting the efficiency target helps control a courthouse's gross square footage and therefore its costs . according to gsa officials , controlling the gross square footage of a courthouse is the best way to control construction costs . twelve of the 15 courthouses that exceeded the congressionally authorized gross square footage by 10 percent or more also had total project costs that exceeded the total project cost estimate provided to congressional authorizing committees . four of the 15 courthouses had total project costs that exceeded the estimate provided to the congressional authorizing committees , at the construction phase , by about 10 percent or more . gsa's annual appropriations acts include a provision stating that gsa may increase spending for a project in an approved prospectus by more than 10 percent if gsa obtains advance approval from the committee on appropriations . while gsa sought approval from the appropriations committees for the cost increases incurred for these 4 courthouses , gsa did not explain to these committees that the courthouses were larger than authorized and therefore did not attribute any of the cost increase to this difference . more detail on our scope and methodology is available in the full report . the administrative office of the u.s. courts is an organization within the judicial branch which serves as the central support entity for federal courts , and is supervised by the judicial conference of the united states . the judicial conference serves as the judiciary's principal policy - making body and recommends national policies and legislation , including recommending additional judgeships to congress . the u.s. courts design guide ( design guide ) specifies the judiciary's criteria for designing new court facilities and sets the space and design standards for court - related elements of courthouse construction . in 1993 , the judiciary also developed a space planning program called anycourt to determine the amount of court - related space the judiciary will request for a new courthouse based on design guide standards and estimated staffing levels . gsa and the judiciary plan new federal courthouses based on the judiciary's estimated 10-year judge and space requirements .