energy projects . the energy report lists energy conservation , renewable energy , and water conservation projects . however , throughout the report we found that the four military services and 10 defense agencies reported these projects inconsistently ( see fig . 5 ) because the guidance for the energy report does not identify at what levels they should be reported . entities reported energy projects by installation , facility / building , project type , funding mechanism , or other means . for example , the navy stated that it might consolidate 10 smaller solar energy projects into 1 larger solar project for reporting purposes , whereas the marine corps stated that it does not track by project type but rather by installation , building , and energy type . these different methods of reporting energy projects make it difficult to clearly understand the size and scope of the projects as well as compare the projects among those reported . end - of - fiscal - year data . we found that the military services and defense agencies used a variety of methods for reporting their end - of - fiscal - year energy data — and , in some cases , installations within each military service reported their end - of - fiscal - year energy data using different methods . for example , because osd requires data inputs by mid - november , some military services required initial submissions from the installations by mid - october , which is before some energy utility bills have been received . as a result , some installations estimate end - of - fiscal - year usage , and the estimates may be based on different factors , including previous month data , historical data , or data from a month with similar weather patterns . additionally , because utility bills may straddle months ( such as from mid - september through mid - october ) , some military services and installations chose to report according to the utility bills rather than the fiscal year . any inaccuracies we found were insignificant . specifically , in comparing the data submitted by the military services and defense agencies to the published energy report , we found 2 inaccuracies out of nearly 2,000 data inputs provided . for example , dod received information about energy consumption and cost by square footage from 705 installations and facilities . however , dod did not include in the published report information on four facilities from the national reconnaissance office and one facility from the air force — an exclusion of less than 1 percent of the total number of installations that could have been reported . dod responded that it chose not to include installation data for sensitivity reasons . additionally , we found dod incorrectly published in the energy report 1 out of 1,288 appropriated projects as contributing to energy efficiency goals rather than renewable energy goals . however , in july 2015 , we reported on material inaccuracies in duration and cost data on utility disruptions reported in dod's fiscal year 2012 and 2013 energy reports .