b . a comprehensive list of the department's prepositioned stock programs . c. a detailed description of how the plan will be implemented . d. a schedule with milestones for the implementation of the plan . e. an assignment of roles and responsibilities for the implementation of the plan . f. a description of the resources required to implement the plan . g. a description of how the plan will be reviewed and assessed to monitor progress . in addition to the contact named above , individuals who made key contributions to this report include alissa h. czyz , assistant director ; vincent m. buquicchio , tracy w. burney , lionel c. cooper , richard powelson , courtney r. bond , and michael d. silver . dod concurred with our recommendation . in the ndaa for fiscal year 2014 , congress required dod to maintain a strategic policy and develop an implementation plan to maximize efficiencies and reduce duplication of prepositioning stocks . in april 2016 , we reported that dod had made limited progress in developing a department - wide strategic policy and implementation plan and recommended that dod establish a timeline for completing the policy and plan . dod did not concur with this recommendation , stating that the department had already communicated to congress its plan regarding the additional development of a strategic policy and implementation plan . subsequently , senate report 114-255 , accompanying a bill for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 , contained a provision directing dod to establish a timeline for completing the department - wide directive and implementation plan and identify the major steps needed to implement the plan , including target dates for accomplishing each major step that can be used to monitor progress and report results . on march 7 , 2017 , dod issued a strategic policy for the management of its prepositioned stock programs . dod stated in a september 2016 letter to the defense committees that it would develop a plan for implementing its strategic policy for its prepositioned stock programs by the end of the third quarter of fiscal year 2017 . section 321 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2014 also includes a provision for us to review dod's strategic policy and implementation plan for managing its prepositioned stock programs . for this report , we assessed the extent to which dod's strategic policy addresses mandated reporting elements and describe the status of dod's implementation plan . to determine the extent to which dod's strategic policy for managing prepositioned stock programs addresses the specific reporting elements set out in section 321 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2014 , we analyzed dod directive 3110.07 , pre - positioned war reserve materiel ( pwrm ) strategic policy . the military services preposition stocks ashore and afloat to provide dod the ability to respond to multiple scenarios by providing assets to support u.s. forces during the initial phases of an operation until the supply chain has been established ( see figure ) . each military service maintains its own configurations and types of equipment and stocks to support its own prepositioned stock program .