fsa has begun acting on both of these issues . education has also faced challenges in ensuring that information reported on student aid applications is correct and that adequate internal controls are in place to prevent improper payments of grants and loans . the department has taken steps , in two pilot programs with the internal revenue service ( irs ) , to match income reported on student aid applications with federal tax returns . to continue this income match and implement it on a broader scale , legislation to allow irs to release the information is necessary . education has worked with the department of the treasury and the office of management and budget to ask that congress enact such legislation . the department also verifies income information by asking 30 percent of applicants to provide copies of their tax returns to their student financial aid offices . in addition to strengthening its controls over student aid applications , we found that education also needed to address institutions that were disbursing grants to ineligible students . the department has taken steps to analyze student data to identify high concentrations of students over age 65 and eligible noncitizens at individual institutions to determine whether problems exist that warrant further review . these actions are encouraging , and if properly implemented , should improve controls over these payments . a continuing challenge for education and fsa is preventing and collecting defaulted student loans . while the national student loan default rate has decreased from 11.6 percent in fiscal year 1993 to 5.9 percent in fiscal year 2000 , the cumulative amount of defaulted student loans has increased by almost $10 billion over the same period . education and fsa have implemented several default management strategies , such as establishing electronic debiting as a repayment option , and working with some guaranty agencies to set up alternatives to service and process claims for defaulted loans . our analysis of fsa's internal documents indicated that for fiscal years 2000 through 2002 , fsa met or exceeded many of the goals related to these strategies . however , neither congress nor the public can determine whether fsa's default management goals have been met because education did not prepare performance reports that conform to the requirements in the higher education act . fsa's report to congress on its performance in fiscal years 2000 and 2001 was not timely nor did it indicate whether fsa met established performance goals . we have recommended that education and fsa prepare and issue reports to congress on fsa's performance that are timely and clearly identify whether performance goals were met . like other federal agencies , education must address serious human capital issues , such as succession planning , because about one - third of education's workforce is eligible to retire . in june 2001 , we recommended that the department develop human capital goals and measures for its performance plans . in april 2002 , we recommended that the department and fsa coordinate closely to develop and implement a comprehensive human capital strategy . education added a specific objective to its strategic plan , and in 2002 , issued a comprehensive 5-year human capital plan that incorporates fsa .