instead . while we agree that ultimately , it is the revenue lost to usps as a whole that is most relevant to usps , it is still important to accurately represent the changes in revenue at the reduced - hour offices to fully understand the effects of postplan on these offices and the trade - offs necessary between costs and benefits , and to provide relevant information for program evaluation and future decision making . we have long reported that usps needs to restructure its operations to better reflect customers' changing use of the mail and to align its costs with revenues . toward this end , usps has proposed or started a number of initiatives , such as postplan , to increase efficiency and reduce costs as it seeks to improve its financial viability . having reliable data and quality methods for calculating the potential savings usps expects to achieve through these initiatives , the actual savings they achieve , and the potential effects they have on revenue are critical . such rigor can help ensure that usps officials and oversight bodies , such as prc and congress , have accurate and relevant information to help usps strike the right balance between the costs and benefits of the various initiatives . although postplan was an initiative that affected about 66 percent of usps's post offices and postmasters , usps did not produce cost - savings estimates with the level of rigor that an initiative with such a large footprint may have warranted . having reliable estimates of expected cost savings when initially making decisions could help ensure that usps is achieving its goals , yet usps's estimates of expected savings had limitations . for example , by not conducting a sensitivity analysis , as recommended by our cost - estimating guidance , usps may have missed an opportunity to test how vulnerable its expected cost savings were to program changes . for instance , usps may have been able to test how its expected savings would change should any of its assumptions change , as some later did because of the arbitration decision , which affected staffing arrangements at the majority of postplan post offices . if usps had noticed significant differences in its projected labor costs and savings through a sensitivity analysis , it might have taken steps to address these vulnerabilities prior to announcing postplan . usps believes that , given likely savings and the realities of postal operations , moving forward with postplan was the correct operational decision . however , for future initiatives like postplan , having guidance that clarifies when usps should develop cost - savings estimates using a rigorous approach could help ensure that usps produces estimates that thoroughly consider the scope of a program's implications , effects , and alternatives . such an approach is particularly relevant given that usps has projected unsustainable losses through fiscal year 2020 and beyond , may continue to develop efficiency and cost - savings initiatives , and will need quality information on the potential savings and effects associated with these initiatives . further , according to usps as of october 2015 , it has saved $306 million in labor costs from fiscal year 2012 to june 2015 as a result of postplan .