fe . mr. apr . ag . sept. oct. nov. dec. state and justice officials told us that the lack of a transparent timeline and requirements for visa waiver program expansion has led to confusion among u.s. agencies in headquarters' offices and at u.s. embassies overseas , as well as foreign governments seeking to join the program . for example , dhs's standard procedures were not updated to account for the department's plans to sign with each of the aspiring visa waiver program countries separate memorandums of understanding ( mou ) that lay out the new legislative requirements from the 9 / 11 act . according to dhs , while not required by the act , the u.s. government is seeking to negotiate mous with current and aspiring visa waiver program countries to help put the legislative provisions in place . although dhs has not yet signed mous with any current program countries , the department intends to complete negotiations with existing program countries by october 2009 . as indicated in figure 1 , dhs signed mous with aspiring countries before conducting in - country security reviews . the mous are to be accompanied by more specific “implementing arrangements” for sharing biographic , biometric , and other data , as required by the 9 / 11 act , within general parameters of what the united states is willing and able to reciprocate — this includes sharing information on known or suspected terrorists . according to dhs , the type and scope of these arrangements will vary by country and will take into account existing bilateral information - sharing arrangements . as of june 2008 , dhs had signed mous with eight road map countries and had begun negotiations on the implementing arrangements . however , state and justice officials told us that dhs had not been clear in communicating these steps to aspiring and current program countries . dhs officials acknowledged that the department was still exploring how to best complete the implementing arrangements . u.s. embassy officials in several road map countries told us that it had been difficult to explain the expansion process to their foreign counterparts and manage their expectations about when those countries might be admitted into the visa waiver program . justice officials and u.s. officials in several embassies told us that the implementing arrangements may be more difficult to negotiate than the nonbinding mous because some countries have expressed concerns about sharing private information on their citizens due to strict national privacy laws — concerns that the united states also has about its citizens' information . in response to our request , in late april 2008 , dhs provided us with an outline of the department's completed and remaining actions for expanding the visa waiver program by the end of this year . dhs officials stated that this outline could be a first step in providing guidance for all stakeholders , should the program be expanded again in the future . however , the outline does not include criteria for selecting countries under consideration for admission into the program , other than the 13 road map countries .