compliance . there are two levels of cas coverage — full and modified . full coverage applies to business segments with cas - covered contracts valued at $50 million or more ; those business segments must comply with all 19 standards . modified coverage may apply to business segments with cas - covered contracts valued less than $50 million . business segments that have contracts awarded with modified coverage must comply with four of the standards . business segments with full cas - covered contracts are also required to submit disclosure statements describing the company's actual or proposed cost accounting practices and procedures , including how they distinguish direct costs from indirect costs and the basis used for allocating indirect costs . the defense contract audit agency ( dcaa ) reviews disclosure statements for adequacy and compliance — that is , whether the statement is current , accurate , and complete — prior to contract award and during contract performance . comparison . the board has begun this effort by looking at two standards focused on measuring and assigning costs ( cas 408 and cas 409 ) , since it believes that gaap potentially provided additional coverage compared to when the two cas were established in 1975 . ofpp officials stated that these two standards provided a good opportunity to modify and potentially eliminate duplicative coverage while testing the soundness of the board's approach to conform cas to gaap where practicable . the board received seven separate comment letters on the staff discussion paper from five industry organizations , one commercial business , and one private individual . our review of the comments found that they were largely supportive of the board's guiding principles , but some commenters raised concerns regarding the board's approach to its conformance effort and questioned whether it would ease the burden on contractors . for example , four respondents commented that the board should not limit its focus to only revising or eliminating particular cas when it was clear that gaap provided adequate coverage . instead , these industry groups stated that each cas should be eliminated unless proven to be absolutely necessary due to the barriers to contractors that these groups believe the cas create . the board members we met with stated that all options for refining cas requirements were on the table . however , they also stated that gaap and cas are focused on two separate goals — the former on a business's high - level financial statement , the latter on individual contract costs . board members , as well as dcaa and dcma officials , noted that eliminating cas requirements to rely purely on gaap standards would limit the government's ability to compare contract proposals , assess actual costs to avoid overcharges by contractors , and protect its interests . for example , dcma officials stated that the government has $3.1 billion in pending litigation for identified cas noncompliances . recovery of increased costs is accomplished in part through contract clauses that entitle the government to recover specific cost increases on affected cas - covered contracts . were cas and the associated contract clauses eliminated , dcaa and dcma officials noted that the government's ability to recover these costs would be greatly reduced .