malawi . mcc signed a compact with malawi in 2011 for $350.7 million , and data show that the entire amount was obligated for trade - related infrastructure activities . specifically , the compact is a single - sector power revitalization project that aims to increase the capacity and stability of the national electricity grid and bolster the efficiency and sustainability of hydropower generation . officials we spoke to in ghana and ethiopia , the two agoa countries where we conducted fieldwork , highlighted a range of ongoing infrastructure improvements and challenges . business representatives in ghana , where mcc funded $240 million in tcb - related assistance , noted that u.s. tcb activities had helped to reduce problems with land transportation . in ethiopia , a representative from local business noted that infrastructure challenges had been diminished through improvements in transportation , which had reduced costs for importing and exporting goods . officials and local business representatives in both ethiopia and ghana also cited a range of ongoing infrastructure challenges that acted as an impediment to conducting business . for example , in ethiopia , officials cited infrastructure issues , among others , as an impediment to conducting business in the country , and representatives of local businesses noted that further investment was needed in services such as power , roads , and telecommunications . in addition , officials in ghana stated that port congestion caused delays , and the manufacturing sector was diminished partly because of a lack of access to reliable power . a partnership among the u.s. government , african governments , the private sector , and others , power africa aims to expand access to electricity to households and businesses and increase africa's global competitiveness . governments to increase internal and regional trade within africa , and expand trade and economic ties among africa , the united states , and other global markets . usaid's tcb funding has supported a range of tcb activities for agoa countries , with trade - related agriculture and trade facilitation being the two largest categories . usaid has funded tcb assistance activities in 39 of 41 agoa countries ; see table 3 for agoa countries with the highest usaid tcb funding . usaid's tcb assistance activities in agoa countries covers all 14 tcb categories , with the majority of funding , over 75 percent , concentrated on trade - related agriculture , trade facilitation , and trade - related infrastructure ( see fig . from 2002 to 2004 , usaid established three regional trade hubs in sub - saharan africa that serve as primary implementers of u.s. tcb these usaid - assistance for sub - saharan african countries ( see fig . 6 ) .funded trade hubs are staffed with regional advisers who provide a range of services to u.s. agencies , african governments , and the private sector , noted as follows: east africa trade hub , established in nairobi , kenya , in 2002 . this hub aims to increase food security and economic growth in the following 9 east or central african countries: burundi , ethiopia , kenya , madagascar , mauritius , rwanda , south sudan , tanzania , and uganda . west africa trade hub , established in accra , ghana , in 2003 .