( app . i further describes our scope and methodology. ) we conducted our work from october 2002 through august 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . many of the health conditions that people age 65 and older experience are preventable and linked to specific health risks . some health risks are difficult to change , and some , such as a hereditary predisposition for a given disease , cannot be changed . this report addresses the following questions: do medicare beneficiaries receive recommended preventive services through existing physician visits ? what approaches for preventive care have been taken by selected medicare + choice plans , and what is known about their effectiveness for the medicare beneficiaries they serve ? what delivery options for identifying and reducing health risks have been suggested for medicare fee - for - service beneficiaries , and are any of these options being explored by the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , the agency administering the program ? because no single source contained all the information we needed to assess the extent to which medicare beneficiaries receive preventive services through existing physician visits , we analyzed data from four nationally representative health surveys . the centers for disease control and prevention's ( cdc ) behavioral risk factor surveillance system asks a range of health questions over the telephone , including if respondents received a “routine checkup” within the past year . cms's medicare current beneficiary survey collects self - reported data , including whether respondents have received influenza or pneumonia immunizations . cdc's national health and nutrition examination survey ( nhanes ) collects data on health conditions by means of both comprehensive health examinations and interviews , where patients self - report information , including whether a physician or other health professional has ever told them that they have a given health condition . unlike the other surveys , which take a sample of the population , cdc's national ambulatory medical care survey samples physician practices , collecting detailed information about office visits , including the major reason for the visit and which preventive services were ordered or provided . in addition , this survey captured information that allowed us to assess whether visits by medicare beneficiaries were on a fee - for - service basis . unless otherwise noted , however , the data we report generally included beneficiaries from both systems . to describe the approaches of selected medicare + choice plans in delivering preventive services , we assessed literature and interviewed national experts to identify plans that were considered innovative in preventive care . we then obtained information from five such plans: avmed health plans , group health cooperative , highmark blue cross and blue shield , kaiser permanente , and oxford health plans . collectively , an estimated 1.2 million medicare beneficiaries in 15 states plus the district of columbia receive their health care under these plans . to determine suggested options for identifying and reducing health risks and what cms is doing to assess them , we reviewed the results of past related research demonstrations and congressionally mandated studies and interviewed department of health and human services ( hhs ) and cms officials and other experts .