see appendix i for additional program data . despite the proven success of unmanned aircraft on the battlefield and the growing demand for the aircraft , these acquisitions continued to incur cost and schedule growth . rather than looking for unique solutions to common problems , dod must increasingly find common solutions to those problems . however , we recognize that commonality is not a panacea , and in some cases , given legitimate differences in operating environments or mission needs , may not make sense . we also recognize that achieving commonality is not always easy , especially given the strong service - driven acquisition processes and culture within the department . therefore , in our july 2009 report we recommended that dod ( 1 ) direct an objective , independent examination of unmanned aircraft requirements and report a strategy to congress for achieving greater commonality among systems and subsystems , and ( 2 ) require future unmanned aircraft programs to take an open systems approach to product development and to clearly demonstrate that potential areas of commonality have been analyzed and identified . we believe that these steps could help overcome these barriers and could go a long way to ensuring that dod maximizes efficiency as it continues to greatly increase emphasis on developing and acquiring more capable and larger quantities of unmanned aircraft . for further questions about this statement please contact michael j. sullivan at ( 202 ) 512-4841 . the development contract was awarded to the same contractor working with the air force to develop and produce predators and reapers . since the sky warrior is a variant of the predator , the two aircraft are assembled in the same production facility . despite the establishment of a memorandum of understanding in 2006 , direction from the deputy secretary of defense in 2007 to combine their programs , and a subsequent memorandum of agreement , the army and air force maintained separate programs and at the time of our review , had achieved little commonality . while several of the unmanned aircraft programs we examined had achieved commonality at the airframe level , service - centric acquisition processes and ineffective collaboration resulted in service - unique subsystems , payloads , and ground control stations . despite dod's efforts to encourage a joint approach to identifying and prioritizing warfighting needs and to emphasize the need for commonality among the programs , we noted that the individual services continued to drive requirements and make independent resource allocation decisions . in many cases , the services had established requirements so specific that they demanded service - unique solutions , thereby precluding opportunities for commonality . within dod's funding system , each service has the responsibility and authority to prioritize its own budget , allowing it to make independent funding decisions to support unique requirements . therefore , once a service concludes that a unique solution is warranted , the service has the authority to budget for that unique solution , to the exclusion of other solutions that might achieve greater commonality and efficiencies .