gao - 05-364t . washington , d.c.: march 17 , 2005 . what impact have interagency operational centers had on information sharing ? what barriers , if any , have hindered improvements in information sharing among port security stakeholders ? to answer these questions , we focused much of our work at the port level . to review the activities of area maritime security committees , we selected four ports for detailed review . these four ports — baltimore , maryland ; charleston , south carolina ; houston , texas ; and seattle , washington — were selected to reflect various coastal regions and a wide range of volume and types of operations . to review the activities of the interagency operational centers , we visited all three centers currently in operation , discussing ways in which the centers operate with both federal and nonfederal participants as well as observing operations at the centers . during our visits , we talked with coast guard officials involved in sharing information and we also discussed information sharing issues with numerous nonfederal stakeholders , including private sector officials and officials from port authorities or local law enforcement . we examined in more detail the coast guard's procedures for processing security clearances for members of area maritime security committees . we also reviewed legislation and congressional committee reports related to information sharing , reviewed numerous other documents and reports on the issue , and spoke with officials at the coast guard and the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) about their approaches to sharing information with nonfederal entities . see appendix i for further explanation of our scope and methodology . our work , which was conducted between may 2004 and march 2005 , was done in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . ports play an important role in the nation's economy and security . ports are used to import and export cargo worth hundreds of billions of dollars , generating jobs , both directly and indirectly , for americans and our trading partners . ports , which include inland waterways , are used to move bulk agricultural , mineral , petroleum , and paper products . in addition , ports are also used to move cargo containers ( as shown in fig . 1 ) — one of the most important segments of global commerce , accounting for 90 percent of the world's maritime cargo . in 2002 , approximately 7 million containers arrived in u.s. seaports , carrying more than 95 percent of the nation's non - north american trade by weight and 75 percent by value . ports also contribute to the economy through recreational activities such as boating , fishing , and cruises . as an indication of the economic importance of ports , a 2002 simulation of a terrorist attack at a port led to the temporary closure of every seaport in the united states and resulted in an estimated loss of $58 billion in revenue to the u.s. economy , including spoilage , loss of sales , manufacturing slowdowns , and halts in production . ports are also important to national security because they host naval bases and vessels , facilitate the movement of military equipment , and supply troops deployed overseas .