coal . we also identified two studies that analyzed the effects of different policy scenarios on coal production on federal lands . the first study , by the cea , examined how raising the federal royalty rate could affect coal production on federal lands after 2025 using a series of scenarios . under the first scenario , equivalent to raising royalty rates to 17 percent in 2025 , the study predicted that federal production would decrease by 3 percent once the changes were fully implemented . in addition , according to a few stakeholders we interviewed and a 2015 report by the congressional research service , any negative effect on production from higher rates could be limited to or affect areas with marginal oil and gas wells , which are usually wells with low production rates and / or higher production costs . as for coal , some stakeholders said that in an already challenging market , increased costs could further discourage production . according to eia data , total u.s. coal production declined 23 percent from 2008 to 2015 . in a 2012 report , we found that various market and regulatory factors may influence the future use of coal , including the price of natural gas , demand for electricity , and environmental regulations . a few stakeholders we interviewed said there has been little interest in further coal development in their regions , which include the western and midwestern regions of the country . since fiscal year 2012 , the number of coal lease sales on federal lands has generally declined . we previously reported that there was limited competition for coal leases because of the significant capital investment and time required ; additionally , from january 2016 to march 2017 the secretary of the interior placed a pause on significant new federal coal leasing decisions , with limited exemptions and exclusions . cost advantages of different resources . in addition , a few stakeholders stated that companies may avoid mining federal lands for coal when possible in order to avoid the required environmental assessments , which add time to the leasing process . a few stakeholders told us that the competitiveness of federal lands for development depends less on the royalty rate charged and more on the location of the best resources — such as areas with low exploration and production costs . for example , as discussed above , most of the areas with major u.s. tight oil and shale gas plays and major u.s. coal basins do not overlap with federal lands . a few stakeholders suggested that an increase in the federal royalty rates for coal would not cause companies to switch from federal to nonfederal coal because of the cost advantages of federal coal , which is primarily concentrated in surface mines in the west . according to eia data , all coal extracted from the powder river basin in 2015 was from surface mining , which we previously reported has lower extraction and production costs . in contrast , the majority of coal production from the appalachian region in 2015 was from underground production , which we previously reported is more costly to extract .