the majority of this increase is due to added quantities . the program's schedule delays have increased the development cost estimate by over $1.7 billion , or more than 39 percent . in 2008 , the marine corps directed the program to increase its total quantity estimate from 156 to 200 aircraft to support an increase in strength from 174,000 to 202,000 marines . in february 2011 , the secretary of defense testified that the number of marine corps troops may decrease by up to 20,000 marines beginning in fiscal year 2015 . the marine corps has assessed the required quantity of aircraft and determined that the requirement for 200 aircraft remains valid despite the proposed manpower decrease . primarily as a result of the aircraft quantity increase , the program's procurement cost estimate has also increased by over $5 billion , or 35 percent , from nearly $14.4 billion to over $19.4 billion . the program's average procurement unit cost has increased 4.8 percent . in addition , the program's schedule delays have delayed its ability to achieve ioc until 2018 , nearly 3 years later than originally planned . table 1 compares the program's original baseline estimates of cost , quantity , and major schedule events to current program estimates . the program started development before determining how to achieve requirements within program constraints , which led to cost growth and schedule delays . the ch - 53k program originally scheduled its preliminary design review for june 2007 , a year and a half after the program began development , and later delayed it to september 2008 , nearly 3 years after development start . we have reported that performing systems engineering reviews — including a system requirements review , system functional review , and preliminary design review — before a program is initiated and a business case is set is critical to ensuring that a program's requirements are defined and feasible and that the design can meet those requirements within cost , schedule , and other system constraints . problems with systems engineering began immediately within the program because the program and sikorsky disagreed on what systems engineering tasks needed to be accomplished . as a result , the bulk of the program's systems engineering problems related to derived requirements . according to an osd official , the contractor did not account for total design workload , technical reviews , and development efforts . for example , the program experienced problems defining software specifications for its avionics management system . while marine corps officials commented that requirements are often difficult to define early in the engineering process and changes are expected during design maturation , they noted that in this case the use of a firm fixed - price contract with the subcontractor made it difficult to facilitate changes . as a result , completing this task took longer than the program had estimated and the program's cdr was delayed . in another example , the program has a requirement that the ch - 53k be transportable by c - 5 aircraft .