however , we found a few exceptions . the information they collect generally does not include information on company owners . states and agents are generally not required to verify any information on company ownership or management or to screen names against criminal watch lists , although almost all state officials reported that they screen filings for the presence of statutorily required information such as the company name and an address where official notices can be sent . with rare exceptions , the agents we spoke with did not request additional information on company owners or verify clients' identity . law enforcement officials we spoke with were concerned about the use of shell companies in the united states that enable individuals to conceal their identities and conduct criminal activity . these officials said that they have also had difficulty investigating u.s. shell companies that were being used for illicit purposes because they could not identify the owners . quantifying the magnitude of the criminal use of shell companies is difficult , but law enforcement officials told us about investigations , both domestic and international , that have involved such companies and the movement of billions of dollars . the law enforcement officials we interviewed said that they had obtained some company information from company formation documents or periodic reports and occasionally from agents during investigations and that this information had generated additional leads . but some officials noted that the information available from the states often did not reveal who owned the company and that cases had been closed because owners could not be traced . state officials , agents , and others we interviewed said that collecting company ownership information could be problematic , for several reasons . for example , state officials told us that the costs and time involved in approving company formations could increase , potentially slowing down or derailing business dealings . in addition , a few states and agents said they might lose business to other jurisdictions with less stringent requirements . state officials and agents also expressed concerns about maintaining the privacy of the owners of legitimate businesses that historically had been protected from public scrutiny . state officials , agents , and other experts in the field suggested that internal company records , financial institutions , and the internal revenue service ( irs ) could be alternative sources of ownership information for law enforcement investigations , but we found that using these sources could also be problematic . the company formation process is governed and executed at the state level . formation documents are generally filed with a secretary of state's office and are commonly called articles of incorporation ( for corporations ) or articles of organization ( for llcs ) . agents also indicated that it might be difficult to collect and verify information on company owners because they often were in contact only with law firms and not company officials during the formation process . in addition , some state officials noted that any change in requirements for obtaining or verifying information , or the fees charged for company formation , would require state legislatures to pass new legislation and grant company formation offices new authority .