administration . o employers ? o individuals ? session 3: reevaluating our nation's approach to retirement policy preamble: various proposals for a broader , more cohesive approach to retirement policy have been made over time . do you believe there is a need for some type of national retirement policy ? if such a policy were to be proposed - - 2a . what could or should be the primary goals of such a policy ? what could or should be the roles of key actors in achieving those goals ? what do you believe could be the greatest benefits of a national retirement policy ? what do you believe could be the greatest risks or potential downsides of a national retirement policy ? what barriers exist to creating a national retirement policy and how could the federal government best address these barriers ? the chronology highlights below selected federal legislation related to retirement security in the united states since 1960 . it is based on a larger chronology included in our prior special product on the nation's retirement system ( gao - 18-111sp ) . the chronology is intended to illustrate the incremental approach that the nation has taken to improving the u.s. retirement system and to convey the changes that the legislation enacted at the time . it is not intended to provide an exhaustive list of legislation that has impacted retirement in the united states , to make statements about current provisions of the law , or to provide comprehensive descriptions of each law . chronology of selected federal legislation shaping retirement in the united states ( 1960 – present ) 1961 social security amendments of 1961 selected provision: enacted a provision for men , comparable to the provision enacted for women in 1956 , concerning early retirement at age 62 . self - employed individuals tax retirement act of 1962 selected provision: imposed minimum distribution requirements for self - employed participants in a qualified plan generally beginning at age 70 ½ . social security amendments of 1965 selected provisions: enacted new titles to the social security act for medicare and medicaid . medicare provided hospital , post - hospital extended care , and home health coverage to almost all americans age 65 or older ; medicaid provided states with the option of receiving federal funding for providing health care services to certain low - income and medically needy individuals . age discrimination in employment act of 1967 selected provisions: made it unlawful for an employer to discriminate against any individual with respect to compensation , terms , conditions , or privileges of employment because of age ; and required the secretary of labor to carry on a continuing program of education and information , which could include research with a view to reducing barriers to the employment of older persons . employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) selected provisions: regulated private sector employers who offer pension or welfare benefit plans for their employees . title i: imposed reporting and disclosure requirements on plans ; imposed certain responsibilities on plan fiduciaries . title ii: strengthened participation requirements for employees age 25 and over ; established vesting rules ; required that a joint and survivor annuity be provided ; and established minimum funding standards .