see figure 1 . concurrent with jpdo's efforts , the european commission is conducting a project to harmonize and modernize the pan - european air traffic management system . known as the single european sky air traffic management research programme ( sesar ) , the project is overseen by the european organization for the safety of air navigation ( eurocontrol ) . eurocontrol has contracted out the work of sesar to a 30-member consortium of airlines , air navigation service providers , airports , manufacturers , and others . ( 2 ) what is the status of jpdo's planning efforts for ngats ? ( 3 ) to what extent are efforts being made to control costs and leverage resources to support atc modernization and the transformation to ngats ? my statement is based on our recently completed and ongoing studies of faa's atc modernization program , together with updated information from ato and jpdo officials and aviation stakeholders . later this year , we expect to issue two detailed reports related to the issues discussed in this statement . one report will provide our assessment of the status of jpdo's efforts to develop ngats . another report will examine a variety of cost - saving and financing options for faa in the 21st century . we are performing our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the following is a summary of our findings to date: created as a performance - based organization , ato has been working to establish a results - oriented organizational culture , a more accountable management structure , and more businesslike management and acquisition processes , but continued management attention will be required to institutionalize these initiatives . to bring about cultural change , ato has adopted core values such as integrity , accountability , and fiscal responsibility and is using faa employee attitude survey data to establish a baseline for assessing changes in attitudes over time . ( 1 ) what is the status of ato's efforts to improve its performance as it modernizes our nation's air traffic control system ? ato has begun to hold managers accountable for cost control through its performance rating and bonus system . to improve its acquisitions process , faa is , for example , evaluating all investment decisions , including those for systems in service beyond 2 years , to ensure that all decisions support agency goals . recently , faa has reported positive results: for the past 2 fiscal years , faa has met its major acquisition performance goal — to have 80 percent of its acquisitions meet scheduled milestones and be within 10 percent of budget . however , faa still faces challenges , including sustaining ato's transformation to a results - oriented culture , hiring and training thousands of air traffic controllers to replace those expected to retire , ensuring stakeholder involvement in major system acquisitions to ensure that the acquisitions meet users' needs , and keeping major acquisitions , such as the faa telecommunications infrastructure ( fti ) on schedule and within budget . jpdo has made progress in planning for the ngats that is described in its december 2004 integrated plan and its march 2006 progress report .