ii ) . figure 5 shows a rendering of the un campus with the proposed north lawn building , shown in pink , at the far north end of the un campus ( options 1 and 4 in table 7 ) . as mentioned in table 7 , construction of the north lawn building may not begin until 2023 and matters related to the architectural integrity of the proposed building need to be taken into account . according to the secretary - general's february 2014 report , the un complex is considered “an iconic masterpiece of mid - century modernism of worldwide historical significance.” the size of the proposed new building is larger than anything previously envisioned historically , and the scale of the proposed north lawn building would not meet the un's criteria for historic preservation . according to un officials , should the building need to be downsized , the cost of this option could increase because downsizing the building would require the un to lease more office space . figure 6 shows a rendering of the un consolidation building , as shown in pink , sometimes referred to as dc - 5 — located just south of the un campus , which the united nations development corporation ( undc ) is to develop , finance , and construct ( option 2 in table 7 ) . the dc - 5 project is subject to the terms of an october 2011 memorandum of understanding ( mou ) agreed to by new york city and state elected representatives . while not parties to the agreement , the use of the site for construction of dc - 5 requires that undc and the un fulfill certain requirements . for example , undc and the un would have to agree on a lease by the un of dc - 5 from undc , potentially in a lease - to - own or similar arrangement . to date , the un has not entered into any agreements with undc regarding the dc - 5 project . un officials informed us the un wants a more precise cost estimate , which will not be possible until a later date . in december 2014 , the un general assembly approved a resolution asking the secretary - general to provide a preliminary un credit rating , proposed lease terms and accurate cost projections . the un credit rating would affect the interest rate on the bonds financing the dc - 5 project . according to undc officials , undc can only rent space in dc - 5 to un entities , and before the issuance of bonds to finance the project could occur , undc would have to make a major investment in the project . as of late march 2015 , undc reported that it had already incurred design and planning costs of approximately $14 million for the project and foresaw additional costs of approximately $25 million for development of a full design package to be recouped in the future financing arrangement . undc expects that extending the mou's december 31 , 2015 expiration date may be possible as the city of new york has a strong commitment to the project .