mr. chairman , this concludes my remarks . table 2 indicates the numbers or percentages involved . va's office of inspector general ( oig ) found when it visited gpd providers in 2005-2006 that va officials had not been consistently monitoring the gpd providers' annual performance as required . the gpd program office has since moved to enforce the requirement that va liaisons review gpd providers' performance when the va team comes on - site each year to inspect the gpd facility . to assess the veterans' success , va has relied chiefly on measures of veterans' status at the time they leave the gpd program rather than obtaining routine information on their status months or years later . in part , this has been due to concerns about the costs , benefits , and feasibility of more extensive follow - up . however , va completed a onetime study in january 2007 that a va official told us cost about $1.5 million . the study looked at the experience of a sample of 520 veterans who participated in the gpd program in five geographic locations , including 360 who responded to interviews a year after they had left the program . generally , the findings confirm that veterans' status at the time they leave the program can be maintained . we recommended that va explore feasible and cost - effective ways to obtain information on how veterans are faring after they leave the program . we suggested that where possible they could use data from gpd providers and other va sources , such as va's own follow - up health assessments and gpd providers' follow - up information on the circumstances of veterans 3 to 12 months later . va concurred and told us in 2007 that va's northeast program evaluation center is piloting a new form to be completed electronically by va liaisons for every veteran leaving the gpd program . the form asks for the veterans' employment and housing status , as well as involvement , if any , in substance abuse treatment , 1 month after they have left the program . while following up at 1 month is a step in the right direction , additional information at a later point would yield a better indication of longer - term success . i would be happy to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for further information , please contact daniel bertoni at ( 202 ) 512-7215 . also contributing to this statement were shelia drake , pat elston , lise levie , nyree m. ryder , and charles willson . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . addressing homelessness — particularly when it is compounded by substance abuse and mental illness — is a challenge involving a broad array of services that must be coordinated .