volunteerism . the secretary of the air force is authorized to activate arc personnel on active duty with the consent of those individuals ; however , the consent of the state governor is required for the voluntary activation of ang personnel . according to joint publication 4-05 , joint mobilization planning ( feb. 21 , 2014 ) , volunteerism is important because it enables a service to fill required positions with reserve component personnel without its counting against the statutory limits related to involuntary mobilization . however , the guidance also states that volunteerism should be used judiciously , because excessive use of volunteers removes personnel from reserve component units , which could result in a reduction of the unit's readiness in the event of unit mobilization . another factor that mobilization planners must take into account is dwell time policy in relation to deployments . furthermore , the air force has established specific goals for managing the operational tempo of its forces , and planners need to consider this factor as well . involuntary mobilization . any unit or individual of a reserve component may be ordered to active duty under multiple mobilization statutory authorities under title 10 of the u.s. code that vary regarding the number of personnel who can be mobilized , the duration of the mobilization , and the approval authority . for example , section 12304 of title 10 , u.s. code , provides authority to the president to involuntarily activate up to 200,000 members of the selected reserve for up to 365 days to augment active forces for an operational mission or in response to certain emergencies . afsoc is required to follow air force guidance for accessing arc units and personnel . the air force guidance implements dod instruction 1235.12 , accessing the reserve components ( rc ) , which establishes the overarching policies and procedures for accessing the reserve components for all military departments . when afsoc officials determine that arc capabilities are the appropriate option for a given special operation requirement , their access to the reserve component is governed by air force instruction 10-301 , managing operational utilization requirements of the air reserve component forces . this instruction outlines roles and responsibilities for managing requirements for reserve component capabilities accessed through both involuntary mobilizations and volunteerism . among other things , it establishes that afsoc use the reserve component in a cyclical or periodic manner that provides predictability to arc individuals , to the individual's employer , and to the combatant command receiving the capabilities . the process for accessing the reserve component through involuntary mobilization is further outlined in air force instruction 10-402 , mobilization planning . this guidance implements and expands on the specific timelines for particular milestones during the mobilization process established in dod instruction 1235.12 , such as the identification of the types of capabilities required and of the unit responsible for providing them . these timelines vary , depending on whether the requirement for capabilities is known well ahead of mobilization — a rotational , or preplanned , requirement — or , conversely , is emergent .