gomez . ph.d. , joseph and sally shay , ph.d . evaluation of the edison project school . final report , 1999-00 ( portions related to parental satisfaction and involvement , and school climate ) . office of evaluation and research , miami - dade county public schools ( mdcps ) , april 2001 . gomez and shay examined responses from surveys mdcps had administered to parents and teachers from both the edison school and the control group . however , the outcomes related to parental satisfaction and involvement were measured with single - item survey questions that do not seem to capture the full context of the concepts . school climate was measured with a single - item question on a teacher survey and with school archival data . shay and gomez did not report whether any differences are statistically significant , in part because they acknowledged it would be inappropriate to conduct tests of significance on single - item questions . therefore , there is no evidence to determine whether edison school parents were more satisfied or involved than those in the control group , or whether the edison school improved school climate . we are aware of other studies and reports that address the effect of chancellor beacon academies , mosaica education , and edison schools on academic achievement , parental satisfaction , parental involvement , or school climate ; however , the following are examples that did not meet the criteria for inclusion in our review . district of columbia public charter school board . school performance reports . washington , d.c.: august 2001 . department of research , evaluation , and assessment , minneapolis public schools . edison / ppl school information report 2000-2001 . minneapolis , minnesota: 2001 . department of administration , counseling , educational and school psychology , wichita state university . an independent program evaluation for the dodge - edison partnership school: first year interim report . wichita , kansas: 1996 . missouri department of elementary and secondary education . charter school performance study: kansas city charter schools . jefferson city , missouri: 2001 . company - provided information such as annual reports and school performance reports . other sources of general information included school district websites and other educational services , such as standard and poor's school evaluation services and the national association of charter school authorizers' educational service provider information clearinghouse . in addition to those named above , rebecca ackley and n. kim scotten made key contributions to this report . jay smale , michele fejfar , kevin jackson , sara ann moessbauer , and shana wallace provided important methodological contributions to the review of research . patrick dibattista and jim rebbe also provided key technical assistance . school vouchers: characteristics of privately funded programs . gao - 02- 752 . washington , d.c.: september 26 , 2002 . school vouchers: publicly funded programs in cleveland and milwaukee . gao - 01-914 . washington , d.c.: august 31 , 2001 . charter schools: limited access to facility financing . gao / hehs - 00- 163 . washington , d.c.: september 12 , 2000 ) charter schools: federal funding available but barriers exist . hehs - 98- 84 . washington , d.c.: april 30 , 1998 .