encouraging public participation . nepa is intended to help government make informed decisions , encourage the public to participate in those decisions , and make the government accountable for its decisions . public participation is a central part of the nepa process , allowing agencies to obtain input directly from those individuals who may be affected by a federal action . doe officials referred to this public comment component of nepa as a piece of “good government architecture,” and dod officials similarly described nepa as a forum for resolving organizational differences by promoting interaction between interested parties inside and outside the government . likewise , the national park service within interior uses its planning , environment , and public comment ( pepc ) system as a comprehensive information and public comment site for national park service projects , including those requiring nepa analyses . crs , the role of the environmental review process in federally funded highway projects: background and issues for congress , r42479 , ( washington , d.c.: apr . environmental outcomes brought about through the nepa process . doe has also published a document showing its nepa “success stories.” in one example from this document , doe cited the november 28 , 2008 , final programmatic eis for the designation of energy corridors on federal lands in 11 western states ( doe / eis - 0386 ) , that it had developed in cooperation with blm . in this case , public comments resulted in the consideration of alternative routes and operating procedures for energy transmission corridors to avoid sensitive environmental resources . agency activities under nepa are hard to separate from other required environmental analyses , further complicating the determination of costs and benefits . ceq's nepa regulations specify that , to the fullest extent possible , agencies must prepare nepa analyses concurrently with other environmental requirements . ceq's march 6 , 2012 , memorandum on improving the process for preparing efficient and timely environmental reviews under the national environmental policy act states that agencies “must integrate , to the fullest extent possible , their draft eis with environmental impact analyses and related surveys and studies required by other statutes or executive orders , amplifying the requirement in the ceq regulations . the goal should be to conduct concurrent rather than sequential processes whenever appropriate.” different types of environmental analyses may also be conducted in response to other requirements under federal laws such as the clean water act and the endangered species act ; executive orders ; agency guidance ; and state and local laws . as reported in 2011 by crs , nepa functions as an “umbrella” statute ; any study , review , or consultation required by any other law that is related to the environment should be conducted within the framework of the nepa process . as a result , the biggest challenge in determining the costs and benefits of nepa is separating activities under nepa from activities under other environmental laws . according to dot officials , the dollar costs for developing a nepa analysis reported by agencies also includes costs for developing analyses required by a number of other federal laws , executive orders , and state and local laws , which potentially could be a significant part of the cost estimate .