( figs . in addition to the contact named above , karen tremba ( assistant director ) , lawrance evans , stefanie jonkman , matthew keeler , marc molino , carl ramirez , barbara roesmann , jeremy schwartz , and paul thompson made key contributions to this report . in the absence of regulation sho . finance , the s&p 500 total return index from global insight , and short interest from the midmonth short interest press releases from the three major exchanges . we did not conduct an assessment of the reliability of these measures . however , these sources are widely used in both finance and economics and are considered credible for the purposes in which we used them . in addition , these measures are used solely for descriptive purposes and not for the purpose of making recommendations or drawing conclusions about causality . we also identified the percentage of threshold securities in our review period that were exchange - traded funds ( etf ) . to identify these securities , we downloaded lists of etfs from four separate sources — including morningstar , yahoo ! finance , msn money , and bloomberg — and compared these lists to identify any differences . we found that differences between the sources amounted to less than 3 percent of etfs appearing on each respective list . to have the most comprehensive list , we included etfs that appear on at least three of these four sources . we have determined that these data were reliable for our purpose , which was to provide descriptive information . to discuss regulatory , industry , and other market participant views on the effectiveness of regulation sho and the recent emergency orders in curbing the potential for manipulative naked short selling , we reviewed and analyzed the requirements of regulation sho , the recent emergency orders , the temporary rule , and comment letters submitted to sec . we also reviewed the results from an oea study on the impact of the temporary preborrow requirement on the market in the july emergency order . while we found the results were based on a reasonable methodology , we note that is difficult to draw strong conclusions given a number of limitations , including the temporary nature of the emergency order . we also reviewed two private sector studies to better understand market trends during and after the implementation of the july emergency order . we did not evaluate or validate their findings because these private sector studies were reviewed primarily to provide additional descriptive information beyond the oea study , and because neither conducted a rigorous causal investigation . in general , the inclusion of the oea and private sector studies is purely for research purposes and does not imply that we deem them definitive . furthermore , we obtained and reviewed comment letters submitted to sec about regulation sho , the emergency orders , and the temporary rule .