see fig . 1 for more information on implementation timelines . fsma authorized and encouraged fda to coordinate with states in helping to ensure compliance with the produce rule . according to fda officials , developing a working relationship with states to implement the rule is of critical importance because states may have an understanding of farming practices as a result of their historically close relationship with farms . to facilitate coordination with states , fda established the state produce implementation cooperative agreement program . the program is to provide funds to support a variety of state activities , including educating and providing technical assistance to produce businesses , to the 43 participating states . through the program , fda obligated approximately $22 million in 2016 to 42 states and approximately $31 million in 2017 to 43 states to help these states implement the rule . in addition , in september 2014 , fda entered into a 5-year cooperative agreement with the national association of state departments of agriculture — an organization representing state agriculture departments in all 50 states and 4 u.s. territories . under this cooperative agreement , the association is working with fda to support implementation of the produce rule by , among other things , providing technical assistance to states to help them implement their produce safety programs . fda renewed the cooperative agreement in 2016 with an expanded scope to include states' assistance with helping businesses understand what is expected of them ahead of compliance dates . since we last reported on the produce rule , fda has continued to use its information clearinghouse , the tan , to take steps to evaluate and respond to questions and concerns from businesses and other stakeholders regarding the produce rule . fda has also taken other steps , including funding training for industry , conducting visits to farms , and publishing guidance , to evaluate and respond to concerns . in addition , fda is reviewing the produce rule agricultural water standards and in september 2017 published a proposed rule to extend compliance dates associated with those standards . fda has continued to use the tan to evaluate and respond to questions and concerns from businesses and other stakeholders regarding all of the fsma rules , including the produce rule . since our last report , we found that fda received 2,665 additional questions submitted to the tan from september 4 , 2016 , through june 30 , 2017 . of those 2,665 additional questions , 230 questions ( about 9 percent ) pertained to the produce rule . of those 230 questions , 154 questions ( about 67 percent ) came from individuals who self - identified as belonging to “business / industry.” ( see fig . we reviewed the full text of questions about the produce rule that were submitted to the tan by those who identified themselves as belonging to business / industry . we reviewed all such questions submitted since september 10 , 2015 , when the tan first began operating , through march 31 , 2017 , the date of the most recently available information when we conducted our audit work ( 321 total questions ) .