there have been few systematic studies of weight loss supplements . consequently , little is known about whether weight loss supplements are effective , but many of them have been reported to be associated with the potential for physical harm . fda has issued warnings for some products and ingredients . however , fda faces difficulty in addressing safety concerns due in part to weaknesses in its adverse event reporting system . the agency must also meet different standards for addressing safety concerns with supplements than it uses for drugs . further , fda has been slow to issue good manufacturing practice ( gmp ) regulations . federal agencies have also been involved in research and education . nih's national center on complementary and alternative medicine ( nccam ) has determined that weight loss supplements are not as high a priority as its other areas of research . both ftc and fda have developed publications and internet sites on weight loss that provide some educational materials to consumers . in addition , several states have statutes or regulations in effect or pending to restrict the sale of some weight loss supplements . some state attorneys general and local district attorneys have sued the manufacturers of supplements marketed with weight loss claims , and individuals have sued over injuries . more than half of u.s. adults are overweight or obese , and more than one - third of u.s. adults are trying to lose weight . increasingly , they are turning to weight loss supplements for help . the most widely used weight loss supplement is ephedra , or ma huang . the active ingredients in ephedra — ephedrine alkaloids — are compounds with potentially powerful stimulant effects on the nervous and cardiovascular systems . however , in 2001 , a jury awarded $13.3 million to a woman who suffered a debilitating stroke after taking a dietary supplement containing ephedra for weight loss . the dietary supplement industry estimates that as many as 3 billion servings of ephedra are sold each year in the united states and approximately 12 million individuals were using ephedra in 1999 . ftc and nih declined to provide official comments . ftc , fda , and nih provided technical comments which we have incorporated where appropriate . we conducted our work from may through july 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , little is known about whether weight loss supplements are effective , but some supplements have been associated with the potential for physical harm . health consequences , which can be serious , may result from the use of the supplement itself or from the interaction of the supplement with medications or foods . people with certain underlying health conditions , such as heart disease , high blood pressure , and diabetes , may be particularly at risk . in addition , supplements may be contaminated with harmful ingredients or may not contain the amount of an active ingredient that is stated on the label . federal and state activities related to weight loss supplements have been limited and have focused on oversight of marketing more than on oversight of safety . ftc has prosecuted manufacturers of weight loss supplements for making misleading claims .