( fig . 2 shows the steps in mr. smith's enrollment process. ) from the time mr. smith applies for his state's medicaid program on august 11 , it takes about 1 month for him to receive notification from the state that he is eligible for medicaid , thus beginning the enrollment process . from there , mr. smith's new status is submitted by his state to cms in a monthly file transmittal . once cms receives the lists of dual - eligible beneficiaries from all of the states , it verifies eligibility for medicare and sets each beneficiary's cost - sharing level . then , around october 8 , cms assigns mr. smith to a pdp randomly , based on the premium level and the geographic area served by the pdp . cms next notifies the pdp sponsor , which then has to enroll him in its plan and assign the necessary billing information . this billing information , such as a member identification number , is necessary for pharmacies to correctly bill the pdp for mr. smith's prescriptions . the pdp also has to inform mr. smith of his enrollment information . by the time this process is completed , it is the middle of october . cms has developed some contingency measures to help individuals like mr. smith during the processing interval . however , we found that these measures have not always worked effectively . for instance , cms designed an enrollment contingency option to ensure that dual - eligible beneficiaries who were not yet enrolled in a pdp could get their medications covered under part d , while also providing assurance that the pharmacy would be reimbursed for those medications . however , representatives of pharmacy associations we spoke with reported problems with reimbursements after using this option , which has led some pharmacies to stop using it . to avoid a gap in coverage for beneficiaries transitioning from medicaid to medicare prescription drug coverage , cms has implemented a prospective enrollment process . because states can predict and notify cms which medicaid beneficiaries will become new dual - eligible beneficiaries and when , cms begins the enrollment process for these individuals 2 months before the their anticipated dual - eligible status is attained . by conducting the processing steps early , the prospective enrollment used for this group of new dual - eligible beneficiaries should ensure a seamless transition from medicaid drug coverage to medicare part d coverage . fully implemented in november 2006 , prospective enrollment applies to about one - third of the new dual - eligible beneficiaries enrolled in pdps by cms . for the majority of new dual - eligible beneficiaries , cms requires pdps to provide drug coverage retroactively , typically by several months . during 2006 , medicare paid pdps millions of dollars to provide coverage to dual - eligible beneficiaries for drug costs that may have been incurred during the retroactive coverage period . however , we found that cms did not fully implement or monitor the impact of this policy . cms made the effective date of part d drug coverage for medicare beneficiaries who become medicaid eligible coincide with the effective date of their medicaid eligibility .