exit . determining when a participant leaves the program — or exits — affects nearly all wia performance measures because jobseekers must exit the program in order to be counted in the performance measures . while labor's guidance explains when an exit occurs , it also has allowed two different kinds of exits — the hard exit and the soft exit . a hard exit occurs when a participant has a specific date of case closure , program completion or known exit from wia - funded or one - stop partner - funded services . a soft exit occurs when a participant does not receive any wia - funded or partner - funded service for 90 days and is not scheduled for future services except follow - up . furthermore , labor's guidance on wia did not clearly specify which services are substantial enough to delay exiting a participant , and local areas define these services differently . in a recent review we found considerable variation in exit practices at the state and local levels . for example , one local area defined exit as occurring when participants are finished with their wia services ; another local area defined exit when participants have found a new job and the wages for their new job are considered acceptable ( regardless of the number of days that have passed since their last service ) . in addition to allowing states the flexibility to define some performance elements , the initial guidance failed to specify other key elements necessary to ensure data quality . for example , the guidance did not specify which source documentation was to be collected and maintained to support entries into the it system . in the absence of guidance , some states continued to collect source documentation similar to that collected under jtpa , other states moved to paperless systems and did not collect and retain any source documentation . without consistent source documentation , there is no assurance that the data in the it system are accurate . the transition from jtpa to wia required states to make significant changes to their it systems , and in some cases , problems during the transition led to data errors . for example , several data elements required in wiasrd — the file of individual exiters that states submit to labor every year — were similar to those collected under jtpa , but the data definitions were slightly changed . this sometimes led to miscoded or missing data — especially for those participants who were carried over from jtpa into wia . in addition , new data sources were used to measure outcomes , and the calculations for the measures were complex . some states integrated their it systems so that the system that is used for wia data collection is used for tracking participation in other partner programs as well . these changes required major modifications to the it systems . states used a variety of strategies to make the necessary system changes , often facing challenges in fully implementing wia's requirements . for example , 22 states reported that they used the same software they had used under jtpa to report on wia performance , but 15 of these states later converted to different software for wia .