i for a list of systems ) . in fiscal year 2003 , the army fully funded the initial spare parts requirements of the recapitalization program , investing at least $419.7 million of its operations and maintenance funding to run the program . an army official said that about $200 million was taken from the recapitalization program to help with the iraq war , but the program will be reimbursed from the supplemental appropriation . according to army officials , recapitalizing army weapon systems will initially increase the demand for spare parts because new parts will be used for equipment that is cycled through the rebuilding and upgrading process . does the army have the ability to identify the impact on readiness of increased investments for spare parts ? to accomplish these objectives , we analyzed army strategic plans and major initiatives identified by the army that pertain to logistics and supply support . we interviewed officials at army headquarters , army materiel command , army aviation and missile command , tank and automotive command , and the army materiel systems analysis activity . our criteria for evaluating the army's strategy and initiatives included the government performance results act ( gpra ) of 1993 , previous gao reports , and appropriate dod reports and guidance . the army's vision for the 21st century mandates a land force that can operate in joint , combined , and multinational formations to perform a variety of missions , ranging from humanitarian assistance and disaster relief to major theater wars . the army's vision also requires that it be capable of putting a combat force anywhere in the world within 96 hours . to meet these objectives , the army states that it must transform into a more deployable and strategically responsive force . this transformation process also dictates that the army reengineers its logistics processes to increase responsiveness to its combat units and to provide the spare parts needed to maintain equipment readiness . in recent years , congress has provided increased operations and maintenance funding for dod to enable military units to purchase spare parts from the supply system as needed . for example , during fiscal years 1999-2002 , congress provided supplemental funding totaling $1.5 billion , of which the army received $170 million in 1999 , $25 million in 2001 , and $200 million in 2002 to address spare parts shortages that were adversely affecting readiness . the army now projects that it will spend over $7 billion during fiscal years 2003-05 to purchase spare parts for its combat and support systems . the army chief of staff's list of programs that need more funding indicates that the army needs an additional $415 million to sustain the forces in fiscal year 2003 and $263 million to sustain them in fiscal year 2004 and according to an army official , to support operations enduring freedom and iraqi freedom . a portion of these amounts would be used to purchase spare parts , but the army did not provide a breakout of how the funds will be allocated . in july 2001 , we reported that spare parts shortages in the army were adversely affecting operations , maintenance , and personnel .