ind . colo. ky. md . ark . ala. three other possessor statesalbania , india , and a state partyaccount for about 3 percent of the global declared chemical weapons stockpile and are anticipated to meet the cwc complete destruction time line by april 2007 . with smaller stockpiles than those in russia and the united states , these countries have had less difficulty meeting their deadlines . albania declared its stockpile to the opcw in 2003 , and the united states is providing assistance to destroy its chemical weapons stockpile . other nations , including canada and italy , may also provide assistance . state officials estimate that albania will meet the 2007 destruction deadline . according to indian officials , india has the third largest stockpile after russia and the united states ; however , information on its chemical weapons destruction program is not publicly available . the fifth possessor state , a state party , experienced interim delays due to technical difficulties . it requested and received an extension of its 45-percent chemical weapons destruction deadline in 2003 . according to government officials , it remains on track to meet the 2007 deadline . libya , the sixth possessor state , has just declared its chemical weapons to the opcw and has yet to develop a destruction plan for its stockpile . according to the opcw , less than 40 percent of cwc member states have adopted national laws to criminalize cwc - prohibited activities . although the treaty does not establish a time line for the adoption of such measures , according to the opcw , member states are expected to implement these laws soon after ratifying the convention . opcw officials stated that many member states lack sufficient legal expertise and financial resources to adopt the required laws . at the 2003 cwc review conference , however , the united states launched an initiative to assist all cwc member states in adopting comprehensive national laws . the effort culminated in an opcw action plan to help member states adopt necessary laws by 2005 . according to the opcw , 126 member states have designated a national authority to collect and submit their declarations . however , opcw and state officials estimate that a large number of member states' national authorities are not effective because they lack sufficient financial and human resources . national authorities are important in implementing the treaty because they facilitate member states' ability to submit accurate and timely declarations to the opcw and host opcw inspections . to encourage member states to improve the effectiveness of their national authorities , the opcw hosts workshops to identify common problems and assist member states in addressing them accordingly . according to a 2001 department of state report , four cwc member stateschina , iran , sudan , and russiahad not acknowledged the full extent of their chemical weapons program . the cwc requires member states to fully and accurately declare their chemical weapons capabilities . however , state believes that china maintains an active chemical weapons research and development program , a possible undeclared chemical weapons stockpile , and weapons - related facilities that were not declared to the opcw .