these observations are not generalizable . we also interviewed bureau headquarters officials to discuss the use of management reports for monitoring and overseeing the operation . we reviewed workload estimates , address lister productivity rates , and hiring information for the operation , including how many addresses the bureau expected to canvass per hour and how many people the bureau needed to hire . to assess the reliability of these data , we reviewed available documentation and interviewed bureau officials . we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives . we also met periodically with bureau headquarters staff to discuss progress of the operation . efficiency gains from conducting reengineered field operations using: new operational control systems , which were used to electronically assign and transmit work to the listers . new automated time and expense reporting ( timecards ) for employees . in 2010 , timecards were paper - based and the listers had to meet with their supervisors to submit them . enhanced software application for validating and updating addresses . implementation of rapid response to hurricane dorian , which affected areas of the southeastern united states , resulted in minimal disruptions to the operation . additionally , the bureau was able to resolve some unforeseen challenges at the seven area census offices that opened early . for example , the bureau identified issues with training login and new hires not being on the training roster and rectified those issues before the operation expanded to the rest of the country . the bureau experienced delays in hiring for its early operations , raising concerns about hiring for peak operations . the bureau's target was to hire 40,300 listers by september 7 , 2019 , but as of september 9 , 2019 , the bureau had hired 31,151 listers . though address canvassing productivity was higher than expected , in some parts of the country the operation was at risk of falling behind because of a shortage of listers . the bureau told us it filled the gap with listers who lived well outside of the area in which they were supposed to work — in some cases from a different state . this strategy allowed the bureau to complete the operation on schedule ; however , though the operation as a whole was under budget , the bureau incurred unplanned costs for travel ( airfare , personal mileage rates , rental cars , hotel stays , and per diem ) . as we previously reported , these hiring problems are an early warning for what may occur later in the census during nonresponse follow - up , when the bureau intends to hire between 320,000 to 500,000 enumerators to follow up with households that did not initially respond to the census . the bureau said the hiring issues were caused by delays in processing background checks and greater - than - expected attrition . according to the bureau , these delays arose , in part , due to early shortages of staff to review background checks and because a significant number of applicants did not completely or accurately fill out related forms .