some of the factors in these groups may be interrelated . to cope with its persistent deficits , puerto rico issued debt to finance operations . in reviewing 20 of puerto rico's largest bond issuances from 2000 to 2017 , totaling around $31 billion , we found that 16 were issued exclusively to repay or refinance existing debt and to fund operations . according to ratings agency officials and experts in state and local government , states rarely issue debt to fund operations , and many states prohibit this practice . according to former puerto rico officials and experts on puerto rico's economy , high demand for puerto rico debt and the government development bank for puerto rico ( gdb ) facilitating rising debt levels enabled puerto rico to continue to use debt to finance operations . puerto rico issued a relatively large amount of debt , given the size of its population . additionally , according to gdb's audited financial statements , gdb did not reflect loan losses in its audited financial statements until 2014 because it presumed that puerto rico's legislature would repay loans through the general fund or appropriations , as generally required by the acts that approved such loans . based on an analysis of fiscal year 2014 comprehensive annual financial reports of the 50 states and puerto rico , puerto rico had the second highest amount of outstanding debt among states and territories , while its population falls between the 29th and 30th most populous states . by comparison , california , the state with the largest amount of outstanding debt , is the most populated state . various factors drove demand for puerto rico municipal bonds , even as the government's financial condition deteriorated . triple tax exemption: according to a former puerto rico official , federal reserve bank of new york officials , and an expert on puerto rico's economy , puerto rico's municipal bonds were attractive to investors because interest on the bonds was not subjected to federal , state , or local taxes , regardless of where the investors resided . in contrast , investors may be required to pay state or local taxes on interest income earned from municipal securities issued by a state or municipality in which they do not reside . in addition to financing from the municipal bond markets , gdb also provided an intragovernmental source of financing . prior to april 2016 , gdb acted as a fiscal agent , trustee of funds , and intergovernmental lender for the government of puerto rico . gdb issued loans to puerto rico's government agencies and public corporations to support their operations . gdb provided loans to government entities valued at up to 60 percent of gdb's total assets , as shown in figure 11 . in general , these entities did not fulfill the terms of their borrowing agreements with gdb , while they independently accessed the municipal bond market . facing non - repayment of public sector loans , gdb took on debt to maintain liquidity .