gao - 09-904sp . washington , d.c.: september 25 , 2009 . photo: state . in each , several steps were taken to ensure the reliability of the information obtained , including its consistency , completeness , and accuracy . in the first phase , we developed a data collection instrument ( dci ) to obtain a broad list of activities potentially applicable to our review as well as a number of key general characteristics of the activities including , for example , overall goals , how the program prepares participants to collaborate across department lines , agencies involved , and general information about participation levels . we validated the dci by conducting pretests of the instrument with points of contact ( pocs ) in four agencies . these pretests included in - depth probing on the clarity of instrument , the criteria for including activities in the instrument , respondent burden , and usability of the instrument spreadsheet . the gao engagement team staff worked with their technical advisors to revise the dci as appropriate to address issues that arose over these topics during the pretesting process . a key element of this first phase of data collection was defining the criteria to guide agency pocs in determining the appropriate professional development activities for submission . these criteria were included in the instrument itself , with instructions to the pocs to include all programs open to their staff that met all of the following four criteria: ( 1 ) the activity explicitly prepares federal civilian and / or military personnel to collaborate with personnel of other federal departments . in particular , the activity: ( a ) can involve personnel of other entities — such as contractors or ngos — or can include only personnel from the poc's department ; ( b ) may be provided by the poc's department or it may be provided by another organization ; and ( c ) must prepare personnel for interagency collaboration . pocs were not to include activities that focused solely on intraagency collaboration ( eg , collaboration among dhs component agencies or among other services within dod ) . pocs were asked about the sources of counts of participants , how these counts had been stored , whether they had been checked for accuracy , and other topics relevant to verifying the reliability of these data . all of the participation data used in the present report were judged reliable for the purpose of establishing approximate levels of participation in the national security collaboration activities . as part of the data collection instrument used in phase i , we asked agency officials to describe how each activity they submitted was intended to improve the ability of national security personnel to collaborate across agency lines . we provide further description of these groups in figure 1 . additionally , six of the eight agencies represented on the executive steering committee established by the executive order — dod , dhs , justice , commerce , state , and doe — identified training related to the national security professional development ( nspd ) initiative .