washington state . in the november 2010 financial statements and federal compliance report for the drinking water srf program , auditors found significant deficiencies in the department of health's internal control . as a result , they recommended that the department of health train employees on financial reporting preparation and requirements ; establish and follow internal controls , including an appropriate , independent review of the financial statements and related schedules ; and establish policies and procedures related to the preparation of the year - end financial statements . the department of health concurred with the finding , and stated that it would take appropriate action . in the corresponding report for the clean water srf program , auditors found no internal control weaknesses . to meet our mandate to comment on recipient reports , we have continued monitoring recipient - reported data , including data on jobs funded . for this report , we focused our review on srf program funds and epa and state efforts to conduct data quality reviews and identify and remediate reporting problems . according to epa officials , the overall quality of the states' srf data on recovery.gov , which epa officials have checked each quarter , is stable . the officials said that the states' initial unfamiliarity with a newly developed reporting system has been resolved , the federalreporting.gov help desk has improved , and guidance issued by omb has clarified reporting issues over time . during the seventh round of reporting , which ended on march 31 , 2011 , epa officials continued to perform data quality checks as they had in previous quarters . specifically , epa used data from the agency's grants database , contracts database , and financial management system to compare with recipient - reported data . these systems contain authoritative data for every award made to the states , including the award identification number , award date , award amount , outlays , treasury account symbol codes , and recipient names . according to epa officials , they use the agency data to ensure that recipient - reported information for a given award corresponds with the information on epa's official award documents . epa staff can raise questions about any inconsistent data through the federalreporting.gov system . state recipients may make appropriate changes to the data through the end of the reporting period , and after public release , during the continuous correction cycle . according to epa officials , this process has resolved any questions and comments from epa's reviews . to facilitate its oversight of state - reported data , epa required states to use its clean water benefits reporting ( cbr ) system and program benefits reporting ( pbr ) system to report on certain recovery act project information , such as the project name , contract date , construction start , recovery act funding , jobs created or retained , and project purpose and anticipated benefits . ( see fig . in los alamos , new mexico , city officials used clean water srf program funds to install facilities to recycle water at the city's wastewater treatment plant ; the recycled water will be used as washwater — water that is used in the plant to clean equipment ( see fig .