tourists . according to the cnmi government , tourists from certain countries may enter the cnmi as part of its entry permit waiver program . the program allows eligible participants to enter for tourism or business for up to 90 days without a visitor entry permit . noncitizens who are ineligible for a waiver may apply for a visitor entry permit , which is valid for a single entry for 30 days . visitors entering the cnmi with a visitor entry permit must have a valid passport and a verified round - trip itinerary and must have either a cnmi sponsor or acceptable proof of the financial means to support the visit . according to the cnmi government , information on visitor permit applicants from china is collected and reviewed by the cnmi under the electronic visitor entry permit program . no other countries have asked to participate in the program . in addition , japanese , korean , and certain other tourists ages 55 and above may enter for up to 90 days under a comity entry permit for citizens of countries that provide a comparable permit to cnmi residents . foreign investors . the cnmi currently has a foreign investor permit available for an indefinite period of time for individuals who submit evidence of good moral character and who meet all of the requirements of the foreign investment certificate . foreign investors in the cnmi must maintain an investment of at least $250,000 by an individual in a single investment or $100,000 per person in an aggregate investment exceeding $2 million . the cnmi also offers a retiree investor entry permit requiring a minimum investment of $100,000 in residential property ( or $75,000 on the islands of tinian or rota ) by an applicant 55 years or older . in addition , the cnmi's long - term business entry permit for holders of a long - term business certificate is valid for 2 years and requires an investment of at least $150,000 in a public organization or at least $250,000 in a private investment . they also must provide a security deposit of $25,000 . the cnmi also offers a regular - term business entry permit . immediate relatives of aliens may obtain an entry permit if they satisfy other requirements of cnmi law and can post a cash bond in an amount of twice the cost of return travel . noncitizens may apply for entry into the united states as either immigrants intending to reside permanently or as nonimmigrants . the immigrant categories include various employment - based categories for admission to the united states as lawful permanent residents , who are permitted to work in the united states as part of their immigration status . the nonimmigrant categories for temporary admission include diplomats , visitors for business or pleasure , treaty investors , students , journalists , teachers , fiancés or fiancées of u.s. citizens , extraordinary artists or athletes , and workers who meet certain requirements , among others . as a general rule , nonimmigrants temporarily admitted for an employment - based purpose are authorized to work only in the authorized position ; lawful permanent residents and other immigrants may work for any employer .