dot had no comments on this report . results of this analysis are not generalizable . we conducted this performance audit from april 2016 to may 2017 in accordance with the generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . public transportation provides many groups with wide - ranging benefits . those served include transportation disadvantaged populations , such as “low - income individuals” . congress created the jarc program in the 1998 transportation equity act for the 21st century ( tea - 21 ) to support national welfare - reform goals , including helping adults meet new work requirements to receive federal assistance . a purpose of the program was to improve low - income individuals' ability to access jobs and job - related needs by providing grants to states and localities for the provision of additional or expanded transportation services . under tea - 21 , jarc was a discretionary program , with projects selected by fta for funding through a competitive process or congressionally designated for funding . figure 1 provides a timeline of subsequent surface transportation authorizations that affected the program . in 2005 , the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act — a legacy for users ( safetea - lu ) changed jarc into a formula program . fta apportioned dedicated program funds to states for projects in small urbanized and rural areas , and to large urbanized areas , based on a statutory formula . state transportation agencies were required to be jarc designated recipients for small urbanized and rural areas . designated recipients for large urbanized areas include major transit agencies and metropolitan planning organizations . safetea - lu also required that designated recipients develop and conduct a competitive selection process for their projects , and competitively allocate funds to subrecipients . after projects were selected , designated recipients had to apply to fta to fund the projects . fta awarded grants to designated recipients and funds were obligated at the time of award . figure 2 below provides an overview of the jarc grants process under safetea - lu . program - eligible activities included , among others: late - night and weekend transit service , expansion of fixed - route public transit routes ( eg , bus routes ) , ride - sharing activities , local car loan programs , or capital expenditures such as vehicle purchases to support a transit service . in fiscal year 2012 , the last year before the program was consolidated , fta apportioned approximately $176.5 million to urbanized and rural areas . funds were available for obligation for 3 years from the time of apportionment . jarc funds remain subject to the program requirements that were in place at the time the funds were apportioned . in 2012 , the jarc program was one of several fta grant programs that map - 21 changed or did not renew .