( see app . ii for a sample insurance claims history report. ) insurance industry representatives told us aggregated claims data provided by specialty cras are extremely useful in making coverage and rate determinations . they noted , for example , that past losses are the best indicator of future driving risk and thus are useful to firms that underwrite auto insurance . banks and credit unions frequently assess applicants of new checking and other deposit accounts using products offered by resellers such as chexsystems , a specialty cra that is a subsidiary of efunds . chexsystems compiles information from banks and credit unions on accounts that have been closed due to account misconduct such as overdrafts , insufficient funds activity , returned checks , bank fraud , and check forgery . the company also aggregates available driver's license information from state departments of motor vehicles , and receives information from check - printing companies on check order histories , which can help identify fraud . banks we spoke with said that the name and identifying information of a customer seeking to open a new deposit account is typically run through the chexsystems database . the reports provided back to the financial institution by chexsystems typically include identifying information , as well as information useful in assessing an applicant's risk , such as the applicant's history of check orders and the source and details of any account misconduct . ( see app . ii for a sample deposit account history report. ) financial institutions use data purchased from information resellers to comply with legal requirements ; detect , prevent , and investigate fraud ; identify risks associated with prospective clients ; and locate debtors or shareholders . financial institutions we spoke with frequently use products provided by information resellers to comply with patriot act requirements . congress intended these provisions to help prevent terrorists and other criminals from using the u.s. financial system to fund terrorism and launder money . the act requires financial institutions to develop procedures to assure the identity of new customers . many resellers offer products that verify and validate a new customer's identity by comparing information the customer provided to the financial institution with information aggregated from public and private sources . fcra provides enforcement authority to a state's chief law enforcement officer , or any other designated officer or agency , although federal agencies have the right to intervene in any state - initiated action . in addition , glba allows states to enforce their own information security and privacy laws , including those that provide greater protections than glba , as long as the state laws are not inconsistent with requirements under the federal law . several states , including connecticut , north dakota , and vermont , have enacted restrictions on the sharing of financial information that are stricter than glba . states can also enforce their own laws related to unfair or deceptive acts or practices to the extent the laws do not conflict with federal law . since 1972 , ftc has initiated numerous formal enforcement actions against at least 20 information resellers for violating fcra and , in some cases , the ftc act .