below are examples of such problems . south runway . this runway was recently built on ramstein air base in order to upgrade the base's capabilities in support of overseas missions , including those in iraq and afghanistan . however , the runway lights are adversely affected by a construction defect that allows groundwater to collect in the underground ducts and manholes that contain electrical components used to control the lights . the intrusion of water has damaged electrical components resulting in power outages to the lights . these lights are crucial for operations because they allow aircraft to land during times of extremely limited visibility . according to the air force , because of the lighting failures , aircraft could not land during periods of limited visibility from november through december 2007 and flights were diverted to other bases in europe . portable lights have been used to temporarily resolve the problem . additionally , water is pumped from the manholes as an ongoing maintenance activity that according to air force officials , has cost about $65,000 to date . finally , during rainy periods , several large ponds developed between the south runway and adjacent runways and taxiways because of poor water drainage . hindrance claims . as a result of delays to the project , the air force expects that contractors will submit claims for additional costs incurred from being hindered in their performance . as of june 1 , 2008 , lbb - kaiserslautern had forwarded change order requests for contractor hindrances totaling $8.2 million ( 5.4 million euros ) to the air force . however , the air force has denied the requests because it contends that they are not substantiated . in anticipation of contractors making formal hindrance claims — that must meet a prescribed legal standard and would be adjudicated through the german courts — the air force has retained a consultant to evaluate the history of the project and prepare the air force's claims defense strategy . at this time , the air force's potential exposure to claims is unknown . concrete cracking . long cracks have been identified by the air force at various locations on concrete floors of the kmcc subsequent to our 2007 site visit . a german court appointed an expert consultant to determine the severity of the cracks and identify their causes . the consultant's report , issued in march 2008 , indicates that joints will need to be cut into the floor to keep additional cracks from occurring . lbb - kaiserslautern subsequently initiated design work to detail the scope of the repairs . the air force expects that lbb - kaiserslautern will award a contract for the repairs in july 2008 . at this time , the cost of repairs is unknown . ( see fig . 3 for an example of these cracks ) . air force personnel costs for staff managing the kmcc . according to the air force , a team of 29 military , civilian , and contractor personnel manage the kmcc construction project . they are responsible for financial management , claims management , design and construction management , and stakeholder operations . this team comprises 6 military officers and enlisted personnel , 10 civil service employees , and 13 contracted employees .