this led to the formation of the mdeb . its mission is to review and make recommendations on mda's comprehensive acquisition strategy to the deputy secretary of defense . it is also to provide the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics , with a recommended strategic program plan and a feasible funding strategy based on business case analysis that considers the best approach to fielding integrated missile defense capabilities in support of joint mda and warfighter objectives . the mdeb will be assisted by four standing committees . these committees , who are chaired by senior - level officials from the office of the secretary of defense and the joint staff , could play an important oversight role as they are expected to make recommendations to the mdeb , which in turn , will recommend courses of action to the under secretary of defense and the director , mda as appropriate . although the mdeb is expected to exercise some oversight of mda , it will not have access to all the information normally available to dod oversight bodies . for other major defense acquisition programs , the defense acquisition board has access to critical information because before a program can enter the system development and demonstration phase of the acquisition cycle , statute requires that certain information be developed . however , in 2002 , the secretary of defense deferred application of dod policy that , among other things , require major defense programs to obtain approval before advancing from one phase of the acquisition cycle to another . because mda does not yet follow this cycle , and has not yet entered system development and demonstration , it has not triggered certain statutes requiring the development of information that the defense acquisition board uses to inform its decisions . for example , most major defense acquisition programs are required by statute to obtain an independent verification of life - cycle cost estimates prior to beginning system development and demonstration , and / or production and deployment . independent life - cycle cost estimates provide confidence that a program is executable within estimated cost . although mda plans to develop unit cost for selected block assets and to request that dod's cost analysis improvement group verify the unit costs , the agency does not yet plan to do so for a block cost estimate . statute also requires an independent verification of a system's suitability for and effectiveness on the battlefield through operational testing before a program can proceed beyond low - rate initial production . after testing is completed , the director for operational test and evaluation assesses whether the test was adequate to support an evaluation of the system's suitability and effectiveness for the battlefield , whether the test showed the system to be acceptable , and whether any limitations in suitability and effectiveness were noted . however , a comparable assessment of the bmds assets being fielded will not be available to the mdeb as mda conducts primarily developmental tests of its assets with some operational test objectives . as noted earlier , developmental tests do not provide sufficient data for operational test officials to make such an assessment of bmds .