we agree . opm also wrote that hr systems at all shared service centers have the functionality to notify supervisors when an employee's probationary period is ending . however , as our report notes , even though opm considers having a tool in place to notify supervisors that a probationary period is ending to be a leading practice , not all agencies have implemented that practice . accordingly , we have clarified the recommendation so that it calls on opm to educate agencies on the benefits and availability of automated notifications to alert supervisors . opm partially concurred with our recommendation to use the results of various surveys such as the fevs and other information sources to help determine the extent to which its tools and guidance for dealing with poor performers are cost - effectively meeting agencies' needs . specifically , opm said it would use relevant data from these resources to inform decisions about content and distribution methods for the material opm makes available to agencies . at the same time , opm noted that the information contained in these surveys and other data sources had certain limitations and may not always be relevant . we agree and have clarified the recommendation accordingly . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the director of the office of personnel management , the chairman of the merit systems protection board , as well as to the appropriate congressional committees and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2757 or goldenkoffr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi . we were asked to examine the rules and trends relating to the review and dismissal of employees for poor performance . our objectives were to ( 1 ) describe and compare avenues for addressing poor performance , including the formal procedures required when dismissing employees for poor performance ; ( 2 ) describe issues that can affect an agency's response to poor performance ; ( 3 ) determine trends in dismissals and other agency actions taken for poor performance since 2004 ; and ( 4 ) assess the extent to which opm provides the policy , guidance , and training that agencies say they need to address poor performance . to describe and compare avenues for addressing poor performance , including the formal procedures required when dismissing employees for poor performance , we reviewed relevant sections of title 5 of the united states code ( title 5 ) and office of personnel management ( opm ) regulations to describe the process for addressing poor performance in the competitive , excepted , and senior executive services .