surveys . for our third objective , to obtain perceptions of military medical students regarding active - duty service obligations , including their effect on recruitment and retention , we conducted two web - based surveys with a generalizable sample of current scholarship and university medical students to obtain information on the students' knowledge of the current program and willingness to accept different lengths of service obligations or a change to a consecutive service obligation model ( see table 1 ) . one survey was administered to current scholarship medical students , while the other was administered to current university medical students . the questions in both surveys were largely the same . ( no change in the service obligation for the medical residency. ) no don't know additional service obligations and incentives c. an additional 1-year service obligation for attending usuhs and additional cash incentives ? ( no change in the service obligation for the medical residency. ) na 19.4 95 confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) d. an additional 2-year service obligation for attending usuhs and additional cash incentives ? ( no change in the service obligation for the medical residency. ) no don't know e. service obligations served one after the other ? for example , a service obligation of 7 years for attending usuhs and a 4- year military residency has two service obligations – 7 years for usuhs and 3 years for the residency . service obligations served one after the other in this example would result in a term of 10 years . f. a 7-year active - duty commitment followed by a 2-year selected reserve commitment ? currently , usuhs graduates may be subject to an individual ready reserve commitment after the completion of their active - duty service obligation . with a selected reserve commitment , reservists typically drill about 1 weekend a month and 2 weeks a year , and may be activated in support of military operations . ( no change in the service obligation for the medical residency ) if ‘no' or ‘don't know' to questions 4a , 4b , 4c , 4d , 4e , or 4f which of the following funding options , if any , would you have pursued instead of attending usuhs ? ( check all that apply ) national health service corps scholarship program 19.0 95 confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) . in addition to the contact named above , lori atkinson ( assistant director ) , adam howell - smith ( analyst in charge ) , taylor bright , timothy carr , breanne cave , alexandra gonzalez , caitlin jackson , ronald la due lake , won ( danny ) lee , kirsten leikem , amie lesser , amanda miller , dae b . park , stephanie santoso , and lillian yob made key contributions to this report . defense health care: dod's proposed plan for oversight of graduate medical education programs . gao - 19-338 . washington , d.c.: february 28 , 2018 .