reg . gao , general aviation security: increased federal oversight is needed , but continued partnership with the private sector is critical to long - term success , gao - 05-144 ( washington , d.c.: nov. 10 , 2004 ) . had not conducted an overall systematic assessment of threats to , or vulnerabilities of , general aviation to determine how to better prepare against terrorist threats , and recommended that they develop a plan for implementing a risk management approach to help identify threats to and vulnerabilities of general aviation security . we also reported that there were limitations in the monitoring of flight student programs , prior to tsa's assumption of this responsibility from the department of justice , and made a recommendation to strengthen that oversight . dhs concurred with our recommendations and has taken steps that address them , such as conducting a comprehensive risk assessment for aviation and surface transportation , including general aviation . in may 2011 , we also reported on physical security measures that 13 general aviation airports have in place to prevent unauthorized access . the 13 airports we visited had multiple security measures in place to protect against unauthorized access , although the specific measures and potential vulnerabilities varied across the airports . dhs concurred with the observations in our report . you asked us to assess the status of tsa and industry efforts to address general aviation security . we selected these airports based on their geographic dispersion ( southern california , north texas , and central florida ) as well as variation in the types of general aviation operations present ( such as charter and private operations ) and size of aircraft based at each airport . while the information gathered from the interviews is nongeneralizable to all general aviation operators , it provided important perspective to our analysis . as part of this work , we assessed the reliability of tsa data in its performance and results information system ( paris ) by interviewing tsa officials and reviewing documentation on controls implemented to ensure the integrity of the data in the database and found these data to be sufficiently reliable for use in this report . to identify any actions tsa and general aviation aircraft operators have taken to enhance security and how tsa has obtained information on the implementation of the operators' actions , we examined documentation on tsa's inspection processes for monitoring implementation of aircraft operator security programs , and on tsa processes for obtaining information on voluntary security initiatives implemented by general aviation operators not covered by tsa security programs , such as guidance for tsa personnel who conduct outreach to general aviation operators . we reviewed a report conducted on behalf of dhs examining the potential damage that could be caused by different types of general we also reviewed the methodology and assumptions aviation aircraft . associated with this report and found them to be reasonable and well documented . we also interviewed tsa officials on efforts to interact with general aviation associations as a means to obtain information on security initiatives implemented by general aviation operators , including the agency's interaction with members of the aviation security advisory committee .