( see app . ii for dod's comments ) . while osd has taken steps to evaluate the effectiveness of the sexual assault prevention and response training provided to dod servicemembers , training programs cannot be assessed because osd's strategic plans and draft oversight framework do not contain measures against which to benchmark performance . as we reported in august 2008 , dod's sexual assault prevention and response training was not consistently administered or evaluated for effectiveness . accordingly , we recommended that dod undertake an evaluation of the department's training programs . to its credit , osd's training subcommittee reviewed the military services' training policies and found that they continue to provide initial and refresher training for all personnel . however , it also found that a greater level of detail was needed in policy to guide the execution of training requirements . osd's training subcommittee developed an action plan for fiscal year 2009 that included visits to selected military installations to review sexual assault prevention and response training programs . nevertheless , osd's draft oversight framework does not include performance measures , thus limiting osd's ability to assess the effectiveness of training programs and other initiatives . osd officials , as part of their recent strategic planning efforts , have acknowledged the need for and are planning to develop a standard set of dod - wide performance measures over the next few years for dod sexual assault prevention and response programs . however , they have stated that these performance measures will not be established until at least the second year of dod's 3- year implementation plan for the oversight framework . until these measures are established , we continue to assert that osd cannot ensure that the department's sexual assault prevention and response training effectively imparts an awareness of the subject matter to servicemembers . dod has not implemented our recommendation to evaluate the military services' processes for staffing key installation - level program positions to ensure that they have the ability and resources to fully carry out their responsibilities . in fiscal year 2008 , osd and the military services examined program staffing processes during osd's assessments of selected military installations , and similarly concluded that dod's policy on selection criteria and scope of duty for key program personnel should be further evaluated . however , osd officials stated that they had not taken action to address their findings because personnel from the congressionally mandated defense task force on sexual assault in the military services advised osd that they would be making related recommendations in their december 2009 report to congress . further details about our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from february 2009 to february 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .