all the agencies agreed with the recommendations made to them . specifically: in its written comments , hhs stated that cdc will draft guidance to reduce the potential for duplication or overlap before awarding a grant or cooperative agreement . omb generally concurred with these recommendations . in our 2013 report , we found that cofar needed to establish an implementation schedule and track progress toward priorities to help pinpoint performance shortfalls and suggest midcourse corrections , including any needed adjustments to future priorities and milestones . in february 2013 , cofar posted its original priorities for fiscal years 2013 through 2015 to the u.s. chief financial officers council website . these priorities were revised and reposted in december 2013 . according to omb staff , the priorities were developed through a series of cofar meetings to ensure that the priorities reflected the way grants management issues should be framed . omb staff told us that the priorities for fiscal years 2016 through 2017 remain largely unchanged from those for fiscal years 2013 through 2015 since cofar has a multiyear focus . cofar's publicly stated priorities are shown in figure 4 . the most significant changes were the elimination of “validated public financial data” from cofar's priorities for fiscal years 2013 through 2015 and the addition of “spending transparency” as a new priority for fiscal years 2016 through 2017 . to address each priority , cofar identified challenges , accomplishments and short - and long - term deliverables to show the implementation status of each priority in its priority document . although cofar released its updated priorities for fiscal years 2016 through 2017 , it continues to face the same challenges that we identified in our 2013 report . as of september 2016 , cofar had not yet released to the public an implementation schedule that includes key elements such as performance targets , mechanisms to monitor , evaluate , and report on progress made toward stated priorities , and council members who can be held accountable for those priorities . for example , in the workforce development priority , cofar reported finalizing and publishing a “grants 101” course outline and content of several modules for the federal workforce as an accomplishment and short - term deliverable . although cofar developed and implemented the first three online training course modules , a mechanism does not exist to determine the extent to which the courses are used . according to omb staff , they have not conducted a survey for users of the training , although they reported having received favorable feedback from some users . we have found that agencies engaged in collaborative efforts need to create the means to monitor and evaluate their efforts to better identify areas for improvement . reporting on these activities can help decision makers , as well as stakeholders , to obtain feedback for improving both policy and operational effectiveness . in our 2013 report , we recommended that the director of omb , in collaboration with the members of cofar , develop and make publicly available an implementation schedule that includes performance targets , council members who can be held accountable for priorities , and mechanisms to monitor , evaluate , and report on results . omb generally concurred with our recommendation .