ยง 2366a and b . provides notification of unit cost breaches above a certain threshold provides notification of cost or schedule changes above a certain threshold 10 u.s.c ยง 2433 and 2433a . notification must be provided to congress when the program acquisition unit cost or average procurement unit cost increases by at least 15 percent over the current baseline estimate or 30 percent over the original baseline estimate . notification must be provided to congress when there is a schedule change that will cause a delay of more than 6 months ; an increase in the expected development cost or full life - cycle cost for the program by at least 15 percent ; or a significant , adverse change in the expected performance of the major automated information system to be acquired . we conducted an analysis to determine whether data provided by department of defense ( dod ) components were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of determining the number , total acquisition cost , and cost performance of dod's current acquisition category ( acat ) ii and iii programs . for our analysis , we conducted electronic and manual testing on data for all programs reported by components in response to our request for completion of a data collection instrument ( dci ) and compared cost data for a non - generalizable sample of programs to source documents when available . we also reviewed relevant dod and component acquisition policy , and interviewed knowledgeable officials . we identified reliability issues with the data for about 60 percent of the programs components initially reported to us . as a result , we determined that the data provided by dod components were not sufficiently reliable to identify the number of current acat ii and iii programs , their estimated total acquisition cost , or the cost performance of dod's acat ii and iii programs . to assess the accuracy and completeness of the acat ii and iii program data reported by dod components , we electronically tested the data for: values outside the designated range of values for acat ii and iii programs , defined per dod acquisition policy ; obvious calculation or data entry errors ( for example , individual cost elements do not sum to total reported ) ; missing data in baseline or current cost estimate data elements , including estimates for research , development , test , and evaluation ; procurement ; military construction ; and acquisition operation and maintenance , as well as the total acquisition cost estimate , and base year ; and missing data in program descriptive data elements , such as acat level , milestone decision authority , or commodity type . additionally , we compared cost data for our sample of 170 programs to source documents when available . specifically , for each program in our sample , we first requested and reviewed original and current acquisition program baselines ( apb ) to determine whether or not they reflected the actual baseline from program start and the current apb based on the approval date of the apb and relevant schedule milestones that trigger the development of an apb or an apb revision in accordance with dod acquisition policy .