we are making four recommendations in this report . we recommend that the secretary of energy , working with the administrator of the national nuclear security administration , take the following two actions . in the comments , which doe transmitted , doe raised concerns about the first finding and recommendation , stated it accepted the second , agreed with the third , and said it had already implemented the fourth , as discussed below . contractors perform regular self - assessments . doe's safeguards and security order also requires relevant security offices to comprehensively survey contractors' operations for safeguards and security regularly . in addition , doe's office of enterprise assessments is to conduct independent assessments that appraise , among other things , doe and nnsa physical security systems , personnel security , protective forces , and nuclear material control and accountability practices to identify gaps and vulnerabilities . according to doe office of enterprise assessments officials , they assess security at doe and nnsa category i sites about every 2 years . in general , doe and nnsa have employed similar processes to develop and produce their annual security reports . doe's office of the associate under secretary for environment , health , safety , and security and nnsa's office of security operations and performance assurance within the office of the associate administrator for defense nuclear security coordinate each agency's report development effort . according to doe and nnsa officials in those offices , in the summer of each calendar year the agencies request information from sites containing category i or category ii special nuclear material . the agencies give their sites about 3 weeks to respond to these requests and to provide the requested documentation . officials said that once the responses are received , doe office of environment , health , safety , and security and nnsa office of defense nuclear security officials synthesize the relevant sites' responses and respectively develop the doe and nnsa draft reports , which then are submitted for review by general counsel and the relevant under secretaries , including the nnsa administrator . nnsa then sends its report to doe for transmittal , and the secretary of energy transmits both reports to congress , along with his certification . doe's and nnsa's 2014 and 2015 annual reports on the security of nuclear facilities holding category i and category ii quantities of special nuclear material did not fully meet the definition of quality information in the 2014 federal internal control standards . under the 2014 federal standards for internal control , management should use quality information to achieve the entity's objectives . the information and communication standard defines quality information as appropriate , current , complete , accurate , accessible , and provided on a timely basis . doe's and nnsa's reports met certain aspects of the definition of quality information in that they were based on current information and were accessible . however , the reports did not always contain complete information on the important assessments that the agencies used in their certification of sites' security . moreover , they were not provided in a timely manner as called for by both the 1999 and 2014 federal internal control standards .