ii ) . va agreed that it could do more in delivering its benefits , and concurred with our recommendations . in addition , va provided technical clarifications to the report , which we have incorporated into this report where appropriate . as part of its comments , va suggested that we use statistical data from its national survey of veterans 2000 on veteran homeownership and income , rather than the general population . va did not provide a copy of this unpublished survey , and we were unable to verify these data to determine their validity . therefore , we did not include them in this report . to address the issues discussed in this report , we reviewed the statute , regulations , annual reports , and informational materials on va's native american veterans direct home loan program as well as our other work and related studies of native american trust land issues . we also interviewed numerous officials in washington , d.c. , and elsewhere with responsibilities for the program or knowledge of indian housing issues . to gain a fuller perspective on native american housing and trust land issues , we interviewed hud officials , who administer block grant and home - loan programs for native americans . we also interviewed an official at the bureau of indian affairs , who is familiar with native american tribes and trust land issues . we gained some perspective on the views of native american veterans by interviewing officials from the national congress of american indians , the national american indian housing council , and the center for minority veterans as well as representatives of the navajo tribe and the oglala sioux tribe . we selected these tribes because they are among the largest in the nation , have completed memorandums of understanding with va , and are served by the two va regional loan centers we visited . to determine if there was a disparity in program participation , we used va data to calculate the number of loans made to native americans on the mainland by each regional loan center in every year since 1992 and compared the results with the number of loans made to native hawaiians and pacific islanders during the same period . to identify the factors contributing to the disparity , we interviewed program officials at va headquarters in washington d.c. , and at four va centers: honolulu , denver , st. paul , and phoenix . we selected these four centers because they are responsible for about 96 percent of all loans made under the program since its inception . during site visits to the st. paul and phoenix centers , we reviewed case files to determine the reasons that loan applications had been rejected and describe contacts with veterans and tribes . to see how income and other program requirements may affect eligibility for the program , we reviewed available census data on native americans' incomes , poverty levels , veteran status , and residency on or near reservations . we also interviewed an official at the one - stop mortgage center in window rock , arizona , to discuss the significance of providing assistance with the mortgage process .