as noted above , we are assessing this guidance . hud partially agreed with these recommendations . since our report , hud has revised the performance reporting requirements for mtw agencies . the office of management and budget ( omb ) approved these revisions on may 31 , 2013 . the new requirements state that mtw agencies are to report standard metrics and report outcome information on the effects of mtw policy changes on residents . hud also provided a standard format to allow analysis and aggregation across agencies for similar activities . we are currently assessing the extent to which these new requirements address our recommendations . furthermore , as we indicated in our 2012 report , while hud had identified some lessons learned on an ad hoc basis , it did not have a systematic process in place for identifying such lessons . as previously noted , obtaining impact information from demonstration programs is critical . since 2000 , hud had identified some activities that could be replicated by other housing agencies . for example , a hud - sponsored contractor developed five case studies to describe issues and challenges involved in implementing mtw . however , these and subsequent efforts had shortcomings . in most cases , the choice of lessons learned was based on the opinions of hud or contracted staff and largely involved anecdotal ( or qualitative ) data rather than quantitative data . because hud had not developed criteria and a systematic process for identifying lessons learned , we reported in 2012 that it was limited in its ability to promote useful practices for broader implementation . thus , we recommended that hud create a process to systematically identify lessons learned . hud agreed and in response , stated that once its revised reporting requirements were implemented , the resulting data would inform an effort to establish lessons learned . consistent with this , hud noted that one purpose of the revised reporting requirements that omb approved in may 2013 was to identify promising practices learned through the mtw demonstration . additionally , according to a hud official , the recently approved reporting requirements will result in more standardized data that hud can verify either through audits or during site visits . legislation has been proposed to expand the number of phas that can participate in the mtw program , and a 2010 hud report recommended expanding the program to up to twice its size . hud had policies and procedures in place to monitor mtw agencies but could have done more to ensure that mtw agencies demonstrated compliance with statutory requirements and to identify possible risks relating to each agency's activities . for example , as noted in our 2012 report , hud had not issued guidance to mtw agencies clarifying key program terms , including definitions of the purposes and statutory requirements of the mtw program . federal internal control standards require the establishment of clear , consistent goals and objectives . agencies also must link each of their activities to one of the three program purposes cited in the mtw authorizing legislation . had occurred in some of the communities affected by the mtw program and indicated that expansion could enable more phas to address local needs and therefore benefit additional communities .