( see fig . one of these unutilized buildings is a 1,000-foot long , two - story former barracks listed as a contributing element to a national historic district . a base official told us that the prolonged nonutilization is both because of the long barracks' inclusion in a national historic district and because the associated buildings require extensive , costly renovations . in some cases , the services reported that the enhanced use leasing and housing privatization authorities have been used to creatively maintain and renovate historic buildings . for example , the old brooke army medical center at fort sam houston went unutilized after the new brooke army medical center opened . army officials stated that an enhanced use lease was negotiated with developers whereby the old brooke army medical center was renovated into usable office space that is currently fully leased to various army tenants . similarly , air force officials stated that section 2878 of title 10 was used on randolph air force base to successfully renovate , repair , and maintain 297 housing units designated as contributing elements to the national historic district located on the base . incoming and outgoing or reduced missions , units , or personnel can leave portions of buildings and structures temporarily underutilized or not utilized while the transition occurs . a building or facility may require renovation to accommodate incoming or changing missions . for example , officials at naval base point loma , california , described two buildings currently not utilized . the first , an empty warehouse , is under consideration to house the navy band , currently located at naval base coronado . if this plan is approved , the warehouse would have to be modified to fit the navy band's mission requirements before the relocation could occur . the second unutilized building is a barracks that has been laid up , or mothballed , because of the reduced number of personnel on the base . in addition , at naval base san diego , units have been consolidated into one building so that another building may be renovated prior to the arrival of a new shipping platform at the base . the navy will be unable to utilize this building during the renovation . in addition , property may be classified as not utilized when a service is waiting for funding for repairs or demolition . for example , lackland air force base has a 48-unit visiting officers' quarters and a student dormitory , both of which are unused because of the presence of mold . the air force has sought funding both to demolish the visiting officers' quarters and to repair the student dormitory ; meanwhile , both of these facilities remain not utilized . in addition , officials at naval base san diego told us that a condemned maintenance repair building is occupied by tenants on the first floor only . the second and third floors have been condemned because of structural conditions and remain unoccupied while the building awaits demolition . the services use similar policies and procedures for responding to requests for space on an installation by other federal agencies and by organizations within dod .