we continue to believe in the value of more collaboration . as of august of last year , the two agencies had begun discussions on ways to increase coordination . strategic human capital planning is the centerpiece of federal agencies' efforts to transform their organizations to meet the governance challenges of the 21st century . generally , strategic workforce planning addresses two critical needs: ( 1 ) aligning an organization's human capital program with its current and emerging mission and programmatic goals and ( 2 ) developing long - term strategies for acquiring , developing , motivating , and retaining staff to achieve programmatic goals . the long - term fiscal outlook and challenges to governance in the 21st century are prompting fundamental reexaminations of what government does , how it does it , and who does it . strategic human capital planning that is integrated with broader organizational strategic planning is critical to ensuring agencies have the talent they need for future challenges . an agency's strategic human capital plan should address the demographic trends that the agency faces with its workforce , especially pending retirements . in 2006 , opm reported that approximately 60 percent of the government's 1.6 million white - collar employees and 90 percent of about 6,000 federal executives will be eligible for retirement over the next 10 years . we have found that leading organizations go beyond a succession planning approach that focuses on simply replacing individuals and engage in broad , integrated succession planning and management efforts that focus on strengthening both current and future organizational capacity to obtain or develop the knowledge , skills , and abilities they need to meet their missions . for example , about one third of the nuclear regulatory commission's ( nrc ) workforce with mission - critical skills will be eligible to retire by 2010 . at the same time , nrc's workforce needs to expand because nrc expects to receive applications for new nuclear power reactors beginning in october 2007 . for further information regarding this statement , please contact j. christopher mihm , managing director , strategic issues , at ( 202 ) 512- 6806 , or mihmj@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include anthony p. lofaro , assistant director ; ami j. ballenger ; thomas m. beall ; crystal m. bernard ; william doherty ; karin k. fangman ; and anthony r. patterson . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . although there is room for further improvement , we found that nrc's human capital planning framework is generally aligned with its strategic goals and coherently identifies the activities needed to achieve a diverse , skilled workforce and an infrastructure that fully supports the agency's mission and goals . the agency's framework included using its human capital authorities , developing a critical skills and gaps inventory tool , and using targets and measures to monitor the composition of its hires and separations . nrc has been effective in recruiting , developing , and retaining a critically skilled workforce , though it is unclear if this trend will continue in the next few years .