pub . 111-23 , ยง 201. technical , cost , and schedule delivery information to mitigate risk . appendix vii provides a list of key boeing suppliers for the kc - 46 program . in addition , the air force has approved the contractor's manufacturing program plan that leverages military modifications on the commercial 767 assembly line with boeing planning to use a manufacturing readiness assessment and production reviews for quality assurance . entering its third year , the kc - 46 development program is , for the most part , progressing as planned even though some concerns exist . the program has an ambitious schedule , particularly with regard to flight testing . while program estimates are essentially unchanged , the development contract cost estimate continues to be above the contract ceiling price , making it essential the government not change kc - 46 requirements . boeing has also allocated management reserves at a high rate which raises concerns because doing so early in a program is often an indicator of future contract performance problems . while the fixed price development contract caps the government's cost liability , it would still behoove the air force to fully understand the causal factors driving the accelerated use of management reserves in order to recognize risks , consider potential trade - offs , and better understand circumstances that could impact on - time delivery to the warfighter . also , improvements to a few aspects of the program's master schedule could make it more complete and robust to further help ensure program success . we are recommending that the secretary of defense take the following two actions on the kc - 46 program . to help understand and monitor the causes of the majority of contractor management reserves being allocated two years into development , the secretary of defense should direct the air force , after boeing has fully resolved the relevant design and technical issues , to analyze the root causes for the rate of expenditure of reserves in order to help the air force fully recognize and mitigate risk areas . to help maintain a more thorough and insightful kc - 46 development schedule , the secretary of defense should direct the air force to address our concerns related to three schedule best practices ( capturing all activities , sequencing all activities , and conducting a schedule risk analysis ) , where we concluded the program's master schedule had only partially met best practice criteria . dod provided us with written comments on a draft of this report which are reprinted in appendix viii . dod concurred with our two recommendations . we also incorporated technical comments from dod as appropriate . regarding the recommendation to analyze the use of management reserves , dod stated that the contractor has performed a root cause analysis and that the program office will monitor , analyze , and report on the use of management reserves . regarding the recommendation to improve the master schedule , dod stated that the air force is taking action to address each of the 3 schedule best practices we cited .