these concerns are not unjustified . for example , we have designated information security a governmentwide high - risk area since 1997 . our latest high - risk report noted that progress in strengthening federal information security has been mixed . we assessed the reliability of the gsa advantage ! , itss , and dmlss e - cat data by ( 1 ) performing electronic tests of relevant fields ( for example , we tested for completeness by checking key fields for missing data and checked for accuracy and reasonableness by examining summary statistics for values that were in proper and expected ranges ) and ( 2 ) requesting and reviewing , if available , related program and system design documentation , audit and system reviews , and reports . the results of our assessment showed that the dmlss e - cat data were reliable enough for use in this report . however , the results of our assessment of the gsa advantage ! and itss data were inconclusive in large part because of concerns related to limitations on available documentation and security weaknesses reported in gsa's fiscal year 2000 annual report . nevertheless , we determined that the reliability of the data provided is adequate for the comparative purposes of this report . we will be providing additional information on the gsa advantage ! and itss document limitations in a separate letter . to identify what , if any , obstacles exist for small businesses in conducting electronic procurements with the federal government , we performed a literature search . we also interviewed selected sbdcs , ptacs , ecrcs , and meps about their clients' experiences with obstacles and officials from sba's office of advocacy and office of government contracting . in addition , we obtained comments from organizations representing or working with small businesses to obtain their members' views on obstacles . the following are the organizations that provided information on small business obstacles: association of government marketing assistance specialists coalition for government procurement contract services association of america national black chamber of commerce national small business united u.s. pan asian american chamber of commerce small business legislative council u.s. hispanic chamber of commerce we contacted 13 other organizations , such as the u.s. chamber of commerce and the national women's business council , but they did not provide us with any information on obstacles small businesses had in performing electronic procurements with the federal government . in addition , to review what steps four federal business assistance programs have taken to educate businesses on electronic commerce and the extent to which they have coordinated their efforts , we interviewed headquarters staff of the programs and reviewed applicable program documents , such as grant and cooperative agreements and contracts . we also interviewed officials from 24 local and regional offices of these programs and obtained and reviewed available documentation from these offices . we judgmentally selected six offices from each program based on the following: for each program , we chose at least one office from each of the four u.s. census regions . overall , we chose at least two local offices from each census division .