supplemental appropriations . eight of the 10 states in our review made use of supplemental appropriations when the funds appropriated to statewide accounts or agency budgets at the beginning of the fiscal year were insufficient . when states' general funds served as the source of supplemental appropriations , these funds were unavailable to spend on other budget areas . statewide multipurpose reserve accounts , such as budget stabilization funds ( also referred to as rainy day funds ) , could also be tapped in the event that funds were not available through other means . a few states expanded the conditions for which budget stabilization funds could be tapped to include similar unanticipated expenses not directly related to revenue shortfalls or budget deficits . for example , although initially intended to offset revenue shortfalls , west virginia's budget stabilization fund was subsequently modified to allow the state legislature to make appropriations from the fund for emergency revenue needs caused by natural disasters , among other things . however , budget officials from several states in our review told us that it was uncommon to access budget stabilization funds to cover disaster expenses because their state could generally provide disaster funding from a combination of general fund revenues and spending reductions in other areas . for example , despite having expanded its acceptable uses to include natural disasters , west virginia only accessed its budget stabilization fund once since 2005 to cover disaster - related expenses . similarly , in florida , the state's budget stabilization fund was last used for disaster costs during the 2004 and 2005 hurricane seasons . funding transfers . in addition , nine states in our review had mechanisms to allow designated officials ( eg , the governor , budget director , or a special committee ) to transfer funds within or between agencies or from statewide reserve accounts after the start of the fiscal year . for example , in indiana , if funds within an agency's budget are insufficient to cover the unexpected costs of a disaster , a special finance board can authorize a transfer of funds from one agency to another . in addition , the state's budget director can transfer appropriations within an agency's accounts if needed for disaster assistance . the authority to release funds from disaster accounts varied by state and resided with the governor , the legislature , or special committees . as we have previously reported , a state where the legislature is in session for only part of the year might give the governor more control over the release of disaster funds.legislature is out of session , the presiding officers of the legislature can agree in writing to suspend the $1 million limit placed on the governor's disaster spending authority . for example , in the event that the alaska also , if a state legislature already appropriated a portion of general fund or other revenues to a disaster account , the governor or budget director can exert greater control over access to the reserves . for example , in california , a gubernatorial emergency declaration grants the state's director of finance the authority to tap into any appropriation in any department for immediate disaster response needs .