pub . 111-148 , tit . vi , subtit . h , 124 stat . 119 , 782-804 ( 2010 ) ( codified at 42 u.s.c . the eja was enacted as part of the patient protection and affordable care act , which was signed into law on march 23 , 2010. o annually collect and disseminate data regarding elder abuse , neglect , and exploitation of elders in coordination with justice ; o develop and disseminate information on best practices and provide training for carrying out adult protective services ; o conduct research related to the provision of adult protective o provide technical assistance to states and others that provide or fund the provision of adult protective services ; o establish 10 elder abuse , neglect , and exploitation forensic centers , in consultation with justice , that would ( 1 ) conduct research on forensic markers for elder abuse , neglect , or exploitation , and methodologies for determining when and how health care , emergency , social and protective , and legal service providers should intervene and when these cases should be reported to law enforcement ; ( 2 ) develop forensic expertise regarding elder abuse , neglect , and exploitation ; and ( 3 ) use the data they have collected to develop , in coordination with justice , the capacity of geriatric health care professionals and law enforcement authorities to collect forensic evidence , including evidence needed to determine if elder abuse , neglect , or exploitation has occurred . § 2042 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( c ) , 124 stat . 794 ( codified at 42 u.s.c . § 1397m - 1 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( c ) ) . § 2042 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( d ) , 124 stat . 794 ( codified at 42 u.s.c . § 2042 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( e ) , 124 stat . 794 ( codified at 42 u.s.c . § 1397m - 1 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( e ) ) . grants to state and local governments for demonstration projects that test methods and training to detect or prevent elder abuse or financial exploitation ; and an elder justice coordinating council and an advisory board on elder abuse , neglect , and exploitation to develop priorities for the elder justice field , coordinate federal activities , and provide recommendations to congress . currently , the elder justice coordinating council consists of the following federal agencies: consumer financial protection bureau , corporation for national and community service , department of health and human services , department of housing and urban development , department of justice , department of labor , department of the treasury , department of veterans affairs , federal trade commission , postal inspection service , and social security administration . coordination among federal agencies is also a feature of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act , which established cfpb , requiring it to coordinate its consumer protection efforts of older cfpb's office for older americans is adults with other federal agencies .