cerp projects . as table 4 shows , most cerp funds have been used to purchase land — 210,642 acres over the last 8 years . the state is responsible for acquiring all land for cerp projects ; the federal agencies have not purchased any land for cerp . the corps and florida spent $533 million on support activities primarily to meet the administrative framework requirements of wrda 2000 . while federal agencies and florida provided about $2.3 billion during fiscal years 1999 through 2006 for cerp projects , this amount was about $1.2 billion less than they had estimated needing for these projects over this period . although the federal contribution was significantly less than expected when the cerp project list was developed in 1999 , the state contribution increased significantly later in the period , partially closing the funding shortfall . land acquisition . the regulations also state that funding constraints may be taken into account in determining the timing and order of projects . in addition , cerp program regulations require the corps and the sfwmd to revise the project sequencing that had been originally developed in 2000 to reflect new scientific , technical , and other information . examples of such information include population growth , additional data on the topography of the south florida ecosystem , rainfall data , and existing sources of water and flood controls . according to the regulations , the restoration partners were to conduct model simulations and revise , among other things , their sequencing decisions if the models indicated that changes to the sequence of project implementation were warranted to achieve environmental benefits sooner . the cerp program regulations also required that the sequencing decisions include a consideration of whether the projects , as sequenced , would meet interim goals . these goals were to be established in an agreement signed by the secretaries of the army and the interior and the governor of florida no later than december 2004 . however , when the corps and sfwmd developed the 2005 misp for cerp projects , they did not comply with the requirements of the corps regulations . specifically , the misp was not based on new information because the model used to run the simulations and generate the data — the south florida water management model — had not been updated by the corps as anticipated when the sequencing decisions were made . as a result , the corps and sfwmd staff used outdated modeling data from 1999 . in addition , the secretaries of the army and the interior , and the governor of florida did not sign an agreement that established interim goals for the restoration effort until late april / early may 2007 — over 2 years after the program regulations deadline . consequently , the 2005 misp was developed without the benefit of the interim goals that the regulations required to help guide interagency planning , monitoring , assessment , and project sequencing . because the agencies lacked updated environmental benefits data and lacked interim goals , the 2005 misp for cerp projects was primarily based on an assessment of the technical dependencies and constraints among projects and available funding .