the program had a baseline . based on these criteria , we chose the following systems: navy consolidated afloat networks and enterprise services ; defense logistics agency's defense agencies initiative , increment 2 ; defense health agency's defense healthcare management system modernization . we then analyzed each selected program's it acquisition documentation and compared it to key requirements and risk management and leading practices — including software engineering institute's capability maturity model® integration for acquisition ( cmmi - acq ) practices — to determine the extent to which the programs were implementing these practices . in particular , the requirements management practices we reviewed were: develop an understanding with the requirements providers on the meaning of the requirements , obtain commitment to requirements from project participants , manage changes to requirements as they evolve during the project , maintain bidirectional traceability among requirements and work , and ensure that project plans and work products remain aligned with requirements . specifically , we analyzed program requirements documentation , including requirements management plans , requirements traceability matrices , requirements change forms , technical performance assessments , and requirements board meeting minutes . additionally , we interviewed program officials to obtain additional information about their requirements management practices . the conclusions reached for this objective are not generalizable to the larger population of 34 business and non - business mais programs . design reconfiguration . officials for the air force's base information transport infrastructure wired program reported that its 41 percent cost decrease was due to a reduction in the program's scope when they changed from a base network system to a critical core configuration . in addition , 5 of the programs had experienced cost increases . these cost increases ranged from $2.9 million ( less than 1 percent ) for the army's logistics modernization program increment 2 to $1.5 billion ( 163 percent ) for the army's tactical mission command program . program officials reported a variety of reasons for the increases in planned cost estimates . these reasons included the following: underestimating schedule . officials for the air force's defense enterprise accounting and management system increment 1 program attributed its 60 percent cost increase to underestimating the level of effort that was needed to develop the system within the estimated schedule . for example , the program did not account for software upgrades and , when this effort was added to the schedule to account for the work , the cost increased . contractor issues . officials from the national security agency's key management infrastructure increment 2 program attributed its cost increase of 14 percent to schedule delays caused by the contractor and , as a result , increased funding at the milestone c decision point . underestimating development and test efforts . officials from the army's tactical mission command program attributed the cost increase of 163 percent to higher than expected costs to conduct research and developmental tests . ten of the 15 selected mais programs had experienced changes in their planned schedule estimates , and 5 programs had no changes to their schedule estimates .