different plan provisions . terminations may coincide with factory shutdowns , which often trigger provisions that increase retirement benefits . while the information about pensions in corporate financial statements does not serve the same purpose as the information in form 5500 , it can also be useful to the pbgc . this information is useful in two primary ways: its overall measures of the company's financial condition provide indications about the company's ability to meet its pension obligations . according to pbgc officials , most large plans that were terminated by pbgc were sponsored by companies whose debt was rated below investment grade for a number of years prior to plan termination . though plan asset - to - liability ratios are not dependent on the health of the plan sponsor , participants in underfunded pension plans at financially distressed companies face the risk that the plan sponsor will lack the cash resources to meet the erisa funding requirements . different discount rates . termination liability discount rates have usually been lower than for current liability in recent years , making the present value of termination liability larger . in contrast , a company in a strong financial position is much more likely to be able to make up funding shortfalls . it provides the timeliest public data about pension plans , which may be useful if the company sponsors only one pension plan . within 60 to 90 days from the end of their fiscal years , publicly traded companies must file their financial statements , which provide data based on measurements on the last day of a company's fiscal year . some primary users of corporate financial statements have expressed concerns about the extent to which these reports show how pension plans affect a company's profitability , cash flow , and financial position . this information is particularly important for companies with large pension plans because the greater the value of a company's pension assets relative to the company's market value , the more sensitive its cash flows and profits will be to changes in pension asset values . the information they found often appeared contradictory . for example , while the stock market was falling and some information indicated that the value of companies' pension assets was declining , other information implied that these same assets were increasing in value . in fact , publicly reported values of pension plan assets and liabilities were routinely contradictory . coupled with news of corporate accounting scandals , these apparent contradictions have raised questions about the accuracy and transparency of available information about pension plans . as you requested , this report examines the two main sources of financial information about defined benefit pension plans and analyzes why these sources generate different measures of the financial condition of these plans . the first source is a report , commonly referred to as the form 5500 , which plan sponsors are required to file each year with the agencies that administer federal pension laws . part of the form 5500 report , called schedule b , provides actuarial and other information about a pension plan's assets , liabilities , actuarial assumptions , and employer contributions .