gao - 10-999 . washington , d.c.: september 20 , 2010 . university research: policies for the reimbursement of indirect costs need to be updated . gao - 10-937 . washington , d.c.: september 8 , 2010 . a - 87 workgroup ) . the single audit workgroup comprises representatives from the federal audit community ; federal agency management officials involved in overseeing the single audit process and programs subject to that process ; representatives from the state audit community ; and staff from omb . omb officials tasked the single audit workgroup with developing recommendations for improving the effectiveness of single audits of nonfederal entities that expend federal funds to help identify and reduce improper payments . a summary of our findings and recommendations follows . in june 2007 , which raised significant concerns about the quality of single audits and made recommendations aimed at improving the quality of those audits . process does not include a designated function or entity to monitor whether or how well federal awarding agencies are implementing single audit requirements . without a mechanism in place to monitor on an ongoing basis how the single audit process is implemented governmentwide , omb and federal stakeholders are unable to measure the efficiency and effectiveness of this process or its usefulness as an accountability tool over federal grant awards . we recommended that omb designate an entity or group to ( 1 ) evaluate and comprehensively monitor the single audit process governmentwide , ( 2 ) assess the efficiency and effectiveness of how agencies carry out their single audit responsibilities , and ( 3 ) identify additional guidance and resources needed to carry out single audit requirements . omb has developed workgroups which are currently underway to review ways to improve the single audit process . in june 2010 , the single audit workgroup established by omb pursuant to executive order 13520 made recommendations to omb in four areas to enhance and streamline the single audit process to better support the overall effort to improve federal program accountability and reduce improper payments . however , as discussed in a later section , the related decisions and planning for acting on these recommendations are still in process . the four areas of recommendations included ( 1 ) instilling federal leadership over the single audit process to improve program accountability and reduce improper payments ; ( 2 ) managing risks by refocusing the single audit to include those nonfederal entities that present the greatest risk of improper payments ; ( 3 ) improving the access to information in single audit reports to enhance federal agency follow - up of audit findings and to coordinate single audit and improper payments analysis and results ; and ( 4 ) amending the stated purposes of the single audit act of 1984 , as amended , to emphasize the importance of acting on single audit findings as a way to reduce the risk of improper payments . time frames of the single audit process do not facilitate the timely identification and correction of audit findings.28 29 under the current time frames for identifying and correcting audit findings provided by the single audit act and omb circular no .