( see fig . 1 for a depiction of the clotting factor market. ) shortages of particular clotting factor products occur periodically . because the six manufacturers run at capacity , a decrease in production by any one reduces availability of a particular product and strains the general clotting factor supply . increasing clotting factor production in response to a shortage is difficult . manufacturing clotting factor takes an average of 6 months ; opening an additional plant can take several years . in 2001 , there was a severe shortage of recombinant clotting factor viii when production problems at one manufacturer occurred concurrently with a routine maintenance shutdown by another . many individuals were unable to obtain recombinant products at that time , causing them to rely on plasma clotting factor , straining its supply as well . because some htcs and homecare companies could not obtain the needed clotting factor products from manufacturers , they turned to distributors to obtain alternative products . htcs and homecare companies are able to purchase clotting factor at prices considerably lower than medicare's payment for clotting factor . almost all htcs that provide clotting factor participate in a federal program that allows them to obtain prices from manufacturers that are 35 to 48 percent below awp . homecare companies can obtain prices that range from 22 to 40 percent below awp . while clotting factor shortages can affect providers' ability to procure specific products for their customers , htcs and homecare companies do not generally face higher acquisition prices from manufacturers during periods of product shortages . in an analysis of 2001 and first quarter 2002 data , we found that htcs purchase clotting factor from manufacturers at a 35 to 48 percent discount from awp . the largest discounts are for plasma clotting factor viii products , and the smallest discounts are for recombinant clotting factor viii products , with the discounts for clotting factor ix products falling in between . htcs obtain these substantial discounts through the public health service 340b program , which enables certain federally funded entities to buy drugs directly from manufacturers at discounted prices . the 340b prices , which are updated quarterly , equal a set discount from a manufacturer's price . our analysis of data from 2001 and 2002 shows that homecare companies can also purchase clotting factor from manufacturers at prices substantially below medicare's payment . with prices from 22 to 40 percent below awp , the discounts that homecare companies receive are somewhat less than those received by htcs . like htcs , homecare companies receive the largest discounts on plasma clotting factor viii products and the smallest on recombinant clotting factor viii products , with discounts for clotting factor ix products falling in between . because most htcs obtain their prices through a federal discount program , they are typically protected from price increases during periods of product shortage . according to certain homecare companies and other stakeholders we interviewed , shortages do not result in price fluctuations for homecare companies over the course of the contracts they sign with manufacturers . during shortages , sufficient supplies of particular clotting factor products may not be available directly from manufacturers .