these recommendations are summarized below . strategic analysis and warnings: in 2001 , we reported on the analysis and warnings efforts within dhs's predecessor , the national infrastructure protection center , and identified several challenges that were impeding the development of an effective strategic analysis and warning capability . we reported that a generally accepted methodology for analyzing strategic cyber - based threats did not exist . specifically , there was no standard terminology , no standard set of factors to consider , and no established thresholds for determining the sophistication of attack techniques . we also reported that the center did not have the industry - specific data on factors such as critical systems components , known vulnerabilities , and interdependencies . we therefore recommended that the responsible executive - branch officials and agencies establish a capability for strategic analysis of computer - based threats , including developing a methodology , acquiring expertise , and obtaining infrastructure data . however , officials have taken little action to establish this capability , and therefore our recommendations remain open today . control systems: in march 2004 , we reported that several factors — including the adoption of standardized technologies with known vulnerabilities and the increased connectivity of control systems to other systems — contributed to an escalation of the risk of cyber - attacks against control systems . we recommended that dhs develop and implement a strategy for coordinating with the private sector and with other government agencies to improve control system security , including an approach for coordinating the various ongoing efforts to secure control systems . dhs concurred with our recommendation and , in december 2004 , issued a high - level national strategy for control systems security . this strategy includes , among other things , goals to create a capability to respond to attacks on control systems and to mitigate vulnerabilities , bridge industry and government efforts , and develop control systems security awareness . however , the strategy does not yet include underlying details and milestones for completing activities . information sharing: in july 2004 , we recommended actions to improve the effectiveness of dhs's information - sharing efforts . we recommended that officials within the information analysis and infrastructure protection directorate ( 1 ) proceed with and establish milestones for developing an information - sharing plan and ( 2 ) develop appropriate dhs policies and procedures for interacting with isacs , sector coordinators ( groups or individuals designated to represent their respective infrastructure sectors' cip activities ) , and sector - specific agencies and for coordination and information sharing within the information analysis and infrastructure protection directorate and other dhs components . these recommendations remain open today . moreover , we recently designated establishing appropriate and effective information - sharing mechanisms to improve homeland security as a new high - risk area . we reported that the ability to share security - related information can unify the efforts of federal , state , and local government agencies and the private sector in preventing or minimizing terrorist attacks .