( see app . ii for a break down of budget amounts available from each part of the international affairs ( function 150 ) budget in recent years. ) of the total $44 billion of development and humanitarian assistance available in fiscal year 2006 , state received about $5 billion , or 11 percent . other agencies received more of these funds , including usaid , which received about $15 billion , or 34 percent , and the department of treasury , which received about $13 billion , or about 30 percent . in january 2006 , the secretary of state established f bureau to serve as an umbrella leadership structure for coordinating all foreign assistance policy , planning , and oversight . the purpose of this reorganization was to ensure that foreign assistance is used as effectively as possible to meet broad foreign policy objectives , more fully align the foreign assistance activities carried out by the department of state and usaid , and demonstrate responsible stewardship of taxpayer dollars . in announcing these changes , the secretary noted that “the current structure of america's foreign assistance risks incoherent policies and ineffective programs and perhaps even wasted resources.” the director of u.s. foreign assistance serves concurrently as the usaid administrator , and has authority over all state and usaid foreign assistance funding and programs . according to state , the f bureau provides coordination and guidance to all foreign assistance delivered through other agencies and entities of the u.s. government . specifically , the director was given authority over program planning , implementation , and oversight of the various bureaus and offices within state and usaid , to develop a coordinated u.s. government foreign assistance strategy , including developing 5-year country specific assistance strategies and annual country - specific assistance operational plans ; create and direct consolidated policy , planning , budget and implementation mechanisms and staff functions required to provide umbrella leadership to foreign assistance ; provide guidance to foreign assistance delivered through other agencies and government entities , including the millennium challenge corporation and the office of the global aids coordinator ; and direct the required transformation of the government's approach to foreign assistance in order to achieve the president's transformational development goals . state's funding available for international development and humanitarian assistance , such as democracy promotion , drug interdiction , and refugee assistance , nearly doubled between fiscal years 2000 and 2006 . state uses certain fiscal budget accounts to fund its development and humanitarian assistance programs , with accounts related to refugees and international narcotics control providing the most funding . state's funding for international development and humanitarian assistance nearly doubled from $2.4 billion in fiscal year 2000 to $4.7 billion in fiscal year 2006 . this increase in the funds available each year for obligation meant more management responsibilities for state . this funding consisted primarily of annual congressional appropriations and unused portions from previous fiscal years , but it excluded money that state allocated to other agencies to obligate . after decreasing slightly in fiscal year 2001 , the available funding increased steadily through fiscal year 2006 , with the sharpest increases coming after fiscal year 2003 ( see fig 2 ) .