iii. ) doe also provided comments to improve the report's technical accuracy , which we incorporated as appropriate . to assess doe's statutory authority for charging other federal agencies for ldrd , we researched and analyzed statutes and legislative histories and referred to principles of appropriations law . to identify laboratory - initiated research programs similar to ldrd at other federal agencies' laboratories , we interviewed cognizant officials within dod , dhs , dot , nasa , nih , and nrc . what does doe do to ensure that ldrd projects are not duplicative of research in other federal agencies or in universities ? doe and its laboratories rely on the scientists , who submit proposals ; members of peer review committees ; and laboratory managers to ensure that ldrd projects do not duplicate research at other laboratories or universities . according to officials at the four laboratories we visited , the chances for duplication among ldrd projects are remote for several reasons . first , the nnsa laboratories ( los alamos , lawrence livermore , and sandia ) coordinate their work to ensure there is no duplication . second , peer review groups consisting of laboratory , doe , industry , and university representatives involve themselves in project management and try to eradicate duplication or other potential wastes of resources . third , science is a very competitive field , and scientists have strong incentives to conduct original research and publish or present the results of that research . finally , because basic science explores fundamental principles , scientists may be looking at the same issue , for example , techniques for sensing ever smaller amounts of an element , but for different reasons or with different approaches . in addition , our september 2001 report concluded that the ldrd project - selection and review processes that are in place at the nine doe laboratories are adequate to reasonably ensure compliance with doe's project - selection guidelines . question 10: to what extent does doe believe that the ldrd program is still a necessary tool to recruit and retain scientists ? officials at nnsa laboratories told us that ldrd remains a necessary tool to recruit and retain top scientists because their program work provides little opportunity for basic scientific research . similarly , ineel officials told us that ldrd plays a major role in attracting and retaining the most qualified scientists and engineers at their laboratory . in comparison , officials at office of science laboratories believe that ldrd is important for recruiting and retaining scientists ; however , they noted its role is less essential for their laboratories because they primarily perform basic research . nnsa laboratory managers told us that ldrd is an essential tool for recruiting and retaining scientists for several reasons . as a recruiting tool , the ldrd program is vital because the mission of the nnsa laboratories — to perform applied research to develop nuclear weapons technologies — does not readily attract qualified new hires . the ldrd program has served as a stepping stone for the nnsa laboratories to attract and hire many scientists by supporting from nearly one - half to two - thirds of the post doctoral researchers at the laboratories .