retaining combat units . according to army officials responsible for taa , army leaders determined that it was important that the army retain as many combat units as possible when assessing how to implement end strength reductions . in 2013 , the secretary of defense announced the conclusion of the department - wide strategic choices and management review . as part of this review , dod examined ways to obtain cost savings by altering the army's future force structure . according to army officials , the secretary of defense's review had , at one point , considered whether the army could reduce its end strength to 855,000 , which would correspond with a force structure of 36 bcts , including 18 in the regular army and 18 in the reserve component . army leaders , reacting to what they considered to be unacceptable reductions , commissioned analyses to determine the end strength and number of bcts the army needed to execute the missions specified in defense planning guidance . the analysis determined that the army should retain a minimum of 52 bcts , including 30 in the active component , in order to best meet the missions specified in defense planning guidance . ultimately , army senior leaders decided to retain 56 bcts based in part on these analyses as well as their assessment of global events and the potential for increased demand for bcts . in retaining 56 bcts in its force structure , the army took additional steps to redesign its force , reflecting its priority to retain combat capacity . specifically , the army plans to eliminate 17 bcts from its force structure relative to its fiscal year 2011 force ( a 23 percent reduction in the number of bcts ) . however , because the army decided to redesign its bcts by increasing its composition from a two maneuver battalion to three battalion formation , the army estimates that it will be able to retain 170 maneuver battalions in its force structure — a net reduction of 3 battalions compared to fiscal year 2011 ( less than 2 percent ) , as shown in table 1 . maintain minimum number of positions in generating force units and the trainees , transients , holdees , and students accounts . according to army officials responsible for taa , the army needs to maintain a minimum number of positions in the army's generating force ( in order to provide medical support and training to army personnel ) and its trainees , transients , holdees , and students accounts ( in order to account for personnel that are not assigned to units ) . specifically , the army tasked the two largest organizations in its generating force ( u.s. army medical command and tradoc ) with evaluating their position requirements and concluded that the army needs a minimum of 87,400 active component soldiers in the generating force for an end strength of 980,000 soldiers . additionally , army officials said that based on a review of historical levels , the army assumed that 58,500 regular army positions ( 13 percent of a 450,000 active component force ) would be filled by trainees , transients , holdees , and students .