these alternatives are as follows . ● kiosk — a self - service device ( including a touch screen interface , document scanner , finger scanner , digital camera , and receipt printer ) that captures a digital photograph and fingerprint and prints out an encoded receipt . ● mobile device — a hand - held device that is operated by a workstation attendant and includes a document scanner , finger scanner , digital camera , and receipt printer to capture a digital photograph and fingerprint . ● validator — a hand - held device that is used to capture a digital photograph and fingerprint , which are then matched to the photograph and fingerprint captured via the kiosk and encoded in the receipt . increment 2 focuses primarily on extending us - visit to land ports of entry . it is divided into three parts — 2a , 2b , and 2c . ● increment 2a ( air , sea , and land entry ) includes the capability to biometrically compare and authenticate valid machine - readable visas and other travel and entry documents at all ports of entry . increment 2a was deployed on october 23 , 2005 , according to program officials . it also includes the deployment by october 26 , 2006 , of the capability to read biometrically enabled passports from visa waiver countries . ● increment 2b ( land entry ) redesigned the increment 1 entry solution and expanded it to the 50 busiest land ports of entry . the process for issuing entry / exit forms was redesigned to enable the electronic capture of biographic , biometric ( unless the traveler is exempt ) , and related travel documentation for arriving travelers . this increment was deployed to the busiest 50 u.s. land border ports of entry on december 29 , 2004 . before increment 2b , all information on the entry / exit forms was hand written . the redesigned process provides for electronically capturing the biographic data on the entry / exit form . in some cases , customs and border protection ( cbp ) officers enter the data electronically and then print the completed form . ● increment 2c ( land entry and exit ) is to provide the capability to automatically , passively , and remotely record the entry and exit of covered individuals using radio frequency ( rf ) technology tags at primary inspection and exit lanes . this tag includes a unique id number that is to be embedded in each entry / exit form , thus associating a unique number with a us - visit record for the person holding that form . one of dhs's goals in using this technology is to improve the ability to collect entry and exit information . in august 2005 , the program office deployed the technology to three land ports of entry to verify the feasibility of using passive rf technology to record traveler entries and exits from the number embedded in the entry / exit form . the results of this demonstration are to be reported in february 2006 . increment 3 extended increment 2b ( land entry ) capabilities to 104 land ports of entry ; this increment was essentially completed as of december 19 , 2005 .