, evidence that a chemical is not harmful . v for additional information on these five chemicals ) . in addition , for 160 existing chemicals , epa has required chemical companies to submit notices of any significant new uses of the chemical , providing epa the opportunity to review the risks posed by the new use . in order to regulate an existing chemical under section 6 ( a ) of tsca , epa must find that there is a reasonable basis to conclude that the chemical presents or will present an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment . before regulating a chemical , the epa administrator must consider and publish a statement regarding the effects of the chemical on human health and the magnitude of human exposure to the chemical ; the effects of the chemical on the environment and the magnitude of the environment's exposure to the chemical ; the benefits of the chemical for various uses and the availability of substitutes for those uses ; and the reasonably ascertainable economic consequences of the rule , after consideration of the effect on the national economy , small business , technological innovation , the environment , and public health . further , the regulation must apply the least burdensome requirement that will adequately protect against such risk . for example , if epa finds that it can adequately manage the unreasonable risk of a chemical through requiring chemical companies to place warning labels on the chemical , epa could not ban or otherwise restrict the use of that chemical . additionally , if the epa administrator determines that a risk of injury to health or the environment could be eliminated or sufficiently reduced by actions under another federal law , then tsca prohibits epa from promulgating a rule under section 6 ( a ) of tsca , unless epa finds that it is in the public interest considering all aspects of the risk , the estimated costs of compliance , and the relative efficiency of such action to protect against risk of injury . the congress could amend tsca to reduce the evidentiary burden that epa must meet to take regulatory action under the act by ( 1 ) amending the unreasonable risk standard that epa must meet to regulate existing chemicals under section 6 of tsca , ( 2 ) amending the standard for judicial review that currently requires a court to hold a tsca rule unlawful and set it aside unless it is supported by substantial evidence in the rulemaking record , or ( 3 ) amending the requirement that epa must choose the least burdensome regulatory requirement . currently , under tsca section 6 , epa may only regulate existing chemicals if it finds that there is a reasonable basis to conclude that the chemical “presents or will present an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment.” several options are available to amend this standard . these laws were generally enacted in or before the early 1970s . nonetheless , the congress found that human beings and the environment were being exposed to a large number of chemicals and that some could pose an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment .