however , there are other considerations . for example , we have reported that if fund assets were invested in non - treasury securities , the fund may experience losses in a market downturn and would thus have reduced assets available for health care . assuming there would be no explicit federal guarantee of the value of the invested assets , we stated that usps is not well positioned to deal with a potentially significant decline in their value , given its significant operating losses and continuing decline in mail volume . as our report also explained , although usps payments with an 80 percent funding target would reduce usps's required payments , fully funded benefits protect against an inability to make payments later , make promised benefits less vulnerable to cuts , and protect usps's long - term viability . finally , usps said that our statements about potential risks associated with investment of assets outside the u.s. treasury seem disproportionate given usps's view that diversification of assets set aside for retiree health benefits is “universally accepted” as a best practice . it would be preferable to take action when careful consideration is possible , rather than wait until lack of adequate funding could disrupt postal retiree health benefits . congress should consider passing legislation to put postal retiree health benefits on a more sustainable financial footing . we provided a draft of this report to opm and usps for their review and comment . opm provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . usps provided a written response , which is reproduced in appendix ii of this report . in its written response , usps stated that it concurred with our matter for congressional consideration that congressional action is necessary to achieve a financially sustainable postal service retiree health benefits fund ( rhb fund ) . the funding requirements for these benefits changed in 2006 . before then , a “pay - as - you - go” system governed usps's payments , which required usps to pay its share of premiums for current postal retirees . the 2006 postal accountability and enhancement act ( paea ) required usps to start fully “prefunding” retiree health benefits . this meant that usps was required to make annual prefunding payments to a newly established fund to build up funds to cover usps's share of future postal retiree health benefit costs . paea also established the rhb fund as a new fund in the u.s. treasury for usps to deposit money into , and specified that beginning in fiscal year 2017 , the fund would be used by opm to pay usps's share of postal retiree premiums for health benefits . under paea , the first 10 years of prefunding payments were fixed — ranging from $5.4 billion to $5.8 billion annually from fiscal years 2007 to 2016 . usps cited a 2014 report that said medicare integration is the most common arrangement for employer - provided retiree health benefits , adding that retiree health benefits for medicare - eligible employees are assumed to be merely supplemental to medicare as a matter of course .