v . the terms of the 57 dpas and npas we previously reviewed for our june 2009 testimony included: durations ranging from 3 months to 5 years ( one of the 57 agreements we reviewed did not specify the duration .

 ) ; monetary payments ranging from $30,000 to $615 million ( forty - five of the 57 dpas and npas we reviewed required monetary payments , while 12 did not .

 ) ; requirements that the company improve or enhance its compliance program ( forty - five of the 57 dpas and npas we reviewed included compliance program requirements , while 12 did not .

 ) ; requirements that the company hire , at its own expense , an independent monitor to assist the company in establishing a compliance program , review the effectiveness of a company's internal control measures , and determine whether the company has otherwise met the terms of the agreements ( twenty - six of the 57 dpas and npas required companies to hire independent monitors .

 ) ; and extraordinary restitution provisions , which are payments or services to organizations or individuals not directly affected by the crime . ( four of the 57 dpas and npas we reviewed included such terms . however , doj issued guidance in may 2008 prohibiting the use of terms requiring payments to charitable , educational , community , or other organizations or individuals that are not the victims of the criminal activity or are not providing services to redress the harm caused by the criminal conduct. ) eileen r. larence , ( 202 ) 512-8777 or larencee@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , kristy n. brown , assistant director ; jill evancho ; tom jessor ; danielle pakdaman ; sarah kaczmarek ; janet temko ; amanda miller ; katherine davis ; and mandana yousefi made significant contributions to this report . the full text of doj's written comments is included in appendix iii . in its letter , doj stated that the department uses a variety of tools to achieve its mission of protecting the public from corporate corruption , and in some cases , dpas and npas are appropriate tools and offer a number of benefits , such as the avoidance of negative collateral consequences of prosecution and conviction to companies and innocent third parties . doj agreed with our recommendation that the attorney general develop performance measures to evaluate the contribution of dpas and npas toward achieving its strategic objective of combating public and corporate corruption , and recognizes the value of appropriate performance measures in this area . doj did not think that the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) was a relevant a criterion for the development of performance measures for dpas and npas , stating that it requires agencies to develop performance measures for broader program activities , such as those set forth in agency budgets , and not for tools such as dpas and npas , which are used less frequently and are narrowly defined to rectify specific wrongdoing .