fdl is organized into forensic and intelligence sections . the forensic section consists of forensic scientists — including document examiners and fingerprint specialists — who have completed extensive training and have been certified by a professional association within their field . fdl officials told us that intelligence officers and forensic document examiners are paired into geographically assigned teams to facilitate the exchange of information regarding document fraud trends and to identify and acquire needed exemplars . while the teams meet monthly , intelligence officers regularly assist document examiners with case examinations by maintaining books of travel documents organized by country , collecting document exemplars , and issuing document alerts as required . according to fdl officials , shortages in its previous funding and staffing levels have affected average case processing time and the percent of overdue cases . to describe fdl's workload , budget , and staffing levels , we interviewed officials at fdl , ins headquarters , and the office of management and budget ( omb ) . we obtained workload data from fdl's facets database showing the number and types of cases received and completed , and the number of cases pending for fiscal years 1997 to 2001 . we also reviewed fdl's budget requests and allocations for fiscal years 1999 to 2001 . to identify key factors that affect fdl's performance , we reviewed documentation and interviewed officials at fdl ; ins headquarters ; ins district counsel offices in los angeles , new york , and miami ; the executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) ; and the american society of crime laboratory directors . we did not independently verify the reliability and accuracy of workload data provided by fdl . through discussions with fdl officials , we learned that fdl conducts some checks on the data in facets . these include ( 1 ) periodic reviews of the database for typing and format errors ; ( 2 ) automatic checks for certain data fields , such as date fields , that prevent the entry of inaccurate information ; and ( 3 ) semiannual audits of open cases at fdl , during which each case is physically accounted for and the case information is verified against the data recorded in facets . our analyses of fdl's workload data indicated that the data were generally valid and useful for understanding trends in fdl's workload . however , we identified discrepancies between fdl's pending caseload statistics and our estimates of the size of the pending caseload based on other fdl data provided to us . fdl officials agreed with our methodology for calculating its annual pending caseload and were able to account for some of the difference between the two sets of numbers . fdl provided data on withdrawn cases for fiscal years 1999 through 2001 indicating that these cases accounted for a portion of the discrepancy . however , the gap between their figures and ours was not completely closed , and we point this out in table 3 . we conducted our work between june 2001 and february 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . fdl's budget was about $4.1 million in fiscal year 2001 , about 15 percent higher than in fiscal year 1999 ( see table 1 ) .