( recommendation 5 ) . we provided a draft of this report to hhs and usda for review and comment . we are making the following five recommendations . the administrator of acl should work with other relevant hhs officials to document the department's plan to focus on the specific nutritional needs of older adults in the 2025-2030 update of the dietary guidelines for americans , which would include , in part , plans to identify existing information gaps on older adults' specific nutritional needs . ( recommendation 1 ) the administrator of acl should direct regional offices to take steps to ensure states are monitoring providers to ensure meal consistency with federal nutrition requirements for meals served in the congregate and home - delivered meal programs . ( recommendation 2 ) the administrator of fns should take steps to improve its oversight of cacfp meals provided in adult day care centers . for example , fns could amend its approach for determining federal onsite reviews of cacfp meal providers to more consistently include adult day care centers . ( recommendation 3 ) the administrator of acl should centralize information on promising approaches for making meal accommodations to meet the nutritional needs of older adult participants in the congregate and home - delivered meal programs , for example in one location on its national resource center on nutrition and aging website , to assist providers' efforts . ( recommendation 4 ) the administrator of fns should take steps to better disseminate existing information that could help state and local entities involved in providing cacfp meals meet the varying nutritional needs of older adult participants , as well as continue to identify additional promising practices or other information on meal accommodations to share with cacfp entities . in its written comments , hhs agreed with our three recommendations to acl ( recommendations 1 , 2 , and 4 ) . in response to our first recommendation , hhs stated that acl plans to work with the office of disease prevention and health promotion and other relevant hhs officials and agencies to document hhs's plans to emphasize the specific and varying nutritional needs of older adults in the 2025-2030 update . hhs also stated that acl plans to acquire the services of a registered dietician with specialized expertise in older adults' nutritional needs . in response to our second recommendation , hhs stated that acl's program and evaluation offices will collaborate on the development of plans to ensure state compliance with federal requirements . in response to our recommendation that acl centralize information on promising practices , hhs stated that acl will award a contract in fiscal year 2020 for a new national resource center on nutrition and aging to , among other things , centralize information on promising approaches so nutrition services providers can access it easily . hhs's comments are reproduced in appendix ii . in oral comments , usda officials , including the directors of the fns child nutrition program monitoring and operational support division and the child nutrition program nutrition education , training , and technical assistance division generally agreed with our two recommendations to fns ( recommendations 3 and 5 ) .