we revised the draft accordingly . the bureau disagreed with our use of the ratio of partnership specialists to complete count committees as an indicator of the specialists' workload . the bureau noted that regardless of the number of specialists or committees , partnership specialists are to offer assistance if and when needed . we recognized the limitation of the measure and thus referred to it as a “rough” indicator in the draft . nevertheless , the ratio of partnership specialists to complete count committees is a useful way of comparing partnership specialists' workloads from one census to another . the bureau expected partnership specialists to provide guidance and staff support for committee activities , engaging in such tasks as providing general information and keeping committees abreast of census operations and schedules . thus , it is likely that , overall , the greater the number of committees , the greater the demands on specialists' time . the bureau provided clarifying information for our findings and recommendation concerning the partnership program's management structure and level of coordination between the local offices and partnership specialists . in response , we revised the draft to better reflect the bureau's view that it is better to have partnership specialists report to partnership coordinators rather than to local census managers , as some managers suggested in our survey . however , as we also note in the report , regardless of the management structure , more positive experiences seemed to result when local managers and partnership specialists dovetailed their efforts , hence our recommendation for the bureau to explore ways to increase the coordination and communication between partnership specialists and local census office managers . in commenting on our recommendation to identify partnership program best practices and incorporate them into future partnership efforts , the bureau said it recognized the value of sharing information . the bureau noted that throughout the 2000 census , the bureau's plans and activities included numerous opportunities for staff to share best practices with each other and their partners . the bureau's efforts to share information during the 2000 census are commendable , and it will be important for the bureau to properly collect and summarize these data so that they can be used to inform future activities . with respect to our recommendation concerning prisms — the bureau's new partnership tracking system — the bureau responded that the system is now fully functional . we revised the draft to reflect this fact . we are sending copies of this letter to the chairman of the house committee on government reform , the secretary of commerce , and the acting director of the bureau of the census . copies will be made available to others on request . our findings cannot be projected to the partnership program as a whole . we also included the initial results of our survey of a stratified random sample of 250 local census office managers in which we obtained responses from 236 managers ( about a 94 percent overall response rate ) . the survey — which asked local census office managers about the implementation of a number of key field operations — can be generalized to the 511 local census offices located in the 50 states .