ii ) . esp contained complex rules about eligibility , amount of the rebate , and filing requirements . over the years , the congress granted irs legal authority to cover 11 areas so that the agency could correct return errors during processing , including calculation errors and entries that are inconsistent or exceed statutory limits , without having to issue the taxpayer a statutory notice of deficiency ( see app . iii for further details on the mea process and authorities ) . we have reported that prompt compliance checks such as these are important because as unpaid taxes age , the likelihood of collecting all or part of the amount owed decreases , due in part to continued accrual of interest and penalties on the outstanding federal taxes . mea also provides a taxpayer service as it allows taxpayers to receive their refunds faster , corrects return errors before interest is accrued , and can avoid time consuming interaction with irs while the error is being resolved . mea can also help ensure taxpayers receive the tax benefits for which they are eligible . for example , between tax years 2003 and 2006 , using its mea , irs identified over 500,000 occurrences of taxpayers under - claiming the eitc with the result that an additional $130 million was provided to those claimants . without mea , most of these errors would not likely have been identified and thousands of low income taxpayers would likely have received less than they were entitled . in contrast , the total number of taxpayer contacts at irs's 401 walk - in sites declined slightly in the 2008 filing season compared to previous years . in order to assess the quality of the assistance at volunteer sites , irs conducts mystery shopping , site , and tax return reviews . this filing season , irs officials conducted 85 mystery shopping reviews for which the accuracy rate for return preparation averaged 75 percent at volunteer sites . while this is an improvement from last year , we are still concerned that , because of the low number of mystery shopping reviews conducted , the quality of volunteer - prepared returns remains largely unknown and information as a whole is unavailable . irs is in the process of improving how it measures the efficacy of its outreach efforts . in response to our recommendation , irs has hired a contractor to conduct surveys and focus groups to assess the irs partners' , such as the aarp , ability to reach their target populations , eg , the elderly and limited english proficiency and rural populations , and measure the effectiveness and quality of that outreach . in response to another one of our recommendations , to further improve its quality assessment at walk - in sites , irs has expanded contact recording — a system irs uses to record and assess the quality of other interactions between its employees and taxpayers — at walk - in sessions to include return preparation . according to irs officials , the agency hired adequate staff to review the recorded sessions , which are considerably longer for return preparation assistance than for tax law or account assistance .