increment 2 has been fielded . increment 3: develops the network operations software to enable seamless integration of tactical network functions and enhanced waveforms for increased throughput capability . win - t increment 3 is currently being restructured . acquisition category: acat id program start: june 2007 low rate production contract award: march 2010 contractor: general dynamics c4 systems , inc . the initial milestone b , which is the point at which a system enters system development , in 2003 included two competing contractors — lockheed martin and general dynamics c4 systems . in august 2004 the competing contractors merged into one team with general dynamics as the lead . after the nunn mccurdy breach in 2007 and program restructure , a sole source contracting approach was used based on the authority of 10 u.s.c . 2304 ( c ) ( 1 ) that the requirements were available from only one or a limited number of responsible sources and no other supplies or services would satisfy agency requirements and for follow - on production since supplies are only available from the original source for continued production . a second follow - on operational test and evaluation is scheduled for the october through november 2014 timeframe at nie 15.1 to support the full rate production decision review , which is expected to occur in 2015 . the government will consider requiring the contractor in the proposal to identify items which the government will be able to acquire competitively in the future , in substantial quantities . win - t increment 3 builds on the capabilities of previous win - t increments by developing the network operations software ( netops ) that enables the seamless integration and management of tactical networks , and the enhanced waveforms that increase throughput and improve network capacity and robustness . for combat platforms and tactical vehicles . in its early years , fbcb2 relied upon line - of - sight radio communications , but later adopted satellite and became commonly referred to as blue force tracking , or bft . in 2006 , the army began a software product line called joint capabilities release ( jcr ) that , according to army officials , provided increased chat and messaging capabilities . however , these capabilities were still limited . we are not making recommendations in this report . we provided a draft of this report to dod for their review and comment . dod provided written comments , which are reproduced in appendix iii . these comments provided updated and clarifying information on a few of the systems in our review . we incorporated these and other technical comments in the report , as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the secretary of the army , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact belva martin at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or martinb@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .