purex . according to em's 2017 extent of condition review , parts of the main purex facility are not physically inspected , including the canyon deck . the canyon deck is in the central portion of the main canyon building and is isolated from the surrounding areas of the facility by thick , reinforced concrete walls and floors and has not been entered in more than 10 years , according to the hanford cleanup contractor's 2015 canyon risk mitigation plan report . according to this report , conditions within this space are unknown , and high contamination levels are expected . due to lack of information and concerns about this area , the 2015 canyon risk mitigation plan recommended — for data - gathering and planning purposes — inspecting this area either physically or remotely , if physical entry is not possible due to high levels of radiation . this report also stated that future cleanup work could not be initiated in this area without sufficient information related to the condition of the canyon deck . in addition , a 2019 engineering evaluation of the facility determined that degradation may not be fully addressed by s&m activities and the risk of release of hazardous substances will increase as degradation continues or goes undetected . figure 3 shows the main purex plant and auxiliary facilities . 216-z - 9 crib . hanford site . however , a 2006 inspection of the interior of the crib utilized a remote controlled device to inspect and determine that the structural integrity of the facility's roof was suspect . this inspection recommended that the roof be inspected for structural integrity every 5 years ; however rl did not direct the contractor to inspect the facility until 2016 . furthermore , according to rl officials , when the facility was inspected in 2016 and then again in 2018 , the inspections did not include an engineering evaluation or use of non - physical engineering or robotic tools to inspect the structural integrity of the roof , as was done in 2006 , to determine if the facility was safe for continued use . despite the lack of an engineering evaluation or interior inspection of the roof , the 2016 and 2018 inspection reports gave the facility a passing grade for structural integrity — raising questions about both the basis and reliability of this assessment . rl officials told us they did not instruct the contractor to conduct such an evaluation because recent visual surveillance inspections of the outside of the crib roof did not indicate that structural failure was imminent . however , in its january 2019 structural integrity assessment of contaminated excess facilities at risk of collapse , the contractor reported that this facility was among 11 facilities needing further evaluation . plutonium finishing plant 241-z - 361 settling tank . according to rl's response to our january 2019 questionnaire , the interior of the plutonium finishing plant 241-z - 361 settling tank is not inspected . rl's response noted that although there are concerns regarding the structural integrity of the facility , the facility is safe for continued use . however , rl's response is not consistent with prior studies on the condition of the tank .