( pub . since enactment of the 1996 reform act , the council has amended the procurement practices act many times to exempt additional entities from falling under the authority of the office of contracting and procurement or procurement practices act or both , despite the procurement practices act's statutory purposes of creating uniform procurement laws in the district and centralizing the district's procurement authority in the office of contracting and procurement . to date , in addition to those entities mentioned above , the council excluded the following entities from the authority of both office of contracting and procurement and procurement practices act: d.c. water and sewer authority ; d.c. public service commission ; d.c. housing authority , except for the provisions regarding contract protests , appeals , and claims arising from procurements of the housing authority ; and d.c . advisory neighborhood commissions . further , the council amended to procurement practices act to exclude the following entities from the authority of office of contracting and procurement , but they are subject to the procurement practices act: director of the child and family services agency ; criminal justice coordinating council ; director of the department of mental health ; and board of education to solicit , award , and execute contracts , except for security for the district's public schools for security contracts to begin on or after june 30 , 2005 . also , the council exempted delivery of electrical power and ancillary services for the district from certain requirements of the procurement practices act , subject to council approval . in addition to these exemptions , the council continues to use its emergency act authority under the home rule act to exempt the application of all or certain provisions of the procurement practices act or the authority of the office of contracting and procurement for certain district entities or projects . these exemptions can last no more than 90 days or can become permanent if the emergency bill is accompanied by a temporary bill bridging the gap between expiration of the 90-day emergency bill and congressionally - approved permanent legislation on the same matter . the following are gao's comments on the cfo's letter dated january 5 , 2007 . as we state in the report , the cfo's analysis of fiscal year 2004 direct voucher payments showed that $217 million fell outside a 1996 financial management and control order . it was only after the cfo , in 2005 , added 7 more acceptable uses of direct vouchers to the original order , that these payments were found to be acceptable . the $4 million in payments referred to in the cfo's comments are those that fell outside this updated policy . we recognize that the cpo's office is not directly responsible for developing financial management policies . however , we believe that in order to effect meaningful procurement reform , the cpo should be consulted on any policy changes that affect procurement — particularly as such changes have been amended into the procurement law . elevating the cpo within the district government , as we recommend , would facilitate needed coordination .