( recommendation 2 ) . faa partially agreed with the first recommendation to develop a plan for analyzing test site data , noting a concern about using such a plan to determine if the collection of any additional test site data could be useful for informing integration . specifically , faa noted that the agency cannot require test sites to share data from their privately contracted users , other than the data required for the test sites' coas or for their otas with faa . you asked us to examine how faa is managing the test sites . this report examines: what research has been conducted at faa's designated uas test what steps faa has taken to address any test site research how faa is leveraging and sharing information from the test site program to advance uas integration . to address these objectives , we reviewed relevant statutes and regulations ; faa orders and guidance ; and faa documents related to uas integration , uas research and development efforts , and the test site program . we also reviewed test sites' annual and quarterly reports to faa , as well as recent relevant reports by the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , department of transportation's office of inspector general ( dot oig ) and gao . to identify the number of test flights that have occurred through the test sites , we analyzed flight test data collected by the test sites and submitted to faa via faa's mission logging system ( mls ) from 2015 through 2018 . we assessed the reliability of the data provided by faa from mls by reviewing them for anomalies , outliers , or missing information , among other things . based on these steps , we determined them to be sufficiently reliable for capturing the number of qualifying test flights reported as occurring at each test site from 2015 through 2018 . in addition , we interviewed faa and nasa officials , representatives from all seven test sites , and a selection of seven uas and aviation industry stakeholders ( eg , uas industry associations and aviation research organizations ) to address these objectives . for example , since august 2016 , operators of small uas — defined as those uas weighing less than 55 pounds , including any attachments — who have obtained a remote pilot certificate have generally been allowed to operate without prior faa approval in certain airspace during the day , under 400 feet , and not over people or beyond an operator's line of sight , among other requirements under faa's part 107 rule . small uas operators may seek a waiver of certain faa operational requirements ( referred to as a part 107 waiver ) from the agency on a case - by - case basis , such as a waiver that would allow an operator to fly drones above 400 feet . in contrast , no routine operations — meaning those that can occur without any prior authorization — are currently allowed for large uas ( 55 pounds and over ) for any purpose ( see fig . 1 for examples of small and large uas ) .