accordingly , these results are generalizable . with regard to parochialism ( i.e. , focusing on one's own sub - organization rather than having an enterprisewide view ) , the department is developing online tools that provide additional information to program managers , portfolio managers , pre - certification authorities , and the defense business council . for example , the department's problem statement portal is to be a repository for problem statement submissions and is to be available departmentwide . for example , the dcmo stated that the department plans to restructure the business enterprise architecture to focus more explicitly on the business processes being executed within the functional domains , which span all levels of the department . dod officials also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the director , office of management and budget ; the secretary of defense ; and other interested parties . this report also is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions on matters discussed in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4456 or chac@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . our objectives were to ( 1 ) assess the actions by the department of defense to comply with section 332 of the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2005 , as amended and ( 2 ) determine the usefulness and effectiveness of dod's business enterprise architecture and business process reengineering processes . to address the first objective , we identified recommendations related to dod's business systems modernization efforts that we made in our annual reports from 2011 to 2014 ( 16 recommendations total ) in response to the fiscal year 2005 ndaa's requirements . though we have made recommendations in this area prior to 2011 , those recommendations have since been closed . we evaluated the department's written responses and related documentation on steps completed to implement or partially implement the recommendations . documentation we analyzed included guidance on business enterprise architecture and business process reengineering compliance , guidance on certifying and approving defense business systems , and documentation about the department's problem statement development and review process . in addition , we interviewed officials from the office of the deputy chief management officer and the office of the chief information officer , and observed a demonstration of the office of the deputy chief management officer's integrated business framework - data alignment portal tool to better understand the actions taken to address our recommendations . we also reviewed the department's annual report to congress , which was submitted on april 6 , 2015 , to identify gaps or inconsistencies with the implementation of the 16 recommendations . to address our second objective , we determined the intended outcomes of the business enterprise architecture and business process reengineering processes by analyzing the fiscal year 2005 ndaa .