noaa concurred with our recommendations . regarding critical and high - risk vulnerabilities , noaa noted that the jpss program would continue to follow agency policy allowing its authorizing official to accept risks when remediation cannot be performed as anticipated . however , the program did not have documentation from the authorizing official accepting the risk of a delayed remediation schedule for critical and high - risk vulnerabilities . in summary , noaa is making progress in developing and testing the jpss - 1 satellite as it moves toward a march 2017 launch date , but continues to experience issues in remaining ground system development , and faces a potential near - term data gap in the period before this satellite becomes operational . in addition , noaa is planning to launch a future set of satellites to ensure continuity of future satellite data , but it is uncertain which launch timing will best meet the agency's criteria for a robust constellation . without ensuring that its plans for future satellite development are based on the full range of estimated lives of potential satellites , the agency may not be making the most efficient use of the nation's sizable investment in the polar satellite program . further , findings from a draft report show that noaa's efforts to depict and update key polar satellite information , such as timelines and operational life , need to be improved . its flyout charts , used to inform users of potential gaps and support budget requests , did not always accurately reflect current program data or consistently present key information , such as a satellite's lifetime once beyond its original design life . limitations in controls assessment . until noaa addresses these shortfalls , it runs an increased risk that its flyout charts will mislead congress and may lead to less - than - optimal decisions . as a part of jpss ground system development , noaa has established policies in key information security areas called for by guidance . each satellite makes about 14 orbits a day . as the earth rotates beneath it , each polar - orbiting satellite views the entire earth's surface twice a day . currently , the polar - orbiting satellites that are considered primary satellites for providing input to weather forecasting models are a noaa / nasa satellite ( called suomi national polar - orbiting partnership , or s - npp ) , two department of defense ( dod ) satellites , and a series of european satellites . we expect to issue the report by september 2016 . the work upon which this statement was based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . figure 4 graphically shows the number of open vulnerabilities on the current jpss ground system over time . without addressing these vulnerabilities in a timely manner , the program remains at increased risk of potential exploits . security incidents reported but not consistently tracked .