we disagree . section e1.1.14 of department of defense directive 5000.1 , the defense acquisition system , states that “pms…shall reduce integration risk and demonstrate product design prior to the design readiness review.” dod's design readiness review is required to end the system integration phase of system development and demonstration . additionally , dod's entrance criterion for the demonstration phase requires a demonstration of the integrated product in a prototype . are technologies at a high level of maturity ? is there sufficient funding to develop and deliver the capability in time ? the acquisition strategy also fails to capture critical design , manufacturing , and reliability data in time to make investment decisions for moving the program through the development program into production . the gaps in knowledge increase the likelihood that the air force will not be able to deliver on the cost , schedule , and performance goals in its business case . because gaps exist in the information needed to make a sound business case to start a major acquisition program , we recommend that the secretary of defense ensure that the open business case questions are answered before a decision is made to start the e - 10a program . additionally , to ensure a greater likelihood of success , if the e - 10a program is approved to begin , we recommend the secretary direct the air force to revise the acquisition strategy to ensure sufficient time is included in the schedule to ( 1 ) integrate and demonstrate the design before moving past the critical design review and ( 2 ) test a production representative e - 10a prototype before starting production . dod provided us with written comments on a draft of this report . the comments appear in appendix ii . dod concurred with our recommendation that the secretary ensure that the open business case questions are answered before a decision is made to start the e - 10a program . dod provided some information on the current status of these questions and implies that some of the business case questions had been answered . we believe that until the osd / program analysis and evaluation study is completed and final results are provided to osd acquisition decision makers , the business case questions remain open . dod partially concurred with our recommendation that the secretary direct the secretary of the air force to revise the e - 10a acquisition strategy to ensure sufficient time is available to ( 1 ) integrate and demonstrate the design before moving past the critical design review and ( 2 ) test a production representative e - 10a before starting production . regarding ( 1 ) , dod stated that osd policy does not require the integration and demonstration of a design before critical design review . nonetheless , dod stated that it is restructuring the program with the goal of demonstrating the radar and battle management technologies in a prototype before starting systems development and demonstration . this approach incorporates the knowledge - based approach inherent in commercial best practices and endorsed by dod policy . in its comments , dod acknowledges that this approach will increase confidence in the program's cost estimate and allow time to evaluate the aircraft platform .