reg . 3504 ( jan. 25 , 2005 ) 70 fed . reg . 5123 ( feb. 1 , 2005 ) 70 fed . reg . the service's selection process for determining which esa decisions were potentially inappropriately influenced by former deputy assistant secretary macdonald and the status of the service's review of these decisions . the types of decisions , if any , excluded from the service's selection process . interviewed the director of the service , all eight regional directors , and key regional esa staff . conducted site visits , phone interviews , or both with esa staff from 10 field offices in five regions that were actively engaged in esa decision making . reviewed documentation developed by service headquarters , regions , and field offices about the selection process and the current status of the service's review . reviewed service policies and procedures for making esa decisions and reviewed other species - specific documentation . threatened and endangered species and the ecosystems upon which they depend . the esa requires listing a species as endangered if it faces extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range and as threatened if it is likely to become endangered in the foreseeable future . the esa has provisions to protect and recover species after they are listed , and it prohibits the “taking” of listed animal species . many esa decisions must be based , at least in part , on the best available scientific information . interior is responsible for implementing the esa for freshwater and terrestrial species . interior has delegated many of its esa responsibilities to the service . service staff at headquarters , regional , and field offices are largely responsible for implementing the various esa provisions . field office staff are generally responsible for initiating esa decision - making actions ; listing and critical habitat decisions are forwarded to regional and headquarters offices for review . secretary for fish and wildlife and parks for review ; the service director generally approves final decisions . for critical habitat , the service forwards its recommendations to interior's office of assistant secretary for fish and wildlife and parks , which applies economic , national security , and other factors before it approves a final determination . while in office from july 2002 until may 2007 , interior's former deputy assistant secretary macdonald reviewed more than 200 esa decisions . dale hall was sworn in on october 12 , 2005 , as service director . in february 2006 , he met with ms. macdonald and other interior officials about their review and involvement in the service's esa decisions . investigation of allegations that ms. macdonald's involvement resulted in the withdrawal of the service's decision to list the sacramento splittail as threatened . the investigation concluded that ms. macdonald stood to gain financially by the decision and therefore should have recused herself . on november 30 , 2007 , senator wyden sent a letter to the inspector general requesting an investigation of potential inappropriate involvement by ms. macdonald on 18 esa decisions . two more species were subsequently added to this investigation . directors to communicate deputy secretary scarlett's directive to examine decisions reviewed by ms. macdonald that could require revision because of her involvement .