, uneducated user ) . we did not verify the accuracy of the agencies' responses ; however , we reviewed supporting documentation that agencies provided to validate their responses . we contacted agency officials when necessary for follow - up information . we then analyzed agency responses to determine agencies' perception of risks from spam , phishing , spyware , and other malware , as well as their practices in addressing these threats . although this was not a sample survey , and , therefore , there were no sampling errors , conducting any survey may introduce errors , commonly referred to as nonsampling errors . for example , difficulties in how a particular question is interpreted , in the sources of information that are available to respondents , or in how the data are entered into a database or were analyzed can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results . we took steps in the development of the survey instrument , the data collection , and the data analysis to minimize these nonsampling errors . for example , a survey specialist designed the survey instrument in collaboration with subject - matter experts . then , it was pretested to ensure that the questions were relevant , clearly stated , and easy to comprehend . because this was a web - based survey , 23 of the 24 respondents entered their answers directly into the electronic questionnaire , thereby eliminating the need to have much of the data keyed into a database and thus minimizing an additional potential source of error . for the remaining agency , which provided a separate file of its survey responses , the data entry was traced and verified . to determine the government and private - sector efforts under way to address spam , phishing , and spyware on a national level as well as the governmentwide challenges to protecting against these threats , we conducted literature searches , reviewed available federal and private - sector documentation , and solicited agencies' input on incident reporting in our survey . in addition , we met with security experts in the private sector and federal officials from homeland security , law enforcement , and the intelligence community to discuss their experiences , practices , and challenges in addressing these threats . we conducted our work in washington , d.c. , from september 2004 through march 2005 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . federal agencies are facing a set of emerging cybersecurity threats that are the result of changing sources of attack , increasingly sophisticated social engineering techniques designed to trick the unsuspecting user into divulging sensitive information , new modes of covert compromise , and the blending of once distinct types of attack into more complex and damaging forms . spam , phishing , and spyware are examples of emerging threats that are becoming more prominent . advances in antispam measures have caused spammers to evolve their techniques to bypass detection . also , the frequency and sophistication of phishing attacks increased rapidly in the past year . further , spyware has proven to be difficult to detect and remove .