involvement in production . according to the fcs program manager , the army plans to contract with boeing during fiscal year 2008 for the initial production of fcs capabilities to be spun out to the current forces and for the early production of the fcs non - line - of - sight cannon . the current lsi development contract for the core fcs systems extends almost 2 years beyond the fcs initial production decision . the army does not expect that the initial brigades outfitted by fcs will meet the upper range of its requirements , and has made the lsi responsible for planning future fcs enhancements in the production phase . the lsi is also responsible for defining and maintaining a fcs growth strategy for integrating new technologies into brigade combat teams . two characteristics , in our view , distinguish a lsi from a traditional contractor . first , the integrator is managing across what would traditionally have been program lines , versus subsystems within a program . second , in so managing , the integrator is acting on behalf of , and in the interests of , the government . in our opinion , the role played by the fcs lsi is not typical of a dod contractor . we also note that while the fcs lsi is performing substantive work on software systems , its portion of total work is low relative to major prime contractors elsewhere in dod and it is not directly involved in the development of any hardware for the fcs system - of - systems . finally , the department noted that the role of the fcs prime contractor in requirements determination is not correctly framed in our draft report and that we confuse operational requirements with design specifications . we have characterized the lsi's role in this report as requirements refinement , rather than requirements definition . the requirements work being led by the fcs lsi is intended to complete the definition of the system - of - systems requirements and the system - level requirements . two aspects of this role are , in our view , distinctive . first is the fact that because fcs is a system - of - systems , the functions performed are one level higher than they would have been for a typical single - system program . thus , while the army determines the operational requirements for the fcs brigade combat team the lsi is heavily involved with its subcontractors and the army in setting the requirements for individual systems . on single system programs , the army would have set the requirements for the individual system . second , the fcs solution is being formed concurrent with the development of individual technologies and the design of systems . thus , as the limitations of technology and design are discovered , the lsi works with the army to change or refine the requirements to conform to these limitations . while this process is not atypical of weapon system acquisitions , the vast scope and large technical leaps sought in the fcs program requires greater involvement by the lsi in the refinement process . dod's comments are reprinted in appendix iii . dod also provided technical comments , which were addressed throughout the report as appropriate .