as fig . 2 shows , spaces used by federal truck safety inspectors at the world trade bridge in laredo are not covered , nor is there lighting available for inspectors to conduct safety inspections at night . in light of the limited amount of temporary space for truck inspection activities , fmcsa has recently begun to take steps to acquire its own space in anticipation of increasing border enforcement personnel . fmcsa submitted its space needs for border port of entry facilities to the general services administration ( gsa ) in august 2001 in an attempt to secure space at federal ports of entry . however , it is not clear when or if inspection space at these facilities can be acquired . according to a gsa official , gsa and customs must first conduct site surveys to determine the amount of vacant space available at port of entry facilities for truck inspections . as a result of heightened security in response to the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on the united states , customs is reassessing its space needs at these facilities , with important implications for truck inspection activities . in discussions among fmcsa , gsa , and customs held in october 2001 , customs said it will no longer allow trucks placed out - of - service for safety violations to remain on customs compounds due to safety concerns related to allowing mechanics and tow truck operators on the compound . instead , federal and state inspectors must escort these vehicles off the facility . for example , in texas a tow truck meets out - of - service vehicles at the customs gate and tows them off the compound . a fmcsa official in texas said these vehicles are rarely towed to mexico unless they are empty . it is unclear what effect this development will have on the number and type of truck inspections that can be conducted in both the near and long term at federal ports of entry . as noted , only 2 of the 25 commercial ports of entry have permanent truck inspection facilities — both state - operated facilities located in california . as permanent facilities dedicated to truck safety inspections , they have space to perform inspections and to place vehicles out - of - service ( see figs . the three border states without permanent truck inspection facilities at border ports of entry — texas , arizona , and new mexico — are planning to build facilities at some crossings . to construct truck safety inspection facilities , dot officials said they plan to make the following allocations based on the fiscal year 2002 dot appropriations act: $12 million for texas , $54 million to be divided among the four border states , and $2.3 million for federal facility improvements . texas plans to build eight permanent truck safety inspection facilities that would be adjacent to the customs ports of entry . the facilities would be similar in function to california's truck inspection facilities . city officials in laredo and el paso , however , object to the facilities being so close to the border , arguing that these facilities would interfere with the flow of commerce .