comprehensive . of the cost estimates for the four selected investments , none were comprehensive . while one investment partially met associated best practices , the remaining three investments minimally met these practices . specifically , although all of the estimates included costs for specific elements and phases of the investments , none of the estimates included both government and contractors costs of the investment over the life - cycle , from inception through design , development , deployment , and operations and maintenance , to retirement of the investment . we supplemented our analysis with interviews of cognizant hud officials . these officials included program and other officials responsible for each of the four investments , as well as the deputy chief information officer , the director of the office of the strategic planning and management , and the assistant chief financial officer for budget . from these officials , we sought additional information on each investment's approach to developing cost estimates and the steps taken to establish department guidance related to cost estimation . we conducted this performance audit from july 2016 to february 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objective . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objective . hud's mission is to create strong , sustainable , inclusive communities and quality , affordable homes for all . to carry out this mission , the department administers community and housing programs that affect millions of households each year . these programs provide affordable rental housing opportunities and help homeless families and chronically homeless individuals and veterans . the department also administers mortgage insurance programs for single - family housing , multifamily housing , and health care facilities . it plays a critical role in hud's ability to perform its business functions , which involve the management of billions of dollars to carry out its mission . for example , the department's it environment consists of multiple systems that , among other things , are intended to help coordinate interactions with lending institutions to insure mortgages , collect and manage state and local housing data , process applications for community development , and process vouchers for different rental assistance programs . its systems also support the processing of applications for , and the management of , more than 50 grant programs administered by the department . however , according to hud , its it environment has not been sufficient to effectively support business functions because its systems are overlapping and duplicative , not integrated , necessitate manual workloads , and employ antiquated technologies that are costly to maintain . these plans contain information related to the department's modernization efforts and actions aimed at improving its capacity to manage it . nevertheless , even with these plans and ongoing modernization efforts , the department reported in november 2016 that limited progress had been made in replacing legacy systems and manual processes with modern applications and enhanced capabilities .