management cycle . in these comments , the postal service stated that the report offered an opportunity to consider changes and improvements in its it investment management processes . the service added that it would carefully evaluate each of the report's recommendations to determine the necessary actions for adopting and integrating key practices outlined in the gao itim model that are appropriate for the postal service . the postal service also identified key points where it stated that it differs from gao's it investment management framework . the postal service also explained that it uses a hierarchy of delegations to select and oversee its investments , from the board of governors through the lowest level of management , to ensure that senior management can concentrate on strategic issues and the most significant projects . we did observe this structured approach to the selection and oversight process and have recognized it in our report . the establish team and the deploy team , composed of postal service executives , manage this annual organizationwide direction - setting process , led by operations and aided by the budget and financial analysis ( b&fa ) and the capital and program evaluation ( cape ) groups within the finance department . the establish team is expected to align the organization's targets and goals with its commitment to listen to the three “voices” that represent aspects of its mission: the voice of the business ( financial benefits ) , the voice of the customer ( customer satisfaction ) , and the voice of the employee ( employee satisfaction ) . the establish team is to review project and program funding requests and make preliminary selection and funding decisions on the basis of how the requests fit the organization's mission and budget . such a process allows an organization to identify systems that should be retained , modified , replaced , or otherwise disposed of in a timely manner . however , as we stated in our report , the postal service does not have such a process . the postal service's annual capital planning and budgeting cycle begins in january with a process called the customerperfect ! this process sets the postal service's financial and nonfinancial goals for the year . figure 3 provides detail on the postal service's capital planning and budgeting cycle . the process for approving major new it projects is the same as for any other new projects with capital costs of $5 million or more . these major projects are to proceed through the formal approval process and are monitored by the finance department in conjunction with the program sponsors when they are in development and implementation phases . the process for approving proposed capital investments is defined in the postal service's f - 66 manual . the process begins with the sponsoring unit preparing a decision analysis report ( dar ) , which presents the business case for the proposed project . figure 4 provides detail on the process for approving major new projects . the postal service's budget process does not satisfactorily address this critical process . during a capital project's life cycle , control and evaluation are accomplished through two processes . ( see app .