d independently reviewed . we ound that va did not adequately control changes to its operating software change control procedures were not consistently implemented . it is important to ensure that only authorized and fu tested systems are placed in operation . to ensure that changes to systems are necessary , work as intended , and do not result in the loss of data or program integrity , such changes should be documented , authorized , tested , an f systems . for example , in 1998 we reported that one va data center had not established detailed written procedures or formal guidance for modifying operating system software , for approving and testing operating system software changes , or for implementing these changes . the data center had made more than 100 system softwar changes during fiscal year 1997 , but none of the changes included evidence of testing , independent review , or acceptance . we report in 2000 that two va health care systems had not established procedures for periodically reviewing changes to standard application programs to ensure that only authorized program code was implemented . ed service continuity planning was not complete . in addition to protecting data and programs from misuse , organizations mu ensure that they are adequately prepared to cope with a loss operational capability due to earthquakes , fires , accidents , sabotage or any other disrup c continuity plan . such a plan is critical for helping to ensure that information system operations and data can be promptly restored in the event of a disaster . we reported that va had not completed o tested service continuity plans for several systems . for example , in 1998 we reported that one va data center had 17 individual disastertion . an essential element in preparing for such atastrophes is an up - to - date , detailed , and fully tested service recovery plans covering various segments of the organization , but itdid not have an overall document that integrated the 17 separate plans and defined the roles and responsibilities for the disaster recovery teams . in 2000 , we determined that the service continuity plans for two of the three health care systems we visited did not include critical elements such as detailed recovery procedures , provisions for restoring mission - critical systems , and a list of key contacts ; in addition , none of the health care systems we visited were fully testing their service continuity plans . these deficiencies existed , in part , because va had not implemen key components of a comprehensive computer security program . specifically , va's computer security efforts lacked ● clearly delineated security roles and responsib regular , periodic assessments of risk ; ● security policies and procedures that addressed all aspects of va's interconnected environment ; ● an ongoing security monitoring program to identi investigate unauthorized , unusual , or suspicious access activity ; and ● a process to measure , test , and report effectiveness of computer system , network , and process controls . as a result , we made a number of recommendations in 2002 were aimed at improving va's security management .