health . according to an evaluation of the health sector , the contractor's data management system was unable to collate data from service delivery subgrantees into a comprehensive picture for the overall service delivery effort , making it difficult for managers and usaid to judge progress or results . owing to these weaknesses and other problems , the performance measures that the kabul mission provided to decision makers in washington , d.c. , did not completely portray the status of each sector or the overall accelerating success initiative . for example , we found that the reported agriculture sector measures , such as kilometers of canal repaired , did not provide the information necessary to determine whether the program was meeting the primary objectives stated in the contract — increasing agricultural productivity and farmers' incomes . likewise , the only two measures where reported for the democracy and governance sector , the number of courthouses constructed , and the number of judicial personnel trained . those measures did not capture the performance of the diverse activities implemented in this sector . further , the data reported in some sectors did not always match contractor reports . for example , although contractor reports indicted that 77 schools were refurbished and 8 were substantially complete , reports provided to washington indicated that only 39 schools had been constructed or rehabilitated . infrastructure . the use of grants instead of contracts to accelerate the construction of some schools and clinics in fiscal 2004 made it difficult for usaid to hold grantees accountable , because no - penalty causes were included in the grant agreements . further , neither usaid nor its initial contractor developed a quality assurance plan for the school and clinic reconstruction effort . such a plan could have guided usaid's oversight efforts and assisted in the identification of problems . similarly , although the main infrastructure contractor was required to develop and submit a comprehensive quality control and assurance program for the kabul – kandahar road construction project , this was not done . according to a september 2004 usaid inspector general report , usaid did not inspect contract quality control laboratories until 21 months after road construction began . the regional office of the inspector general also found deficiencies in the contractor's quality control program , such as untrained personnel and lack of adherence to testing standards . all sectors . because of staffing constraints and competing priorities , usaid did not perform annual contractor performance evaluations in any sector as required by usaid policy directives in 2004 and federal regulation . the evaluations are intended to document contract quality , cost control , and timeliness ; and inform future award decisions . according to usaid , five additional contracting staff were hired in early fiscal 2005 and efforts to conduct evaluations subsequently began . in addition , according to contract provisions , technical and contracting officers are to meet quarterly and annually with contractors to discuss performance and other administrative and technical issues . although usaid maintains that staff met frequently with contractors throughout 2004 and conducted in - house reviews of some of the major programs , most meetings were ad hoc and records of the discussions were not always formally documented and reported .