( recommendation 1 ) . are there any electrical hazards present ? team members record information on deficiencies that they identify into an environment of care inspections database , which is used to document and track the status of deficiencies . during interviews with medical center staff at all six of the medical centers included in our review , officials told us they follow the environment of care inspections process that vha guidance outlines . at two of the medical centers we visited , we accompanied inspections team on environment of care inspections and observed staff following this process . the inspection teams walked through the areas designated for inspection , for example examining conditions of floors , ceilings and fire safety systems . also , as we discuss later in the report , vha officials also monitor aspects of the inspections process , such as who attends the inspection . vha officials told us they also collect data on performance measures related to utilization of the environment of care checklists and environment of care inspections process but no longer track these measures because medical centers achieved 100 percent utilization of these measures in 2015 . figure 1 below details the process used to identify and address deficiencies , as outlined in vha guidance . as previously mentioned , vha guidance considers these inspections to be critical to all aspects of patient care in a medical facility , and officials at all six medical centers confirmed that they rely on these inspections to identify needed repairs . for example , officials in one medical center noted that the frequency and thoroughness of these inspections has helped them determine day - to - day wear and tear issues and informed their planning processes . medical center staff noted that condition deficiencies identified through this process are often minor but are nonetheless important to maintenance of a clean and safe patient environment . for example , a damaged or stained ceiling tile identified during an inspection could be a potential safety hazard to patients or indicate an issue with leaking pipes . the replacement of the tile itself is a minor repair , but that repair could be an indication of an important maintenance issue at the medical center . as table 2 below shows , the deficiencies commonly identified through the inspections process include items that need to be cleaned or dusted or walls that need minor repairs . medical center staff we interviewed said , in general , the most common environment of care deficiencies can be addressed by medical center staff , but medical centers told us they sometimes use contractors if warranted . in most cases , a deficiency can be addressed with simple repairs such as patching and repainting walls , replacing stained and damaged tiles , or by cleaning . on our site visits , we saw examples of the types of issues that medical center staff address during environment of care inspections . in one case , we were shown a recurring deficiency at the medical center caused by moving hospital beds . moving beds in and out of rooms was damaging the plaster corners of a wall near the door .