this statement is based on the report we released today . to accomplish our report objectives , we reviewed procedural guidance , statistics , and other relevant documentation obtained from and interviewed officials at tsc , the fbi , the national counterterrorism center , the department of homeland security , and other agencies that perform terrorism - related screening . specifically , at the transportation security administration , we examined the prescreening of airline passengers prior to their boarding a flight ; at u.s. customs and border protection , we examined the screening of travelers entering the united states through ports of entry ; and at the department of state , we examined the screening of visa applicants . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . pursuant to homeland security presidential directive 6 , the attorney general established tsc in september 2003 to consolidate the government's approach to terrorism screening and provide for the appropriate and lawful use of terrorist information in screening processes . tsc's consolidated watch list is the u.s. government's master repository for all records of known or appropriately suspected international and domestic terrorists used for watch list - related screening . when an individual makes an airline reservation , arrives at a u.s. port of entry , or applies for a u.s. visa , or is stopped by state or local police within the united states , the frontline screening agency or airline conducts a name - based search of the individual against applicable terrorist watch list records . in general , when the computerized name - matching system of an airline or screening agency generates a “hit” ( a potential name match ) against a watch list record , the airline or agency is to review each potential match . tsc data show that state or local law enforcement officials have encountered individuals who were positively matched to terrorist watch list records thousands of times . although data on the actual outcomes of these encounters were not available , the vast majority involved watch list records that indicated that the individuals were released , unless there were reasons other than terrorism - related grounds for arresting or detaining the individuals , such as the individual having an outstanding arrest warrant . other outcomes included individuals matched to the no fly list and denied boarding ( did not fly ) and individuals matched to the no fly list after the aircraft was in flight . additional information on individuals on the watch list passing undetected through agency screening is presented later in this statement . u.s. customs and border protection data show that a number of nonimmigrant aliens encountered at u.s. ports of entry were positively matched to terrorist watch list records . for many of the encounters , the agency determined there was sufficient information related to watch list records to preclude admission under terrorism grounds . however , for most of the encounters , the agency determined that there was not sufficient information related to the records to preclude admission .