we disagree . while acknowledging hhs' past and ongoing efforts , already discussed in the report , we continue to think additional efforts are warranted . in addition , our conclusions and recommendations are firmly based in existing research . more specifically , as the report introduction and background discuss and as hhs notes , welfare reform is built upon a considerable research base . this research shows that welfare - to - work interventions can increase employment and reduce welfare use and that a mixed approach — with a strong work focus and some education and training as needed — shows the greatest earnings gains . this research also shows that the most successful approaches tested generally do not lead to stable , higher - paying employment . as a result , many former welfare recipients rely on other forms of government aid to help make ends meet and some return to the welfare rolls . we have added to our discussion of this research in the background section . a key unanswered question — and the focus of this report — is about identifying and testing additional ways to help low - income parents support their families through employment rather than reliance on government supports . we acknowledge that hhs has several important research efforts under way to shed light on these issues . our recommendation asks hhs to review its research agenda and seek out additional opportunities , given the importance of improving outcomes for low - income parents . we maintain that while not yet proven effective , the practices we identified hold promise and warrant additional attention in hhs' portfolio . we acknowledge that some strategies , such as microenterprises , will probably always be of limited scale . we also clearly understand that , as hhs said , congress created work requirements that emphasized some core activities and deemphasized others , such as post - secondary education . at the same time , congress gave states flexibility to include other approaches deemed to address state and local needs and some administrators we spoke with believe post - secondary education can play a role in moving families permanently off welfare . we also identified promising short - term , work - focused training strategies that would fit within existing tanf work requirements . hhs stated that we recommend that it do more to encourage states to shift their focus toward activities not emphasized by congress . what we found , and what we do recommend , is that the wide range of program administrators involved in helping low - income parents avoid welfare dependence would benefit from an even greater effort by hhs to provide information and practical technical assistance about promising practices . we think further collaboration among hhs , labor , and education in providing technical assistance warrants attention . as we already discuss in the report , hhs has several relevant and very important research efforts under way that will provide valuable information to policymakers . we understand that choices about where to focus limited research resources must be made and that its ongoing efforts are just one part of a larger portfolio of research related to tanf goals , including research on promoting safe and healthy marriages and fatherhood initiatives .