both agencies concurred with our recommendations . in addition , va provided us with comments on the draft report , which we have reprinted in appendix i , as well as general and technical comments , which were incorporated in the draft as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of veterans affairs ; the secretary of health and human services ; and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or williamsonr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs are on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . in addition to the contact named above , gerardine brennan , assistant director ; jennie apter ; lori fritz ; hannah marston minter ; and lisa motley made key contributions to this report . we were asked to examine how the agencies have implemented the mou . in this report , we address the ( 1 ) extent to which va and ihs have established mechanisms through which the mou can be effectively implemented and monitored ; and ( 2 ) key challenges that va and ihs face in implementing the mou , and the progress they have made in overcoming them . to address both of these objectives , we reviewed the mou and documentation related to the mou's implementation , including periodic updates and descriptions of sharing agreements . we also reviewed the signed reimbursement agreement between va and ihs as well as signed reimbursement agreements between va and tribes . we interviewed va and ihs officials , including va's director of the office of rural health and office of tribal government relations , the ihs chief medical officer , and leaders of 8 of 12 va / ihs workgroups tasked with addressing and implementing the mou to learn about the steps that have been taken to implement and monitor the mou and any related challenges . some smaller tribal communities with more limited postal access are not interested in using the cmop program , according to the workgroup members . this stakeholder's concern implies that va's outreach efforts may not be systematically reaching all tribal communities . specifically , federally recognized tribes have government - to - government relationships with the united states , and are eligible for certain funding and services provided by the united states . in addition , some native american veterans are members of the more than 400 indian groups that are not recognized by the federal government ( which we refer to in this report as non – federally recognized tribes ) . many — but not all — native american veterans are dually eligible for health care services in va and ihs . va's fiscal year 2012 budget for medical care was approximately $54 billion .