varying definitions . the national data collection efforts we reviewed could not provide a basis for combining the results to compute valid and reliable nationwide prevalence estimates because the efforts used varying definitions related to the four categories of crime . for example , cdc's youth risk behavior surveillance system's definition of dating violence included the intentional physical harm inflicted upon a survey respondent by a boyfriend or girlfriend . in contrast , the victimization of children and youth survey's definition did not address whether the physical harm was intentional . to address the issue of varying definitions , we recommended that the attorney general and the secretary of health and human services , to the extent possible , require the use of common definitions when conducting or providing grants for federal research . this would provide for leveraging individual collection efforts so that the results of such efforts could be readily combined to achieve nationwide prevalence estimates . hhs agreed with this recommendation . in commenting on our november 2006 draft report , doj expressed concern regarding the potential costs associated with implementing this and other recommendations we made and suggested that a cost - benefit analysis be conducted . we agreed that performing a cost - benefit analysis is a critical step , as acknowledged by our recommendation that doj and hhs incorporate alternatives for addressing information gaps deemed cost - effective in future budget requests . hhs agreed with this recommendation and both hhs and doj have taken actions to address it by requesting or providing additional funding for initiatives to address information gaps , such as those on teen dating violence . in response to our recommendation on common definitions , in august 2007 , hhs reported that it continued to encourage , but not require , the use of uniform definitions of certain forms of domestic violence and sexual assault it established in 1999 and 2002 , respectively . at the same time , doj reported that it consistently used uniform definitions of intimate partner violence in project solicitations , statements of work , and published reports . since then , officials from cdc reported that in october 2010 , the center convened a panel of 10 experts to revise and update its definitions of certain forms of domestic violence and sexual assault given advancements in this field of study . cdc is currently reviewing the results from the panel and plans to hold a second panel in 2012 , consisting of practitioners , to review the first panel's results and to obtain consensus on the revised definitions . moreover , hhs reported that it is also encouraging the use of uniform definitions by implementing the national intimate partner and sexual violence survey . this initiative is using consistent definitions and methods to collect information on women and men's experiences with a range of intimate partner violence , sexual violence , and stalking victimization . thus , by using consistent methods over time , hhs reported that it will have comparable data at the state and national level to inform intervention and prevention efforts and aid in the evaluation of these efforts .