this is no small task . for example , the report notes that one document that will need revision is a may 1968 memorandum that defines the roles and responsibilities of the office of defense programs and the albuquerque operations office . as we noted in our december 2000 report on the management of the office of defense programs , there have been several attempts to revise this relationship over the years , none of them successful . moreover , some of the proposals , such as the centers of excellence , are merely concepts that need to be further defined . in addition , streamlining the federal workforce is a difficult undertaking that will take a significant amount of time to fully implement . currently , no plan with milestones exists for refining these concepts and accomplishing the myriad of details needed to implement them . while we are hopeful that resolution of such long - standing issues may now be within nnsa's grasp , without the discipline of an implementation plan , reaching nnsa's organizational goals is likely to be a long and arduous process that could take several years . moreover , unless the new chains of command are enforced and federal and contractor staff are truly held accountable , this reorganization could be simply another in a long line of missed opportunities . numerous studies have identified problems in doe's planning , programming , and budgeting , including the lack of a unified planning and programming process , the absence of integrated long - range program plans , and the failure to fully link existing plans to budgets and management controls . without sound , integrated planning , programming , and budgeting , it has been difficult for officials to ensure that decisions with resource implications are weighed against one another in a complete and consistent fashion and that mission outcomes are linked to management controls . in our december 2000 report , we recommended that nnsa take action to improve and integrate its planning processes and to improve its budgetary data to provide needed management information . title 32 mandates the use of sound planning , programming , budgeting , and financial activities . it also requires that nnsa submit to the congress each year a future years nuclear security program plan that details nnsa's planned expenditures for the next 5 years . very early in his tenure , the current nnsa administrator indicated that he intended to comply with title 32 by instituting a planning , programming , and budgeting process similar to that in use at the department of defense ( dod ) . while dod's approach has not been without problems over the past 40 years , it is generally recognized as a system that , when properly led and staffed , is capable of making cost - effectiveness comparisons and of developing the detailed program and budget plans called for in title 32 . the administrator originally set a goal of having fully established nnsa's version of dod's planning , programming , and budgeting process — now referred to as the planning , programming , budgeting , and evaluation ( ppbe ) process — by the fiscal year 2003 budget cycle .