( see fig . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 7 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of transportation , the administrator of the federal aviation administration , nasa , dod , dhs , commerce , the office of science and technology policy , and other parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or dillinghamg@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . jpdo is also responsible for overseeing and coordinating nextgen research activities within the federal government and ensuring that new technologies are used to their fullest potential in aircraft and the air traffic control system . the memorandums of understanding among the partner agencies also require that the partner agencies have the mechanisms in place to coordinate and align their nextgen activities , including their nextgen - related budgets , acquisitions , and research and development . the legislation also directed the secretary of transportation to establish a senior policy committee , to be chaired by the secretary , to provide nextgen policy guidance and review , and to facilitate coordination and planning of nextgen by the partner agencies . to help implement the responsibilities described in the legislation , each partner agency assigned a liaison to jpdo — as well as staff to jpdo in some cases . in addition , several working groups were created to facilitate collaboration between partner agencies and the private sector , and the nextgen institute was created to be a forum for private industry involvement in nextgen planning and other activities . as initial nextgen planning was completed , and the focus turned to implementation , jpdo's role has changed to focus on long - term research past 2018 . furthermore , in 2010 a new jpdo director was appointed ( the office's fourth director in its 7 years of existence ) and jpdo was moved organizationally within faa to raise its prominence within faa and enable it to better serve as a mechanism for interagency collaboration . because nextgen implementation also requires expertise , research , and technology from the private sector , faa has developed processes and mechanisms for interacting with the private sector . faa views its acquisition management system ( ams ) as the primary mechanism for transferring research and technology from the private sector . faa's ams establishes policy and guidance for all aspects of the acquisition lifecycle , and the ams contracting process is designed to help faa procure products and services from sources offering the best value to satisfy faa's mission needs . election , assignment , nd chedling of ircrft to rnw to imltneously optimize opertion crossltiple irport . created four research transition teams as mechanisms to transition the complicated technologies that do not fit within a single faa office's purview under faa's structure .