household application . under the household - application method , a household submits an application provided by the school district . since a household application is used for all members in the household , a single application can list multiple students . schools send school - meals applications home at the beginning of each school year , but household applicants may apply at any time during the course of the year . online applications are also available in some school districts . the applicant lists all sources of household income , the frequency with which it is received , and the names of all household members , among other information . one adult from the household signs the application , certifying that the information provided is correct . no supporting documentation — such as tax returns or pay stubs — is required at the time of application . in accordance with usda guidance , school districts are not to conduct any actions to verify the information on the application during the certification process ; they must accept the applications at face value and determine eligibility based on the information voluntarily disclosed in the application . in addition , students who are in households receiving benefits under certain public - assistance programs , including snap or tanf , or meet an approved designation — regardless of income — are categorically eligible for free school meals . for example , students who are designated as ( 1 ) homeless , runaway , or migrant ; ( 2 ) a foster child ; or ( 3 ) enrolled in a federally funded head start program are categorically eligible for free meals . these households must state the reason for their categorical eligibility on the application along with any applicable public - assistance identification numbers . fns officials told us that school district officials have a responsibility to verify homeless , runaway , and migrant applications as part of the application approval process . figure 1 below is an example of a school - meals application and information required to be deemed categorically eligible . appendix iv provides a sample school - meals household application . to address the high improper - payment rates in the school - meals programs , among other actions , usda worked with congress to develop the child nutrition and wic reauthorization act of 2004 ( cnr ) .required school districts to directly certify students that receive snap benefits for free meals in all school districts by the 2008-2009 school year . usda officials told us that they are emphasizing the use of direct certification , because , in their opinion , it helps prevent certification errors without compromising access . school - meals programs and snap have cnr similar income - eligibility limits.snap is more detailed than the certification process under the nslp . direct certification has reduced the administrative burden on snap households , as they do not need to submit a separate school - meals application . it also reduces the number of applications school districts must review .