( see app . i for additional information on our meps analyses. ) although we conducted this performance audit from september 2012 to november 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . consumers may obtain health insurance from a variety of public and private sources , which can help protect them from the costs associated with obtaining medical care . health insurance typically includes costs to consumers , which may vary for a number of factors , including scope of coverage , cost - sharing provisions , and federal or state requirements . recent federal laws — specifically , ppaca and the children's health insurance program reauthorization act of 2009 ( chipra ) — further define coverage and cost parameters for certain health insurance plans available to consumers now and in 2014 , when exchanges are required to be operational , and include provisions to increase children's access to coverage . unlike states that opt to include coverage for eligible children under a chip - funded expansion of medicaid , and therefore , must extend medicaid covered services to chip - eligible individuals , states with separate chip programs have flexibility in program design and are at liberty to modify certain aspects of their programs , such as coverage and cost - sharing requirements . for example , federal laws and regulations allow states with separate chip programs to offer one of four types of health benefit coverage and , regardless of the benefit coverage option states choose , require states' separate chip programs to include coverage for routine check - ups , immunizations , and emergency services . states typically cover a broad array of services in their separate chip programs and , in some states , adopt the medicaid requirement to cover early and periodic screening , diagnostic and treatment ( epsdt ) services . effective october 1 , 2009 , chipra required chip plans to cover dental services defined as “necessary to prevent disease and promote oral health , restore oral structures to health and function , and treat emergency conditions.” chipra also required states to comply with mental health parity requirements — meaning they must apply any financial requirements or limits on mental health or substance abuse benefits under their separate chip plans in the same manner as applied to medical and surgical benefits . states covering epsdt services under separate chip plans were deemed to comply with these requirements . with respect to costs to consumers , chip premiums and cost - sharing may not exceed minimum amounts as defined by law . states may vary chip premiums and cost - sharing based on income and family size , as long as cost - sharing for higher - income children is not lower than for lower - income children .