accountability and effective oversight . the department established a governance structure for the fiar plan , which includes review bodies for governance and oversight . the governance structure is intended to provide the vision and oversight necessary to align financial improvement and audit readiness efforts across the department . to monitor progress and hold individuals accountable for progress , dod managers and oversight bodies need reliable , valid , meaningful metrics to measure performance and the results of corrective actions . in may 2009 , we reported that the fiar plan did not have clear results - oriented metrics . to its credit , dod has taken action to begin defining results - oriented fiar metrics it intends to use to provide visibility of component - level progress in assessment ; and testing and remediation activities , including progress in identifying and addressing supporting documentation issues . delays in the successful implementation of erps have extended the use of existing duplicative , stovepiped systems , and continued funding of the existing legacy systems longer than anticipated . additionally , the continued implementation problems can erode savings that were estimated to accrue to dod as a result of modernizing its business systems and thereby reduce funds that could be used for other dod priorities . to help improve the department's management oversight of its erps , we have recommended that dod define success for erp implementation in the context of business operations and in a way that is measurable . accepted practices in system development include testing the system in terms of the organization's mission and operations — whether the system performs as envisioned at expected levels of cost and risk when implemented within the organization's business operations . developing and using specific performance measures to evaluate a system effort should help management understand whether the expected benefits are being realized . without performance measures to evaluate how well these systems are accomplishing their desired goals , dod decision makers , including program managers , do not have all the information they need to evaluate their investments to determine whether the individual programs are helping dod achieve business transformation and thereby improve upon its primary mission of supporting the warfighter . another key element in dod efforts to modernize its business systems is investment management policies and procedures . we reported in june 2011 that dod's oversight process does not provide sufficient visibility into the military department's investment management activities , including its reviews of systems that are in operations and maintenance made and smaller investments . as discussed in our information technology investment management framework and previous reports on dod's investment management of its business systems , adequately documenting both policies and associated procedures that govern how an organization manages its information technology projects and investment portfolios is important because doing so provides the basis for rigor , discipline , and repeatability in how investments are selected and controlled across the entire organization . until dod fully defines missing policies and procedures , it is unlikely that the department's over 2,200 business systems will be managed in a consistent , repeatable , and effective manner that , among other things , maximizes mission performance while minimizing or eliminating system overlap and duplication .