ii ) . the cost of the census , in terms of cost for counting each housing unit , has been escalating over the last several censuses . the average cost for counting a housing unit increased from about $16 in 1970 to around $97 in 2010 constant dollars ( see fig . meanwhile , the return of census questionnaires by mail ( the primary mode of data collection ) declined over this period from 78 percent in 1970 to 63 percent in 2010 . declining mail response rates are significant and have led to higher costs because the mail response rate directly dictates the number of housing units in the nonresponse follow - up ( nrfu ) universe . nrfu , where the bureau attempts to contact households that did not mail back questionnaires , was the largest and most costly bureau field operation in 2000 and 2010 and has had an impact on overall census costs . over the past several censuses , the bureau has attempted to address the competing goals of containing costs and improving the quality of census information , but costs continued to rise in part because external factors , such as a growing and increasingly diverse population , required the bureau to devote more resources in order to ensure a complete count . the bureau is assessing various measures of the quality of the 2010 census . this effort , combined with a better understanding of the specific sources of cost growth , could help managers make cost control decisions . within its financial management system , the bureau classifies census costs into eight broad categories and hundreds of projects ( see fig . these broad categories are further subdivided into individual projects that may be discrete , such as the nrfu operation , which has its costs captured in a single project line , or several project lines may be combined , sometimes from multiple categories , to reflect the total cost of an operation , as is the case with the local update of census addresses ( luca ) operation . the 2010 census costs were concentrated in few categories . planning for the 2020 census is divided into five phases: ( 1 ) options analysis ; ( 2 ) research and testing ; ( 3 ) operational development and systems testing ; ( 4 ) supplemental research and testing ; and ( 5 ) readiness testing , execution , and closeout . the bureau has identified a range of design alternatives for the 2020 census and will narrow this range over the census life cycle . during fiscal year 2012 , the bureau will enter the research and testing phase and intends to develop a preliminary design that when adjusted for inflation will cost less than the $97 per housing unit cost of the 2010 census but will also maintain quality . during the research and testing phase , the bureau plans to execute at least 35 research projects to explore how design areas could be modified to control costs or improve quality . for example , the bureau will examine the feasibility of using administrative records , such as internal revenue service tax records , to collect information from nonresponders and thus reduce the fieldwork .