i for details on our scope and methodology ) . the irc permits employers to sponsor defined contribution ( dc ) retirement plans and outlines requirements to which plan sponsors must adhere for tax - qualified status . with dc plans , employees have individual accounts to which employers , employees , or both make periodic contributions . dc plan benefits are based on the contributions to , and investment returns on , the individual accounts , and the employee bears the investment risk . in some types of dc plans , including 401 ( k ) , 403 ( b ) , and 457 plans and the savings incentive match plan for employees ( simple ) , employees may choose to make tax - deferred contributions instead of receiving the same amount as taxable salary . irs and the pension and welfare benefits administration ( pwba ) of the department of labor are primarily responsible for enforcing laws related to private dc plans . under the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) of 1974 , irs and pwba jointly enforce standards for coverage and participation , for vesting , and for funding that , respectively , determine how plan participants become eligible to participate in benefit plans , define how participants become eligible to earn rights to benefits , and ensure that plans have sufficient assets to pay promised benefits . irs also enforces provisions of the irc that apply to tax - qualified pension plans , including provisions under section 401 ( k ) of the code . pwba enforces erisa's reporting and disclosure provisions and fiduciary standards , which concern how pension plans should operate in the best interest of participants . since the irs 401 ( k ) plan compliance study was undertaken in 1995 , various changes have occurred in certain legal requirements for tax - qualified status that irs examined in the study . certain requirements irs examined in the 401 ( k ) study are no longer applicable to tax - qualified dc plans or have been materially modified . also , the irc has since been amended to permit employers to adopt simple 401 ( k ) plans and safe - harbor design methods for 401 ( k ) plans . furthermore , the lack of a complete data set or comprehensive documentation supporting the published results limited our ability to reliably assess revisions in irs estimates of the proportion of plans that had one or more compliance errors and the frequency with which specific types of errors occurred among the plans in the study . additionally , the inability of irs to provide closed case file information on audited plans limited our ability to assess the reliability of the data collected for analysis . in light of these limitations , we elected to assess to what extent the irs study provides accurate estimates on 401 ( k ) plan noncompliance by evaluating , in relation to published guidance for conducting research , how the study was conducted . we evaluated the irs study using a series of brochures on surveys published by the american statistical association ( asa ) and published gao guidance on methodology and program evaluation .