highways . according to members and a stakeholder , the maritime administration may have had limited commitment to mtsnac in part because the group's original scope was the marine transportation system and all related federal agencies , some of which is beyond the administration's jurisdiction . in their view , mtsnac provided a useful and needed service by addressing the wide - ranging issues affecting the marine transportation system , but its advice may have been better targeted at agency officials with a commitment to the broader marine transportation system . balancing responsiveness with independence: balancing responsiveness to agencies' needs with ensuring independence can improve the usefulness of an advisory group . on one hand , responding to agencies' needs may help advisory groups produce useful recommendations or reports . but on the other hand , as we have previously reported , the advice and recommendations of federal advisory groups should be independent of influence by the entity that created the advisory group . similarly , we previously reported that advisory groups' independence is important because the effectiveness of faca advisory groups can be undermined if the members are , or are perceived to be , lacking independence . according to officials and members of the electricity advisory committee ( eac ) , a doe faca advisory group , eac's responsiveness to doe needs enhanced its usefulness and officials worked closely with the group's members to focus the direction of the group to meet the agency's needs . according to some eac members , agency officials generally identified the topic to be covered while members determined how eac would address the topic and sometimes identified additional topics to cover . officials found eac members to be responsive to doe needs . for example , at doe's suggestion , eac began developing “quick response” products to react to agency requests for information and input in lieu of lengthier reports . doe officials also assisted with the development of agendas for meetings , which can be highly interactive . this type of dialogue between agency officials and advisory group members can help the advisory group meet agency needs and enhance the usefulness of the group's products . however , there may be a tension between responsiveness and independence that could affect the group's usefulness . some advisory group members indicated that some situations may challenge members' efforts to maintain independence . for example , in one instance , members of mtsnac said that their sponsoring agency drafted recommendations and asked the group to endorse them , which the group declined . the members believed that the consensus - based recommendations they developed were valid even if they were not the recommendations that the agency wanted to hear . when asked for their perspectives on the group's usefulness in general , dot officials stated that they implemented some of mtsnac's recommendations and , while they did not always agree with other recommendations , members' diverse and varied perspectives could be useful . leveraging resources through collaboration: collaboration between an advisory group and other groups focusing on similar topics can help agencies spend resources efficiently , prevent unnecessary duplication , and enhance the group's usefulness .