agrivida . this small biotechnology company based in the boston area is developing genetically modified sorghum , corn , and switchgrass crops for use in biofuel production . agrivida representatives explained that the goal of their arpa - e project is to generate crops capable of producing enzymes within the plant itself to internally break down the plant's own cellulose after harvest . this technology would significantly lower the costs of cellulosic biofuel production , because enzyme treatments are currently a large part of the costs of current production methods . before winning an award from arpa - e , agrivida had received venture capital funding to develop the technology . we spoke with a representative of the venture firm that funded agrivida , who told us that this venture funding was only for research on the corn crop enzymes ; the firm was not willing to fund additional research on other crops because the amount of funding it could provide to any one company in the early stages of research was limited . agrivida officials told us that the arpa - e award allowed them to expand the scope of their work and conduct additional research on switchgrass , which may have potential to become a major biofuel crop . they said that the arpa - e funds have enabled rapid progress , allowing them to complete laboratory work in 1 year that would have otherwise taken 5 years . officials from agrivida said they hope to have made enough progress by the time they complete their arpa - e research to be able to attract additional investors and secure commercialization partners . this is a startup company that is developing flow batteries for use in transportation and electrical grid applications . unlike normal batteries , flow batteries generate electrical current by internally circulating electrically active liquids , which allows for much lower costs than traditional batteries . however , flow batteries do not exist for use in tight spaces like cars where their cost advantages could allow for significant improvements to electric vehicles . in 2010 , concurrent with its arpa - e award , 24m received $10 million from two venture capital firms to develop flow batteries for consumer and commercial applications . electrofuels . electrofuels projects intend to explore new paradigms for the production of renewable liquid fuels that are compatible with today's infrastructure . they seek to use microorganisms to harness chemical or electrical energy to convert carbon dioxide into liquid fuels without using petroleum or biomass . grid - scale electricity storage . grid - scale rampable intermittent dispatchable storage ( grids ) projects seek to develop new energy storage technologies that are comparable in reliability and cost to pumped hydropower and that are modular and can be deployed in any location in the country . building efficiency . building energy efficiency through innovative thermodevices ( beetit ) projects focus on developing new approaches and technologies for cooling equipment used in heating , ventilating , and air conditioning ( hvac ) systems in buildings , as well as in refrigeration . electrical power electronics .