we disagree . there are dependencies among projects that would benefit from prioritization . while it makes sense to investigate multiple mitigation options , unless noaa assesses the activities that have the most promise and accelerates those activities , it may not be sufficiently prepared to mitigate near - term data gaps . after spending 10 years and just over $5 billion , the goes - r program has completed important steps in developing its first satellite , and has entered the integration and test phase of development for the satellite . while the goes - r program is making progress , it has experienced recent and continuing schedule delays . as we have previously reported , problems experienced during the integration and test phase often lead to cost and schedule growth . in 2013 , we reported that technical issues on both the flight and ground projects had the potential to cause further delays to the program schedule . by the time of our latest report , in december 2014 , these and all other major milestones have been further delayed by 5 to 8 months . the goes - r program cited multiple reasons for these recent delays , including challenges in completing software deliverables and completing communication testing for the spacecraft . in addition to these intermediate delays , noaa moved the launch commitment date of the first goes - r satellite to march 2016 . further , the program's actions to mitigate schedule delays introduce some risks , and could therefore increase the amount of the delay . for example , the program attempted to mitigate delays by performing system development while concurrently working on detailed planning . in addition , the program has responded to prior delays by eliminating selected repetitive tests and moving to a 24-hour - a - day , 7-day - a - week spacecraft integration testing schedule . we have previously reported that overlapping planning and development activities and compressing test schedules are activities that increase the risk of further delays because there would be little time to resolve any issues that arise . a key element of a successful test phase is appropriately identifying and handling any defects or anomalies that are discovered during testing . while the goes - r program has sound defect management policies in place and is actively performing defect management activities , there are several areas in which defect management policies and practices are inconsistent . among the shortfalls are a number of cross - cutting themes , including in performing and recording information pertinent to individual defects , and in reporting and tracking defect information . the goes - r program has also not efficiently closed defects on selected components . specifically , data for the goes ground system shows that 500 defects remained open as of september 2014 . defect data for the spacecraft show that it is also taking an increasing amount of time to close hardware - related defects . until the program addresses shortfalls in defect management and reduces the number of open defects , it may not have a complete picture of remaining issues and faces an increased risk of further delays to the goes - r launch date .