we identified issues with the completeness of this request data . specifically , we found that the data may not fully capture the marine corps' demand for amphibious ships . as a result , this information may overstate the ability of the navy to fulfill these requests . we discuss these data - reliability issues further below . marine corps officials from the 23 units we interviewed also cited other factors that limit opportunities for amphibious operations training , such as the following: access to range space: seventeen of 23 marine corps units we interviewed identified access to range space as a factor that can limit their ability to conduct amphibious operations training . unit officials told us that priority for training resources , including range access , is given to units that will be part of a meu deployment , leaving little range time available for other units . in addition , unit officials told us that the amount of range space available can affect the scope and realism of the training that they are able to conduct . training for amphibious operations can require a large amount of range space , because the operational area extends from the offshore waters onto the landing beach and further inland . a complete range capability requires maneuver space , tactical approaches , and air routes that allow for maneuverability and evasive actions . each mef consists of 20,000 to 90,000 marines . adequate ranges have been identified as a challenge across dod . for example , according to dod's 2016 report to congress on sustainable ranges , some marine corps installations lack fully developed maneuver corridors , training areas , and airspace to adequately support ground and air maneuver inland from landing beaches . maintenance delays , bad weather , and transit time: ten of 23 marine corps units told us that changes to an amphibious ship's schedule resulting from maintenance overruns or bad weather can also reduce the time available for a ship to be used for training . the navy's amphibious ships are part of its surface force . an arg consists of a minimum of three amphibious ships , typically an amphibious assault ship , an amphibious transport dock ship , and an amphibious dock landing ship . figure 1 shows the current number of amphibious ships by class and a description of their capabilities . further details on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . the performance audit upon which this report is based was conducted from may 2016 to august 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate , evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we subsequently worked with dod from august 2017 to september 2017 to prepare this unclassified version of the original classified report for public release . this public version was also prepared in accordance with these standards .