becquerels . 2,000 teletherapy sources located primarily in developing nations around the world . additionally , strontium - 90 sources contained in large devices known as radioisotope thermoelectric generators ( rtg ) , designed to provide electric power to navigational facilities such as lighthouses and weather stations , contain between 25,000 and 250,000 curies . u.s. and russian officials have estimated that there were more than 1,050 rtgs produced and distributed throughout the former soviet union . these devices present a particularly high security risk because of their high levels of radioactivity and inadequate protection . the department of energy ( doe ) has reported that the rtgs likely represent the largest unsecured quantity of radioactivity in the world . waste storage facilities also pose a considerable threat if left unsecured because any one of these facilities can store , at any given time , up to 3 million curies of material . in 2001 , a congressional report directed doe to use a portion of its fiscal year 2002 supplemental appropriation to address the threat posed by dirty bombs . in response to the congressional requirement , the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) established the radiological threat reduction task force to identify , recover , and secure vulnerable , high - risk radiological sources , budgeting $20.6 million for the program in fiscal year 2002 . the program initially focused on securing sources in the countries of the former soviet union ( fsu ) because doe officials determined this region had the greatest number of vulnerable sources . in 2003 , at the direction of the secretary of energy , doe expanded the scope of the program to secure sealed sources worldwide , ultimately establishing the international radiological threat reduction ( irtr ) program . the program's primary objective is to protect u.s. national security interests by ( 1 ) implementing rapid physical security upgrades at vulnerable sites containing radioactive sources ; ( 2 ) locating , recovering , and consolidating lost or abandoned high - risk radioactive sources ; and ( 3 ) supporting the development of the infrastructure necessary to sustain security enhancements and supporting regulatory controls , including the development of regional partnerships to leverage international resources . in addition , doe has established a program to recover sealed sources produced and distributed in the united states , known as the u.s. radiological threat reduction program . part of this program's mission is to recover u.s. - origin sources on a case - by - case basis that were supplied by doe to other countries under the atoms for peace program . the irtr program is administered by nnsa with support from multiple national laboratories , including pacific northwest national laboratory ( pnnl ) , sandia national laboratory , argonne national laboratory , oak ridge national laboratory , remote sensing laboratory , brookhaven national laboratory , lawrence livermore national laboratory , and los alamos national laboratory . the national laboratories' responsibilities include ( 1 ) assessing the physical security requirements of countries participating in the program , ( 2 ) recommending specific upgrades to strengthen radiological source security , and ( 3 ) ensuring that recommended upgrades are properly installed . irtr is one of eight programs within doe's global threat reduction initiative ( gtri ) .