we recommended they do so . the department of commerce agreed with our recommendations , and the department of transportation stated that faa planned to revise its requirements and that these would establish performance measures and evaluation procedures . in september 2009 , we reported that the agencies were considering plans to consolidate 20 of the 21 existing center weather service units to two locations , but it was not clear whether and how the changes would be implemented . moreover , we reported that nws and faa faced challenges in their efforts to improve the aviation weather structure , including achieving interagency collaboration , defining faa's requirements , and aligning any changes with the next generation air transportation system . we also identified three challenges the agencies would face in implementing their plans — developing a feasible schedule that includes adequate time for stakeholder involvement , undertaking a comprehensive demonstration to ensure no services are degraded , and effectively reconfiguring the infrastructure and technologies . we recommended that the agencies address these challenges , and noaa and the department of transportation agreed with our recommendations . after developing and shelving four different proposals for restructuring the center weather service units over the last 5 years , nws and faa have reached agreement on how to improve aviation weather services . in march 2010 , nws proposed maintaining the current 21 center weather service units collocated at en route centers , increasing staffing at the aviation weather center in order to provide remote services during the service units' off - hours , and developing a new collaborative weather product . nws estimated that these improvements would cost faa about $3 million per year . this is in addition to the annual cost of maintaining the existing 21 centers . nws also estimated that it would be able to implement the proposal within 21 months . faa responded that it was not prepared to accept the proposal because of the increased costs . subsequently , in july 2010 , faa and nws reached an agreement on the steps the two agencies would take to improve aviation weather services . specifically , faa proposed and nws agreed to continue the current center weather service units at each of the 21 en route centers through september 2011 and to take immediate steps to improve aviation weather services by ( 1 ) having the service units provide forecasts at 10 key faa terminal radar approach control facilities and ( 2 ) providing around - the - clock coverage at all of the en route centers by having the local weather forecast office support the en route centers when the center weather service units are closed for the night — a practice that currently is used at selected en route centers . in addition , the agencies agreed to establish a joint team to baseline current capabilities and develop firm requirements for nws products and services supporting faa's air traffic flow management out through 2015 . the agencies expect that the joint team will establish an implementation plan by november 2010 and then begin to implement it .