a description of these weaknesses can be found in appendix ii . as mentioned previously , several of the departmentwide weaknesses resulted from combining previously identified weaknesses or reclassifying them , rather than from resolving the underlying internal control weaknesses . for example , in fiscal year 2003 , dhs's auditors reported a departmentwide material weakness related to financial systems functionality and technology . this weakness resulted from combining what accounted for 7 of the inherited weaknesses — 3 from customs , 2 from fema , 1 from ins , and 1 from tsa . appendix iii provides detailed information on the status of each of the 30 inherited weaknesses , including how they were reported in dhs's performance and accountability report . component agencies took various steps to resolve nine of the previously identified weaknesses inherited from component agencies . for example , customs had a previously identified weakness related to the effectiveness of its internal controls over accurate reporting of entry duties and taxes . these conditions were not unexpected for a newly created organization , especially one as large and complex as dhs . the coast guard and the strategic national stockpile had weaknesses in financial oversight that have led to reporting problems . financial reporting: key controls to ensure reporting integrity were not in place , and inefficiencies made the process more error prone . at the coast guard , the financial reporting process was complex and labor - intensive . several dhs bureaus lacked clearly documented procedures , making them vulnerable if key people leave the organization . financial systems functionality and technology: the auditors found weaknesses across dhs in its entitywide security program management and in controls over system access , application software development , system software , segregation of duties , and service continuity . many bureau systems lacked certain functionality to support the financial reporting requirements . property , plant , and equipment ( pp&e ) : the coast guard was unable to support the recorded value of $2.9 billion in pp&e due to insufficient documentation provided prior to the completion of audit procedures , including documentation to support its estimation methodology . the transportation security administration ( tsa ) lacked a comprehensive property management system and adequate policies and procedures to ensure the accuracy of its pp&e records . operating materials and supplies ( om&s ) : internal controls over physical counts of om&s were not effective at the coast guard . as a result , the auditors were unable to verify the recorded value of $497 million in om&s . the coast guard also had not recently reviewed its om&s capitalization policy , leading to a material adjustment to its records when an analysis was performed . actuarial liabilities: the secret service did not record the pension liability for certain of its employees and retirees , and when corrected , the auditors had insufficient time to audit the amount recorded . the coast guard also was unable to provide , prior to the completion of audit procedures , sufficient documentation to support the recorded value of $201 million in post - service benefit liabilities .