gao - 17-317 . washington , d.c.: february 15 , 2017 . ( recommendation 2 ) . we provided a draft of this report for review and comment to dod . in written comments , dod objected to our matter for congressional consideration and concurred with both recommendations . dod's comments are summarized below and reprinted in their entirety in appendix vi . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . dod objected to our matter for congressional consideration that congress should consider , in any future brac authorization , a requirement for dod to identify appropriate measures of effectiveness and to track the achievement of its goals . dod stated that , as advised by brac counsel , it believes this requirement would subvert the statutory requirement that military value be the priority consideration . however , as we noted when we originally directed this recommendation to the department in march 2013 , our recommendation does not undermine dod's reliance on military value as the primary selection criteria for dod's brac candidate recommendations , and dod can still prioritize military value while identifying measures that help determine whether dod achieved the military value that it seeks . congress enacting a requirement for dod to identify appropriate measures of effectiveness and to track the achievement of its goals , alongside the requirement to prioritize military value , would address dod's concern about subverting a statutory requirement related to military value . moreover , the department will likely have a better understanding of whether it achieved its intended results while still continuing to enhance military value . we selected locations for site visits based on ensuring geographic diversity and a mix of types of brac recommendations ( closures , transformation , or jointness ) , and having at least one installation from or community associated with each military department . to assess the extent that dod measured the achievement of goals for reducing excess infrastructure , transforming the military , and promoting jointness for brac 2005 , we met with officials to discuss measurement of goals and requested any related documentation . we compared dod's efforts to standards for internal control in the federal government , which emphasizes that an agency's management should track major agency achievements and compare these to the agencies' plans , goals , and objectives . we also tried to calculate the excess infrastructure disposed of during brac 2005 ; however , dod's data were incomplete . specifically , in reviewing the square footage and plant replacement value data from dod's cost of base realignment actions model , we found that data from several bases were not included . additionally , a senior official with the office of the assistant secretary of defense for energy , installations , and environment stated the data provided were not the most current data used during brac 2005 and the office did not have access to the complete data . ( recommendation 1 ) in the event of any future brac round , the secretary of defense should ensure that asd ( ei&e ) provides specific guidance for the military departments to monitor and report on mission - related changes that require significant changes to the recommendation business plans .