ii. ) the comments described actions planned that respond to our recommendations , such as incorporating processes developed for the vetsnet project in standard project management policies , processes , and procedures that would be used for all it projects in the department . in addition , the comments provided further information on actions already taken , such as details of the records conversion process . if the planned actions are properly implemented , they could help strengthen the department's management of the replacement system project and improve the chances that the system will be successfully completed . we are sending copies of this report to the chairman and ranking minority member of committee on veterans' affairs . we are also sending copies to the secretary of veterans affairs and appropriate congressional committees . we will make copies available to other interested parties upon request . copies of this report will also be made available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . should you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6304 or by e - mail at melvinv@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . these programs are not based on income . pension benefits programs , on the other hand , are income based ; these are designed to provide income support to eligible veterans and their families who experience financial hardship . eligible veterans are those who served in wartime and are permanently and totally disabled for reasons that are not service - connected ( or who are age 65 or older ) . veterans are also eligible for burial benefits . survivor benefits may be paid to eligible survivors of veterans , depending on the circumstances . some of these benefits are based on financial need , such as death pensions for some surviving spouses and children of deceased wartime veterans , and dependency and indemnity compensation to some surviving parents . finally , certain benefits may be paid to third parties , such as individuals to whom a veteran has given power of attorney or medical service providers designated to receive payments on the veteran's behalf . generally , vba administers benefit programs through 57 veterans benefits regional offices in a process that requires a number of steps , depending on the type of claim . when a veteran submits , for example , a compensation claim to any of the regional offices , a veterans service representative must obtain the relevant evidence to evaluate the claim ( such as the veteran's military service records , medical examinations , and treatment records from va medical facilities or private medical service providers ) . in the case of pension claims , income information would also be collected . once all the necessary evidence has been compiled , a rating specialist evaluates the claim and determines whether the claimant is eligible for benefits . if the veteran is determined to be eligible for disability compensation , the rating veterans service representative assigns a percentage rating based on the veteran's degree of disability .