preclearance . cbp preclearance locations serve as ports of entry into the united states where cbp officers are authorized and empowered to make admissibility decisions about passengers and their accompanying goods or baggage destined for the united states . according to cbp program documents and officials , an inspection at a preclearance location is essentially the same inspection an individual would undergo at a port of entry in the united states , and cbp officers conducting preclearance inspections exercise identical authority as cbp officers at domestic ports of entry to approve or deny admission into the united states . once precleared , a passenger is admitted to the united states and will not require additional cbp inspection upon arrival . however , according to cbp's deputy director of preclearance operations , cbp officers retain the authority to inspect these travelers and their accompanying goods or baggage after arriving in the united states should inspection be warranted . according to cbp program documentation , as of may 2015 , cbp has 568 staff located in preclearance facilities in 15 locations in six countries . immigration advisory program and joint security program . according to cbp program documents and officials we interviewed , under both iap and jsp , cbp partners with foreign governments and air carriers to identify and prevent high - risk travelers , travelers without proper documents , and other potentially inadmissible travelers from boarding according to cbp program documentation , as of u.s. - bound flights . may 15 , 2015 , cbp has 41 iap and 11 jsp staff in 11 locations around the world . iap officers operate primarily at airports in western europe , and have access to the sterile and boarding areas of the host airports to question passengers and review their travel documents.iap concept , cbp launched jsp in two locations in 2009 . according to a senior cbp official responsible for overseeing iap , under jsp agreements with these host governments , cbp officers partner with the host country law enforcement to identify air passengers linked to terrorism , narcotics , weapons , and currency smuggling . in addition , he stated that while cbp officers at these locations do not have unescorted access to the host airport's sterile area and must be accompanied by local law enforcement personnel , they do have the ability to question passengers and review their travel documents . further , both iap and jsp officers themselves may not exercise u.s. immigrations and customs authorities at the airport as cbp officers stationed at preclearance locations do . however , a senior iap and a jsp official stated that officers work closely with the air carriers and local law enforcement to identify fraudulent passports and visas and other factors that may render a passenger inadmissible to the united states and support a no - board recommendation to the commercial air carrier — i.e. , recommending that the carrier not transport the passenger because the passenger will likely building on the be deemed inadmissible upon arrival in the united states .