marshals . the marshals service's budget was $676.5 million in fiscal year 2002 . the director , deputy director , and 94 u.s . marshals direct the activities of 95 district offices and personnel stationed at more than 350 locations throughout the 50 states , guam , northern mariana islands , puerto rico , and the virgin islands . for the marshals service , an investigation consists of locating and arresting a federal fugitive . the marshals service initiates fugitive investigations in response to two basic scenarios . in the first , an individual has already been in the federal criminal justice system and has subsequently become a fugitive . the fugitive may have failed to make a court appearance , escaped from custody , or violated the terms of parole or supervised release . in each of these instances , the court issues a warrant and the marshals service is responsible for investigating , apprehending , and arresting the fugitive . in the second scenario , another law enforcement agency has investigated an individual , the individual has been indicted and a warrant issued , and the agency requests that the marshals service make the apprehension . unlike other law enforcement agencies that investigate the commission of a crime , the marshals service investigations primarily consist of locating ( tracking down ) and arresting federal fugitives . the marshals service uses its warrant information network to track the number of fugitive warrants received and closed . the network is a computer - based automated system that manages records and information collected during investigations of fugitives . the system can also provide data for analyses that are used to report information to congress or for management purposes , for example , to provide a listing of active warrants for a specific offense or for a district or suboffice . figure 11 shows the number of warrants closed for fiscal years 1998-2001 . the marshals service takes custody of all federal prisoners arrested by all federal officials empowered to make arrests . the marshals service prisoner tracking system ( pts ) maintains a record of all suspects arrested for federal offenses and booked by the marshals service . the marshals service claims arrests on its workload statistics if a deputy marshal actually makes the arrest , based on a federal fugitive warrant . if another law enforcement agency brings a prisoner to the marshals service for booking , that agency would be recorded as the arresting agency in the pts . when either a deputy marshal or an agent from another federal agency , such as the dea , fbi , or customs service , presents a federal prisoner for booking by the marshals service , the following procedures are followed: a marshals service form 312 ( prisoner personal history ) is filled out , and the prisoner is fingerprinted and photographed . the form contains background information on the prisoner , the charges , case number , and which agency brought the prisoner in for booking . the agent ( eg , dea ) that fills out the marshals service form 312 is called the lead agent and that agency will be credited with the arrest in the pts .