( see fig . combined , in 2075 a full one - fifth of gdp will be devoted to federal spending for these three programs alone . to move into the future with no changes in federal health and retirement programs is to envision a very different role for the federal government . our long - term budget simulations serve to illustrate the increasing constraints on federal budgetary flexibility that will be driven by entitlement spending growth . assume , for example , that last year's tax reductions are made permanent , revenue remains constant thereafter as a share of gdp , and discretionary spending keeps pace with the economy . under these conditions , spending for net interest , social security , medicare , and medicaid would consume nearly three - quarters of federal revenue by 2030 . this will leave little room for other federal priorities , including defense and education . by 2050 , total federal revenue would be insufficient to fund entitlement spending and interest payments . ( see fig . beginning about 2010 , the share of the population that is age 65 or older will begin to climb , with profound implications for our society , our economy , and the financial condition of these entitlement programs . in particular , both social security and the hospital insurance portion of medicare are largely financed as pay - as - you - go systems in which current workers' payroll taxes pay current retirees' benefits . therefore , these programs are directly affected by the relative size of populations of covered workers and beneficiaries . historically , this relationship has been favorable . in the near future , however , the overall worker - to - retiree ratio will change in ways that threaten the financial solvency and sustainability of these entitlement programs . in 2000 , there were 4.9 working - age persons ( 18 to 64 years ) per elderly person , but by 2030 , this ratio is projected to decline to 2.8 . this decline in the overall worker - to - retiree ratio will be due to both the surge in retirees brought about by the aging baby boom generation as well as falling fertility rates , which translate into relatively fewer workers in the near future . social security's projected cost increases are due predominantly to the burgeoning retiree population . even with the increase in the social security eligibility age to 67 , these entitlement costs are anticipated to increase dramatically in the coming decades as a larger share of the population becomes eligible for social security , and if , as expected , average longevity increases . as the baby boom generation retires and the medicare - eligible population swells , the imbalance between outlays and revenues will increase dramatically . medicare growth rates reflect not only a rapidly increasing beneficiary population , but also the escalation of health care costs at rates well exceeding general rates of inflation . while advances in science and technology have greatly expanded the capabilities of medical science , disproportionate increases in the use of health services have been fueled by the lack of effective means to channel patients into consuming , and providers into offering , only appropriate services .