however , 26 u.s.c . state issues millions of passports each year . as such , the amount of tax debt for individuals currently holding u.s. passports may be in multiples of our $5.8 billion estimate for fiscal year 2008 . our investigations found that these individuals used their passports to travel to mexico , france , and africa . issuing passports to “deceased” individuals , in these cases , enabled fraudulent activity of these individuals who traveled internationally using the identity of and impersonating the deceased individual . we referred these two cases to irs for further investigation . similar to the state contractors , 26 u.s.c . § 6103 also precludes us from referring these fraud cases to state directly . to implement such a restriction , the executive branch may want to use the fplp as the mechanism or as a model to determine whether an individual owes federal taxes for purposes of passport restrictions . currently , the department of defense ( dod ) and centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) periodically send their payment information ( eg , dod federal contracts payment data and medicare claims data for physician services , respectively ) to fplp to determine whether those payments should be levied for federal taxes . the dollar amount of these debts was about $1.3 billion . although the over $5.8 billion in unpaid federal taxes owed by individuals issued a passport as of september 30 , 2008 , is a significant amount , it likely substantially understates the full extent of unpaid taxes owed by these or other individuals . the irs tax database reflected only the amount of unpaid federal taxes reported by the individual on a tax return or assessed by irs through its various enforcement programs . the irs database does not reflect amounts owed by businesses and individuals that have not filed tax returns or understated their taxable income and for which irs has not assessed tax amounts due . for example , during our audit , we identified several instances from our 25 case studies in which individuals issued a passport failed to file tax returns for a particular tax period and irs had not assessed taxes for these tax periods . consequently , while these individuals likely had unpaid federal taxes , they were listed in irs records as having no unpaid taxes for those periods . further , our analysis did not attempt to account for individuals who purposely underreported income and were not specifically identified by irs as owing the additional federal taxes . if such a federal law were enacted , criteria would need to be established in determining when a tax debt meets the passport restriction requirement . in addition , congress or the executive branch may need to decide if certain individuals should be exempted from this requirement , such as for national security purposes . to identify examples of abuse or criminal activity , we selected 25 passport recipients with federal tax debts for detailed audit and investigation .