have they been successful ? hud does not offer property owners any specific incentive to keep properties affordable to low - income tenants after maturity of their hud mortgage . during the 1990s , hud established incentive programs to deal with the loss of affordable units because owners were prepaying their mortgages and opting out of their section 8 contracts . these incentives include the mark - up - to - market program , section 236 decoupling , and section 202 prepayments . these incentives do not directly address the termination of the affordability requirements resulting from mortgage maturity . rather , they can extend , under certain circumstances , the affordability period beyond the original term of the mortgage , as in the section 236 decoupling incentive , or allow property owners to be better positioned financially to continue providing affordable housing , as in the case of section 202 prepayments and mark - up - to - market . state and local agencies identified tools and incentives to preserve affordable housing , but not specifically for addressing maturing hud mortgages . the 226 state and local agencies that responded to our survey commented on the effectiveness of 18 tools and incentives as a mean to preserve hud's affordable rental housing . of the 18 , 6 were funded directly by the federal government , while 12 were administered by state and local governments and were not directly federally funded . however , there was no evidence that they have been used to protect properties when hud mortgages mature . this may be because relatively few mortgages have matured to date . what are the possible effects if the section 8 contract maturity date is shorter than the fha mortgage maturity date ? the effects depend largely on the owner's decision about the future use of the property . as noted in our response to question 2 , an owner's decision to renew a section 8 contract can be influenced by a number of factors , such as neighborhood incomes , the condition of the property , and owner's mission . consideration of these factors would likely also apply to properties where the section 8 contract expiration date is earlier than the scheduled maturity date on the hud mortgage . when mortgage maturity is imminent , an owner may also consider what the impact of losing the interest rate subsidy as well as paying off the hud mortgage will be on the property's cash flow . when interest rate subsidies were first paid to properties built in the 1960s and 1970s , they represented substantial assistance to property owners . over time , inflation has substantially reduced the value of this subsidy relative to the rental assistance subsidy , which is adjusted annually to account for increases in operating costs . project - based rental assistance now provides the bulk of the assistance to these subsidized properties . therefore , it is possible that , under certain circumstances , such as where a surrounding neighborhood has gentrified and the property can be upgraded at a reasonable cost , a for - profit owner may decide to forgo the remaining interest rate subsidy payments and prepay the mortgage at the time the project - based contract expires .