the final rule had not been issued as of august 2015 . the tobacco control act aimed to , among other things , promote cessation to decrease health risks and social costs associated with tobacco - related diseases . according to the act , fda can , by regulation , require restrictions on the sale , distribution , advertising , and promotion of a tobacco product if the agency determines that the proposed regulation is appropriate for the protection of public health , based on a consideration of the risks and benefits to the population as a whole , including users and nonusers of tobacco products . in the act , congress recognized that virtually all new users of tobacco products are under the age of 18 . in the proposed deeming rule , fda stated that it was researching the effect of e - cigarette use on public health . fda noted that e - cigarettes could have a positive net impact if using them resulted in minimal initiation by children and adolescents and in significant numbers of smokers' quitting . the fda also noted that e - cigarette use could have a negative net impact if it resulted in significant initiation by young people , minimal quitting , or significant dual use of combustible products , such as cigarettes , and noncombustible products , such as e - cigarettes . the irc , which defines tobacco products subject to fet and sets rates of tax , does not specifically define or list a tax rate for e - cigarettes . however , two states — minnesota and north carolina — have imposed an excise tax on e - cigarettes or vapor products containing nicotine . the minnesota department of revenue issued a notice in 2012 stating its position that e - cigarettes are subject to the tobacco products tax ; the current tax rate is 95 percent of the wholesale price of the nicotine - containing liquid or , if the liquid cannot be sold separately , of the complete e - cigarette . north carolina has taxed vapor products at 5 cents per milliliter of nicotine - containing liquid or other material since june 2015 . we used five different dates during the period january 2012 to october 2013 for the time variable , and we estimated regressions for each date .