this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions you may have . for further information on this testimony , please contact bernice steinhardt , director , strategic issues , at ( 202 ) 512-6543 or steinhardtb@gao.gov . key contributions to this testimony were made by elizabeth curda ( assistant director ) , and benjamin t. licht . contact points for our congressional relations and public affairs offices may be found on the last page of this statement . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . addressing these fiscal challenges will require action on several fronts . first , all federal programs and activities — discretionary programs , mandatory spending , revenues , and tax expenditures — need to be reexamined . second , program structures that are outmoded , overlapping , duplicative , fragmented , and not up to the challenges of the times must be reformed or restructured . in this regard , we recently issued a report that identified over 80 areas of potential duplication , overlap , or fragmentation as well as cost savings and revenue - enhancing opportunities . in addition , weaknesses in management capacity , both governmentwide and in individual agencies , undermine efficient and effective government . here too , our recent update to our high - risk list identified numerous opportunities to reduce costs and improve government performance . moving forward , the gpra modernization act can offer opportunities to help make tough choices in setting priorities as well as reforming programs and management practices to better link resources to results . my statement today , which is based on our past and ongoing work , will focus on five key areas where the requirements of gprama could help address government challenges . a may 2006 report by the center for naval analyses showed that if dod and the services had chosen to implement one of the three larger - scale alternative concepts studied by dod , the department could have achieved significant savings . our adjustment of those projected savings into 2010 dollars indicates those savings could range from $281 million to $460 million annually depending on the alternative chosen and numbers of military , civilian , and contractor positions eliminated . dod officials said that they generally agreed with the facts and findings in our analysis . teacher quality programs: in fiscal year 2009 , the federal government spent over $4 billion specifically to improve the quality of our nation's 3 million teachers through numerous programs across the government . the tax credit will cost $5.7 billion in forgone revenues in 2011 .