see h.r . 112-331 , at 975 ( 2011 ) ( accompanying h.r . 2055 , 112th cong . ( 1st sess . 2011 ) , enacted as the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 , pub . 112-74 , 125 stat . ( 2 ) to what extent does tsa have a consistent process for informing air passengers about how to make screening complaints ? ( 3 ) to what extent does tsa have complaint resolution processes that conform to standards of independence to ensure that these processes are fair , impartial , and credible ? groups to obtain their perspectives on tsa's processes for receiving and documenting air passenger screening complaints and for using this information to monitor or enhance screening operations . the views of these industry groups are not generalizable to all members of the aviation industry but provided us with additional perspective and insights . the groups were selected to include organizations representing airlines , airports , travel agencies , and travelers , among others . in addition , we interviewed officials from the u.s. department of transportation's aviation consumer protection division . we also obtained and analyzed air passenger screening complaint data from october 2009 through june 2012 from four tsa headquarters units . we selected october 2009 as the starting point because it was the first month of the fiscal year that included the december 2009 terrorist attempt to detonate an explosive device during an international flight bound for detroit , which prompted tsa to implement changes to its air passenger screening operations . in addition , we obtained and analyzed air passenger screening complaint data from april 2011 through june 2012 from a database tsa uses to document screening complaints collected through tsa's talk to tsa web - based portal . this database became operational in april 2011 , according to tsa officials . on the basis of information from and discussions with tsa officials related to the controls in place to maintain the integrity of tsa's complaint data , we determined that the data from each database were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . in addition , we selected a nonprobability sample of six airports — including one airport participating in tsa's screening partnership program ( spp ) — at which to interview tsa airport officials ( and contractors' representatives ) about their processes for receiving and documenting air passenger screening complaints and for using this information to inform screening operations and improve customer service . we also obtained supporting documentation and data from officials at these six airports . we visited and observed security checkpoints at four of the airports . at the five airports where tsa performs the screening function , we interviewed tsa federal security director ( fsd ) staff responsible for screening and customer service , such as tsa screening supervisors and managers and tsa customer support managers . at the spp airport , we interviewed tsa fsd staff responsible for customer service and contractor officials responsible for screening . while the information gathered from the interviews cannot be generalized to all commercial airports , it provided important perspective to our analysis of air passenger screening complaint processes , which is focused on airports at which tsa staff conduct screening .