secure grid . in october 2011 , dhs , along with multiple federal agencies and industry representatives , participated in a 2-day security exercise to assess the federal government's response to an extreme solar weather event . the exercise entailed a crisis simulation with the goal of exploring how private and government agencies would respond to a solar storm causing widespread power outages and damage to the electric grid , how they might cooperate during such a crisis , and to explore what steps could be taken to mitigate such severe events . two of the key findings , among others , cite the need to develop a national strategy to determine the costs of hardening the electric grid against space weather events , and the need to conduct a comprehensive study to assess the cascading effects of a widespread and long - term shutdown of the electric grid caused by a space weather event . below is a summary of doe and ferc's training and outreach efforts . installation of magnetometers . in 2014 , doe funded an initiative to gather additional data on gic and magnetic fields to help scientists validate models and develop more accurate estimations and modeling . as of october 2015 , doe reported plans to add 12 magnetometers to supplement the existing 6 that united states geological survey ( usgs ) has deployed nationwide . two of those 12 will be fully funded by industry while 10 will be funded through a cost - share program between doe and industry . these magnetometers are intended to provide owners and operators with real - time data on the expected currents that may impact their transformers . doe officials added that this is a less costly alternative to deploying more monitors on transformers to measure actual currents during a gmd . recovery transformer ( recx ) . in 2012 , dhs science & technology ( s&t ) , with support from doe and electricity sector representatives as part of the sector specific plan , partnered with industry to develop three prototype single - phase , extra - high - voltage transformers that could significantly reduce the time to transport , install , and energize a transformer to reduce recovery time from power outages associated with transformer failures from several months to less than 1 week . s&t , along with industry partners , piloted the recx prototype for 2.5 years . dhs reported that recx proved to be successful in an operational environment and could potentially reduce the impact of power outages . resilient electric grid ( reg ) . in 2007 , s&t partnered with industry to develop a fault current limiting high temperature superconducting cable that allows power substations to interconnect and share power in an internet - like fashion enabling multiple paths for power to flow while mitigating the risk of cascading fault currents . the cable system enables re - architecting urban area distribution grids to allow power to be rerouted in emergencies and will facilitate rapid and resilient recovery for grid outages . a prototype cable will be deployed in the grid in new york for a pilot demonstration . s&t is also evaluating a commercial scale deployment of the technology in downtown chicago .