the impact of 10 u.s.c . 2464 from such determinations is uncertain . investments in facilities , equipment , and human capital have not been sufficient in recent years to ensure the long - term viability of the military services' depots . this situation is in part due to the weaknesses we identified in the core policy and related implementation practices . also contributing is dod's downsizing of depot infrastructure and workforce . as a result , the investment in capital equipment and human capital resources for dod's depot facilities declined significantly . today's military depot capability is primarily in the repair of older systems and equipment . at the same time , the average age of the depot worker is 46 with about one - third eligible to retire within the next five years . the department has only recently begun to consider changes to core capability policies that will generate the workloads , the facilities , and the personnel required to support future core capabilities in government facilities . consequently , the department lacks strategic and related service implementation plans that address the development of future capabilities for both the maintenance facilities and the workforce . capital investments in depot facilities and plant equipment declined sharply in the mid - 1990s as a consequence of defense downsizing , depot closures and consolidations , and dod plans to increase reliance on the private sector for logistics support of new weapon systems . as a result of dod's lack of investment in its internal depot system — particularly , by not assigning new and upgraded systems to the depots for repair — the military depot system is aging and is not keeping up with the latest technologies . in recent years , funding has started to increase slightly as the services have recognized the need to modernize the depots . as with any business , modernizing and refurbishing plant and equipment for optimal operating efficiency , as well as acquiring new capabilities and cutting - edge technologies linked to new workloads , are important to future viability of the military depots . figure 4 depicts depot investments from fiscal years 1990 through 2000 from the three primary funding sources — the capital purchases program , military construction , and new weapon systems procurement and upgrade programs . the depiction has been adjusted for inflation . of the estimated $3 billion in capital investment funding the military depots received between fiscal years 1990 and 2000 , about 60 percent was for the capital purchases program that buys equipment to replace old depreciated equipment . funding for this program was much lower during the 1990s than under its predecessor programs in the 1980s . more recently , funding levels have increased ; but almost one - half of the funds went to meet environmental requirements , to purchase general use computers , and to do minor construction — requirements that may be needed for business purposes but typically do not increase maintenance production capabilities or add new technological capabilities to accomplish new workloads . the military construction appropriation funds new and replacement depot facilities . military construction represents about 26 percent of the total depot capital investments between 1990 and 2000 .