deconfliction . the ibet or best were also used in conjunction with other interagency forums to deconflict operations planned by various agencies that operate in geographic areas of responsibility common to multiple law enforcement agencies , according to officials in all offices we interviewed . for example , the colocation of best members raised awareness of operations and activities at the border due to the daily and ongoing information being shared between members , according to ice participants in the blaine and detroit sectors . ibet participants from the spokane sector also had daily telephone conversations to discuss their operations , and subgroups within the ibet met once a week to share information and intelligence and discuss operations to prevent unknowingly interrupting each other , according to a border patrol participant . dhs components also used joint operations as a means to integrate federal border security efforts with northern border partners from state and local governments , tribal nations , and canada . the 9 / 11 commission stressed the importance of extensive collaboration with international partners as well as increasing interaction between federal , state , and local law enforcement through joint efforts that would combine intelligence , manpower , and operations to address national security vulnerabilities . what progress has dhs made in securing the northern border , and to what extent has dhs used its partnerships and coordination efforts to address dhs's reported border security vulnerabilities ? in conducting our work , we interviewed headquarters officials at dhs , doj , the department of the interior ( doi ) , and usda ; analyzed dhs documentation ; and conducted site visits to four northern border locations . we selected border patrol's blaine , spokane , detroit , and swanton sectors to visit as they comprise a mix of differences along the northern border regarding geography ( western , central , and eastern border areas ) , threats ( terrorism , drug smuggling , and illegal migration ) , and threat environment ( air , marine , land ) as shown in figure 1 . we conducted interviews with federal , state , local , tribal , and canadian officials relevant to these border patrol sectors . although other northern border partners do not divide their geographic areas of responsibility by sectors , for the purposes of this report , we refer to the northern border partners — such as ice and dea — whose area of responsibility overlaps with these sectors as officials operating within these border patrol sectors . while we cannot generalize our work from these visits to all locations along the northern border , the information we obtained provides examples of the way in which dhs and other federal agencies coordinate their efforts with these northern border partners . to address the first objective , we reviewed documents that included relevant legislation affecting the northern border , a past report to congress in response to legislated requirements , and agency strategies , including the dhs quadrennial homeland security review , and cbp's northern border strategy .