cir . 2001 ) , noting a legislative mandate for a position - oriented approach in cases of requests for law enforcement officer credit by requiring the “basic reasons” for the existence of the position must be the performance of law enforcement officer duties . under this approach , if the position was not created for the purpose of investigation , apprehension , or detention , then the incumbent of the position would not be entitled to law enforcement officer credit . cole , 2007 mspb lexis 4819 ( 2007 ) . what are the rationales and potential costs for extending such benefits to additional occupations or employee groups ? to what extent have federal agencies used human capital tools , such as retention incentives , to retain both law enforcement and other related personnel ? to answer these questions , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and reports by opm , the congressional budget office , and the congressional research service that describe the current processes by which enhanced retirement benefits are provided , as well as six different pieces of legislation introduced in the 110th congress that would have provided enhanced benefits to specified employee groups . we also reviewed cbp legislation that was enacted into law . as agreed upon with your office , our review focused on the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , department of justice ( doj ) , and department of the treasury's internal revenue service ( irs ) because these federal entities employed approximately 84 percent of all law enforcement and law enforcement - related personnel in fiscal year 2008 . for the purposes of this report , we are defining the term “law enforcement personnel” in a manner that is broader in scope than the statutory and regulatory “law enforcement officer” definitions . specifically , when we refer to “law enforcement personnel” in this report , we are including those employed in occupations that currently receive leo or similar enhanced benefits . in addition , we are defining “law enforcement - related personnel” as ( 1 ) those employed in occupations that do not currently receive leo or similarly enhanced retirement benefits , but who perform some law enforcement - related job functions , including but not limited to , having arrest authority , carrying a weapon , or participating in some investigative or inspection capacity or ( 2 ) those who have previously expressed interest in obtaining enhanced retirement benefits directly through legislation . we did not include other specialized non law enforcement related annuity recipients , such as federal air traffic controllers and firefighters , in the scope of our review . we obtained information on the benefits provided to law enforcement personnel from dhs , doj , and irs , as well as opm and select employee organizations and unions , and analyzed this information to determine the extent to which the benefits granted to employee groups and occupations vary . in addition , we analyzed data from opm's central personnel data file ( cpdf ) for the population of law enforcement and law enforcement - related personnel within dhs , doj , and the department of the treasury as well as on a governmentwide basis .