what are the priorities of the embassy ? does each agency's mission reinforce embassy priorities ? to what extent are mission priorities not being sufficiently addressed due to staffing limitations or other impediments ? to what extent are workload requirements validated and prioritized and is the embassy able to balance them with core functions ? do the activities of any agencies overlap ? given embassy priorities and the staffing profile , are increases in the number of existing staff or additional agency representation to what extent is it necessary for each agency to maintain its current presence in country , given the scope of its responsibilities could an agency's mission be pursued in other ways ? does an agency have regional responsibilities or is its mission entirely focused on the host country ? cost of operations what is the embassy's total annual operating cost ? what are the operating costs for each agency at the embassy ? to what extent are agencies considering the full cost of operations in making staffing decisions ? to what extent are costs commensurate with overall embassy strategic importance , with agency programs , and with specific consideration of rightsizing options what are the security , mission , and cost implications of relocating certain functions to the united states , regional centers , or to other locations , such as commercial space or host country counterpart agencies ? to what extent could agency program and / or routine administrative functions ( procurement , logistics , and financial management functions ) be handled from a regional center or other locations ? do new technologies and transportation links offer greater opportunities for operational support from other locations ? do the host country and regional environments suggest there are options for doing business differently , that is , are there adequate transportation and communications links and a vibrant private sector ? to what extent is it practical to purchase embassy services from the private sector ? does the ratio of support staff to program staff at the embassy suggest opportunities for streamlining ? can functions be reengineered to provide greater efficiencies and reduce requirements for personnel ? we did not set priorities for the elements in the framework that appear in this report . moreover , we believe that decision makers need to consider security , mission , and cost collectively in order to weigh the trade - offs associated with staffing levels and rightsizing options . we did not imply that there is a problem of exploding growth in overseas staffing levels that needs to be reined in . our statement that there is a need for a systematic process to determine overseas staffing levels ( i.e. is existing space being optimally utilized ? have all practical options for improving the security of facilities been considered ? do issues involving facility security put the staff at an unacceptable level of risk or limit mission accomplishment ? what is the capacity level of the host country police , military , and intelligence services ? do security vulnerabilities suggest the need to reduce or relocate staff ? other reviews reached similar conclusions .