most of these were in the third milestone . although 49 of the project's 72 work elements were supposed to have been completed before 2003 , as of march 2003 , less than 40 percent ( 19 of the 49 work elements ) had actually been completed by that date . in addition , 2 other work elements that were scheduled for completion after 2003 were actually completed by march 2003 . according to the master plan , amtrak was scheduled to complete the first milestone — initiate electrified service — by mid - 1997 , but it did not initiate such service between boston and new york city until january 2000 , and the electrification was not substantially completed until july 2000 — about 3 years later than expected . the electrification was delayed , in part , because amtrak changed contractors in 1995 after the first electrification contractor went out of business and the contract was terminated . amtrak then had to hire a new contractor to complete the work and lost about 2 years in work time . as of march 2003 , 4 of the work elements for this milestone were still incomplete , including the line electrification work element , for which final acceptance is still pending . amtrak has yet to attain the second milestone — initiate 3-hour service . amtrak did begin limited acela express high - speed train service in december 2000 , but this service is scheduled to take 3 hours 24 minutes from boston to new york , not 3 hours . the 3-hour goal has not been met , in part , because work elements on the 56-mile segment of track between new haven and new rochelle that is operated by metro - north railroad have not been completed . amtrak did not believe work on this line segment was necessary to achieve 3-hour service . however , both fra and commuter rail officials told us that work on this track segment is essential for achieving the 3-hour goal . among the work elements that have not been completed is the reconfiguration of the new rochelle ( “shell” ) interlocking . originally this was to include the construction of a “flyover” ( elevated track ) , called the shell flyover . according to amtrak officials , at - grade improvements are now planned rather than a flyover because of high costs . work at new rochelle is critical because of the severe train congestion in this area — connecticut department of transportation officials said more than 200 commuter trains a day go through the shell interlocking . as of march 2003 , about three - quarters of the work elements ( 12 of 17 work elements ) needed to reach this milestone were incomplete or their status was unknown . according to amtrak , work on some elements under this milestone is actively under way . for example , the stamford center island platforms were completed in the summer of 2003 , and final curve modifications were under design .