such a goal does not show progress toward improving the resource . bia recognizes the importance of developing goals that measure results and is attempting to establish them . according to the agency , the primary obstacle to the establishment of outcome goals for protecting and preserving indian trust lands and resources is the lack of readily available data for measuring results . in most instances , an explanation was provided when a new goal was added , but the absence of an explanation in this case confused efforts to track from one year to the next . interior also revised the section of the report dealing with the restoration of the south florida ecosystem to reflect the goals contained in the strategic plan issued by the south florida ecosystem restoration task force in july 2000 in response to our recommendation . the third column discusses the extent to which interior's fiscal year 2002 performance plan includes performance goals and measures to address the management challenges that we and interior's oig have identified . while interior's performance reports discussed the department's progress in resolving many of its management challenges , the department did not have goals for the management challenge dealing with information security and therefore did not discuss progress in resolving the challenge in fiscal year 2000 . interior has been engaged in workforce planning and information security activities during fiscal year 2001 . we agree with interior officials that the issue of strategic human capital management was identified by us as a high - risk area in january 2001 when , according to interior officials , it had finished most of its planning and reporting for fiscal year 2000 . to address their concern , we revised the report to underscore this date when we first mention the high - risk issues in the report . we also noted , however , human capital issues have been a long - standing problem for many federal agencies and that the inclusion of human resources in performance plans has been required as part of the gpra process since 1999 , when the first performance plans were developed . in addition , omb circular a - 11 contains guidance to federal departments to discuss strategies , including the planned use of human resources , to achieve goals in their annual performance plans . the interior officials also provided technical clarifications , which we made as appropriate . as arranged with your office , unless you announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to the chairman of the senate committee on governmental affairs , the chairman and ranking minority member of the house committee on government reform , the secretary of the interior , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested congressional committees . this report will also be available on gao's home page at http:\\www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii .