reexamine the base . given the federal government's fiscal outlook , we have reported that we cannot accept all of the federal government's existing programs , policies , and activities as “givens.” rather , we need to rethink existing programs , policies , and activities by reviewing their results relative to the national interests and by testing their continued relevance and relative priority . improve the efficiency of current facilities . finally , better managing existing system capacity and improving performance of existing facilities could minimize the need for additional expenditures . we have reported that the efficiency of the nation's surface transportation programs are declining and that the return on investment could be improved in a number of ways , including creating incentives to better use existing infrastructure . in addition to better aligning revenues and outlays , improving existing mechanisms that are intended to help maintain highway account solvency could help dot better monitor and manage the account balance , thereby reducing the likelihood of a funding shortfall . for example , statutory mechanisms designed to make annual adjustments to the highway account have been modified over time — particularly through changes in safetea - lu — to the extent that these mechanisms either are no longer relevant or are limited in effectiveness . furthermore , monitoring indicators throughout the year that could signal sudden changes in the highway account revenues could help dot better anticipate potential changes in the account balance that should be communicated to congress , state officials , and other stakeholders . we recently made recommendations to help dot improve solvency mechanisms for the highway account and communication on the account's status with stakeholders . turning to aviation funding , the excise taxes that fund airport and airway trust fund revenues have been lower than previously forecasted , and forecasts of future revenues have declined because of a decline in airline passenger travel , fares , and fuel consumption . moreover , the uncommitted balance in the trust fund has decreased since fiscal year 2001 . ( see fig . for the short run , lower - than - expected excise tax revenues will reduce the trust fund balance even further and could affect funding for faa programs this year and next . in the longer run , continued declines in trust fund revenues may require congress to reduce spending on faa operations and capital projects , increase revenues for the trust fund by introducing new fees or increasing taxes , or increase faa's funding provided by the general fund . improvements in transportation safety are needed to reduce the number of deaths and injuries from transportation accidents , the vast majority of which occur on our nation's roads . we recently reported that although the number of traffic crashes and the associated fatality rates has decreased over the last 10 years , the number of fatalities has , unfortunately , remained at about 42,000 annually and some areas are of particular concern . for example , in 2007 , over half of the passenger vehicle occupants killed were not using safety belts or other proper restraint , nearly one - third of the total fatalities were in alcohol - impaired driving crashes , and motorcyclist fatalities increased for the 10th year in a row .