gao - 12-427 . washington , d.c.: may 21 , 2012 . opp posted this information on its website . however , in reviewing the information on the website , as well as supporting documents provided by opp , we were unable to verify these calculations , in part because opp was unable to locate some of the supporting documentation . in addition , some of the documentation provided did not always make clear whether the submitted data had been timely or reviewed by opp . furthermore , we found that some of the statements on the website were confusing ; used technical terms such as “registration,” “action,” and “decision” without defining the terms ; and contained other discrepancies . some of these problems have been cited by legal and environmental groups who found this information confusing as well . although opp officials generally agreed that revisions were needed to the discussion on the website for clarity , opp had no specific plan or time frame for doing so . regardless of any clarifications needed to the website , an opp deputy director expressed confidence in the results of this analysis . we were unable to verify this assertion . further , epa still needs to take steps to correct these misclassifications in order to ensure the accuracy and integrity of its data and make clear the statutory basis for these program actions . several weaknesses contributed to incorrect data entries into oppin . first , according to opp officials , opp regulatory staff did not have sufficient guidance or training to help them determine when a program action met the criteria for conditional registration . second , according to opp's internal review , there was limited , organized management oversight to ensure that regulatory actions not subject to the narrow scope of section 3 ( c ) ( 7 ) were not mischaracterized by opp staff as conditional registrations . as a result , as the internal review stated , the actions that were classified as conditional registrations have varied across opp's three divisions and by individual entering data into oppin within each division . in addition , data management weaknesses contributed to the misclassification of registrations or other actions as conditional . for example , opp officials said that oppin does not generate management reports of summary data that could have alerted managers to the excessive use of “conditional registration” due to the inaccurate classification of actions as conditional registrations by opp staff . under the federal standards for internal control , federal agencies are to employ internal control activities , such as management reviews at the functional or activity level , to help ensure that management's directives are carried out and to determine if agencies are effectively and efficiently using resources . without the ability to generate summary data on conditional registrations from oppin , opp managers cannot easily conduct such reviews . however , they are still responsible for monitoring and ensuring the accuracy of conditional registration data .