( recommendation 1 ) . we provided a draft of this report to hhs for review and comment . we found that the states addressed ocs's comments . as previously discussed , texas state officials also said that they found the guidance for terminating a deficient agency's csbg funding confusing . however , officials in new york said that they found the guidance to be clear . they said that the informational memorandum on terminating agencies' csbg funding is more prescriptive than previously issued csbg guidance . ocs officials stated that the agency is continuously seeking opportunities to work with its technical assistance centers to identify the best means of delivering guidance to states and to eligible entities . ocs officials also said that they must continue to refresh training efforts when there is turnover among key staff in a state agency and work with new state administrators to transition into their new roles . state agency officials in all three states we visited told us that they used some of their state's discretionary funding for training and technical assistance to help local agencies meet csbg requirements . the csbg act allows states to use a maximum of 10 percent of their csbg funds for training and technical assistance and other specified purposes . in the selected states , officials spent from $65,000 to over $400,000 for training and technical assistance for local agencies ( see table 4 ) . across the three selected states , we found that the training provided to local agencies addressed what local agencies need to do to meet a wide variety of csbg requirements , from planning community needs assessments to implementing performance management requirements . in addition , some funds states provided for training were used by local agencies to send their staff to regional or national conferences for training ( see table 5 ) . state officials in two of the three states we visited said that they determine what training they need to offer based on analysis of feedback and specific requests from local agencies . for example , texas identified training needs for local agencies through a training and community affairs group that gathered information from local agencies about their training needs . texas officials said they analyzed assessment results , feedback , and requests from local agencies and other sources to determine the training needs of individual state and local agencies . state officials said that they then met with the state association to develop the joint state training and technical assistance plan and , ultimately , to provide trainings at the annual state conference , and to identify workshops , webinars , and online resources ( guides , tools , best practices , and links to other training resources ) that need to be added or changed . similarly , state officials in north dakota reported working closely with the state association of community action agencies to plan and conduct training for local agency staff . state and local agency officials also said that they have relied on the ocs - funded national resource centers for assistance .