we believe this is a positive step . however , the issued instruction indicates that the command anticipates the need for future revisions to the instruction as the process continues to evolve and as dod undertakes efforts to integrate air and missile defenses across the department . since u.s. strategic command issued the instruction when our draft report was with dod for comment , we modified the recommendation to direct u.s. strategic command and the missile defense agency to regularly review and update their guidance as the process evolves . dod also commented that the missile defense agency is defining its own guidance for its organizational roles and responsibilities to complement u.s. strategic command's guidance ; however , dod's comments did not provide us with a schedule or time frame for the completion of this effort . until the missile defense agency's guidance is completed , the combatant commands will continue to lack transparency into the missile defense agency's process for addressing their needs and the means to hold the agency accountable . dod also agreed with our recommendation that u.s. strategic command and the missile defense agency establish effective methodologies for identifying , prioritizing , and addressing the combatant commands' capability needs for ballistic missile defenses . in its comments , dod stated that u.s. strategic command and the missile defense agency are implementing effective methodologies for identifying , prioritizing , and addressing combatant command capability needs . yet dod also acknowledged that these methodologies continue to be refined . our report recognizes that u.s. strategic command and the missile defense agency are taking steps to improve the methodologies used in the warfighter involvement process ; however , we identified limitations with the current methodologies used to identify and prioritize the combatant commands' capability needs . for example , we found that the prioritized capabilities list did not fully identify some of the combatant commands' specific needs . we also determined that the combatant commands did not consistently apply criteria for prioritizing their capability needs , and also did not clearly distinguish among their priorities . as u.s. strategic command works to refine the methodologies for identifying and prioritizing capabilities , it will need to overcome these challenges . dod agreed with our recommendation that u.s. strategic command , in conjunction with the other combatant commands , prepare an assessment of the missile defense agency's funding plans compared to the commands' priorities and provide feedback to the missile defense agency . in its comments , dod stated that u.s. strategic command is preparing a capabilities assessment report that examines the effectiveness and programmatic aspects of the ballistic missile defense system compared to the commands' priorities , which it will present to the missile defense agency in the fall of 2008 . dod also commented that u.s. strategic command has prepared a “quick look” of this report , which it provided to the missile defense agency in june 2008 . we encourage u.s. strategic command to provide the final assessment to the missile defense agency as soon as possible so that the agency can consider the results of the assessment in developing its future funding plans .