we also interviewed officials from the u.s . postal service ( usps ) and va's two primary mailing equipment providers , neopost and pitney bowes . we reviewed the reliability of the mail expenditure and volume data va reported to the general services administration's ( gsa ) simplified mail accountability reporting tool ( smart ) in fiscal years 2015 and 2016 . the smart tool is used by gsa to collect mail data from federal agencies , as part of gsa's efforts to oversee federal mail practices and ensure that agencies are managing their mail operations efficiently and effectively . in an effort to assess the validity of va's reported mail volume and costs , we reviewed va's reported fiscal year 2015 and 2016 expenditure and volume data with its service providers , usps , united parcel service ( ups ) , and fedex . to supplement our work at the national level , we collected information on the mail practices in place at the 10 va facilities with the highest mail volume reported in smart in fiscal year 2015 . we collected information from each facility including on their smart - reporting process , their use of performance measures for mail operations , and the role of facility mail managers . we observed mail operations and interviewed mailroom personnel at a vba regional benefit office and a vha medical center . while findings from these facilities are not generalizable to all va facilities , they provide examples of va's mailing practices . to obtain information on gsa's oversight of va's mail management efforts , we interviewed officials responsible for mail management policy from gsa's office of government - wide policy . finally , to learn about issues veterans may face in receiving mail from va , we interviewed representatives of and obtained information from disabled american veterans and the american legion . we selected these veterans service organizations because their memberships are among the highest in the country . we conducted this performance audit from june 2016 to july 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . va is comprised of several entities , including its central office in washington , d.c. , and three administrations — vha , vba , and the national cemetery administration . because these entities each provide different services for veterans , they each handle different types of outgoing mail . see figure 1 for a description of the services each administration and their associated facilities provide , and examples of outgoing mail . va sends hundreds of millions of pieces of mail annually as part of its mission to provide care and benefits to veterans and their dependents . for example , vba mails correspondence related to compensation and copies of documents to veterans service organizations , and vha mails prescription medications and letters to notify veterans of medical appointments .