therefore , we did not modify our recommendations . dod also provided technical comments , which we addressed . dod's letter is reprinted in appendix ii , along with our evaluation of its comments . dod supports this belief with two points . details on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . the national industrial security program was established in 1993 for the protection of classified information . dss administers the national industrial security program on behalf of dod and 23 other federal departments and agencies . dss is responsible for providing oversight , advice , and assistance to more than 11,000 u.s. contractor facilities that are cleared for access to classified information . contractor facilities can range in size , be located anywhere in the united states , and include manufacturing plants , laboratories , and universities . about 221 industrial security representatives work out of 25 dss field offices across the united states and serve as the primary points of contact for these facilities . dss is responsible for ensuring that these contractors meet requirements to safeguard classified information under the national industrial security program . contractors must have facility security clearances under this program before they can work on classified contracts . to obtain a facility security clearance , contractors are required to self - report foreign business transactions on a certificate pertaining to foreign interests form . examples of such transactions include foreign ownership of a contractor's stock , a contractor's agreements or contracts with foreign persons , and whether non - u.s. citizens sit on a contractor's board of directors . dss's industrial security representatives provide guidance to contractors on filling out the certificate . if a contractor declares no foreign business transactions on the certificate , dss places the certificate in the contractor's file located in the field . when u.s. contractors with facility security clearances have changes in foreign business transactions to report , they are required to complete the certificate again and resubmit it every 5 years , even if no foreign transactions take place . because a u.s. company can own a number of contractor facilities , the corporate headquarters or another legal entity within that company is required to complete the certificate . when contractors declare foreign transactions on their certificates and notify dss , industrial security representatives are responsible for ensuring that contractors properly identify all relevant foreign business transactions . they are also required to collect , analyze , and verify pertinent information about these transactions . for example , by examining various corporate documents , the industrial security representatives can determine corporate structures and ownership and identify key management officials . the representatives may consult with dss counterintelligence officials , who can provide information about threats to u.s. classified information . dod's position that there is little in our report that would enable dss to improve the foci process or justify the cost of implementing our recommendations underscores the department's failure to grasp the gravity of our findings . dod has neither systematically evaluated the effectiveness of its foci process nor identified opportunities to strengthen its oversight for contractors under foci . our recommendations specifically target correcting these weaknesses .