reg . 59,022 ( sept. 30 , 2014 ) ( to be codified at 43 c.f.r . pts . projects were located in certain preferred areas — called designated leasing areas . projects outside designated leasing areas . the proposed rule would establish a minimum bond amount per turbine of $20,000 for wind energy development projects — a doubling of the minimum amount currently set in blm policy — and establish a minimum bond amount of $10,000 per acre for solar energy development projects . the minimum bond amount for wind energy site - specific or project area testing projects would remain at the amount currently set in blm policy , that is , $2000 per meteorological tower . the proposed rule would require both wind and solar right - of - way applicants to submit a reclamation cost estimate to help blm to determine the bond amount , and it would outline specific bond components that must be addressed when determining the estimated costs . the proposed rule would not require blm to conduct periodic reviews to assess whether the bonds remain adequate to cover potential reclamation costs , as is specified in the current wind and solar policies . projects inside designated leasing areas . the proposed rule would establish a standard bond amount for wind energy development of $20,000 per turbine and $2,000 per meteorological tower , as well as a standard bond amount for solar energy development of $10,000 per acre . blm proposed a standard bond amount because these areas would be identified by blm as areas with lesser and fewer environmental and cultural resource conflicts . according to blm officials , when a project terminates inside a designated leasing area , the agency would potentially reoffer the site for new wind or solar energy development . as a result , these sites would require less reclamation than if they needed to be fully reclaimed to their predeveloped condition and the bond amount required would be lower . under the proposed rule , right - of - way holders would not be required to submit a reclamation cost estimate . a blm official told us that the agency expects the proposed rule to be finalized by the end of 2015 . once finalized , the official said blm plans to rescind the current wind and solar policies and replace them with policies that would address , among other things , the bonding process and adequacy reviews not covered in the proposed rule . we found that blm has about $100 million in bonds — primarily in the form of letters of credit and surety bonds — to cover reclamation costs associated with 12 solar rights - of - way and 108 wind rights - of - way on federal land in nine western states , according to our analysis of blm data . see table 1 for further detail on the values of bond held and table 2 for further detail on the types of bonds held . blm tracks bonds through lr2000 and the bond and surety system , but we found that neither system was reliable for this purpose . specifically , we found multiple instances in each system where information was missing , inaccurate , or had not been updated as follows: missing information .