most of the misreporting was underreporting . these nrp results showed that an estimated 61 percent of schedule c filers underreported their net income and 9 percent overreported . these reporting errors resulted in $93.6 billion , before adjusting , of misreported net business income as shown in figure 3 . this misreporting included an estimated $99 billion of underreported and $5.4 billion of overreported net income . the underreporting of net business income was caused by misreporting of both gross income and expenses , as shown in figure 3 . an estimated 39 percent of sole proprietors ( 6.9 million ) made an error on the gross income line of schedule c and underreported about $53 billion net after subtracting overstatements from understatements . an estimated 73 percent of sole proprietors ( 10.9 million ) made an error on the total expense line of the schedule c and overreported about $40 billion net after subtracting understatements from overstatements . overstating expenses reduces net business income and thus taxes . however , understating expenses may also contribute to understated tax if it is done to disguise understating higher amounts of gross income . the misreporting of expenses was spread over all the 23 expense categories on the schedule c. however , 55 percent of expense misreporting was concentrated in four categories: car and truck , depreciation , supplies , and other . the unadjusted nrp results underestimate the amount of misreporting . the estimates in figure 3 are based on errors detected in the nrp reviews . irs knows that not all misreporting is detected during its examinations , including nrp reviews . unreported cash receipts , for example , are difficult to detect . irs uses various methodologies and other sources of data ( on cash transactions , for example ) to adjust the aggregate nrp results ( but not individual line items ) to estimate misreporting . the nrp data limitations are more fully described in appendix i . after these adjustments , irs estimates that sole proprietors misreported 57 percent of their net business income in 2001 and that the tax gap caused by this misreporting of sole proprietor net business income in 2001 was $68 billion . this is a substantial upward adjustment from the estimated $36.9 billion in understated taxes from all sources on returns with a schedule c attached based on what nrp detected . taxpayers misreport income and expenses for a variety of reasons . some misreporting is intentional ; some is unintentional . how much misreporting is in each category is not known . irs refers some misreporting for criminal prosecution , but often it is impossible to tell from a tax return whether errors are intentional . beyond intentional misreporting , reasons for errors include transcription mistakes , misunderstanding of the relevant tax laws or regulations , and poor recordkeeping . examples from our review of nrp examination case files illustrate some of these types of reporting errors: the sole proprietor operated a cash - card business and reported about $900,000 in gross receipts on the schedule c. the business is largely done with cash transactions .