ssap no . 103 , which took effect on january 1 , 2013 , increases the details about cash collateral that companies report on statutory financial statements , such as the maturation of investments obtained with it and instances in which counterparties can call it back . naic also added a new reporting requirement , schedule dl which requires insurance companies to provide more details to support the aggregate information about invested collateral reported on an insurer's statutory financial statements . naic changed the methodology it used in its guidance to state insurance regulators to determine the amount of risk - based capital ( rbc ) that state regulators should require insurers to hold for nonagency mbs investments . as discussed earlier , life insurance companies saw a decline of almost 6 percent in capital in 2008 . prior to the change , naic's methodology for calculating rbc charges for nonagency mbs relied on agency ratings . for example , capital charges were lower for rmbs with a relatively high agency rating than for those with a lower rating . during the crisis , the historically high levels of failed mortgages across the nation were followed by rating agency downgrades of nonagency rmbs that required insurers to increase their capital levels . naic officials told us that , in hindsight , using agency ratings to help determine the amount of capital an insurer should hold for their nonagency mbs investments was not appropriate because these securities were rated too highly before the crisis and overly pessimistic after the crisis . as a result , naic moved to a methodology for calculating rbc charges for nonagency mbs that determined an expected recovery value for each security based on a set of economic scenarios . naic contracts with blackrock and pimco to conduct these analyses . naic reported that this change in methodology not only had eliminated reliance on agency ratings , but also had increased regulatory involvement in determining how rbc charges were calculated for nonagency mbs . naic officials saw both of these results as positive . although this change in methodology did result in a change in rbc charges for more than half of insurers' rmbs holdings , the change did not significantly affect insurers' financial statements . because the new methodology resulted in estimated recovery values that were higher than the amortized values of rmbs shown on financial statements , in 2010 capital requirements for 59 percent of the insurance industry's nonagency rmbs were reduced . however , almost 88 percent of industrywide cmbs holdings in 2011 were not affected by these changes . officials from one rating agency said the change was appropriate because the new methodology was actually similar to the one used by the rating agency itself . officials from another rating agency said that the switch to the new modeling method reduced transparency to insurers because naic did not release its modeling results for insurers to use until late in the year . during the financial crisis , some state regulators granted some insurers permission to use prescribed and permitted accounting practices that helped the insurers improve their capital positions .