usace . usace cleaned up 10 fusrap sites that are now within lm's portfolio . under a memorandum of understanding signed by doe and usace in 1999 , doe is responsible for the long - term management of fusrap sites after usace completes cleanup . key requirements that govern usace's cleanup of fusrap sites include cercla and the national oil and hazardous substances pollution contingency plan . private licensees . lm's portfolio includes seven sites cleaned up by private licensees , i.e. , commercial operators who were permitted to operate uranium mills or other facilities under a license from the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) . in all except one case , private licensees cleaned up these sites under title ii of umtrca , which assigned responsibility to the licensee for reclamation of uranium mill sites operating on or after the law's enactment in 1978 . when a private licensee has completed all cleanup requirements , nrc approves transfer of a site to lm for long - term management . cleanup activities conducted by these entities included decontaminating , decommissioning , and demolishing buildings ; containing and disposing of a variety of hazardous and radioactive wastes ; excavating and stabilizing contaminated soil ; constructing engineered disposal cells for contaminated materials ; containing and treating contaminated surface water and groundwater ; and preparing the land for future public , industrial , or commercial use . depending on the legal and regulatory framework governing cleanup , other agencies or groups may have played a role in setting cleanup standards and helping to select a site's cleanup remedy . for example , sites cleaned up under title i of umtrca must meet regulatory cleanup standards established by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) . for certain sites cleaned up under cercla and rcra , doe has entered into agreements with epa and the relevant state regulator regarding the necessary cleanup actions , and epa and the state have provided input in selecting the cleanup remedy . as cleanup of a site nears completion , lm works with the entity responsible for cleanup to prepare the site for transition into lm's portfolio . the transition process for a given site may take up to 5 years , during which time lm and the cleanup entity develop a long - term surveillance and maintenance plan . depending on the authority under which a site has undergone cleanup , this plan may require approval by regulators such as epa or nrc . other transition responsibilities include identifying and preserving records and checking that administrative institutional controls and other real property instruments are in place . doe considers site cleanup to be complete when , among other things , short - term cleanup activities have been completed and long - term cleanup measures , such as groundwater treatment , are in place . according to a doe document , ongoing groundwater remediation continues at many sites after the official completion of cleanup because of the long timeframes required to capture and remediate contaminated groundwater . once lm acquires a site , it places each site into one of three categories based on the actual or anticipated long - term surveillance and maintenance activities associated with the site .