detonators . the design and production of main charge detonators involves several nnsa sites and their suppliers . according to contractor representatives , livermore and los alamos share the responsibility for designing the main charge detonators , and los alamos will produce all the detonators . as part of production , los alamos reprocesses the petn used in detonators from a stockpile of dod - grade material purchased 30 years ago . other detonator parts come from third - party suppliers and from nnsa's kansas city national security campus , another nnsa site that does not have a role in designing or producing explosives , according to contractor representatives . los alamos produces and tests completed detonators and then sends them to pantex for weapon assembly , according to contractor representatives . spin rocket motors . sandia plays the primary role in designing spin rocket motors . spin rocket motors use pyrotechnics and propellants and are a key component in the b61 and b83 bombs . contractor representatives at sandia said that they supply the explosives to third - party suppliers , who produce the motors . the completed spin rocket motors are sent to sandia for inspection and testing , and after sandia approves the components , they are shipped to pantex for weapon assembly , according to contractor representatives . component manufacturing research . in addition to designing and producing components for leps and modernization efforts , nnsa sites also collaborate on other explosives research and development programs , such as on component manufacturing processes . for example , los alamos , livermore , sandia , and pantex are collaborating on additive manufacturing processes for explosives . additive manufacturing differs from traditional manufacturing in that it builds components by depositing material rather than by cutting material away during machining . this research effort seeks to introduce additive manufacturing into the explosives production process , producing explosive parts with highly complex geometries while meeting nnsa's safety and performance requirements , according to a contractor representative . in may 2018 , according to nnsa documentation , nnsa began implementing a new enterprise - wide approach to improve the management and coordination of explosives activities across its sites . in the past , each program that used explosives — such as an lep or a research and development program — developed or procured them independently of other programs , without formal coordination to ensure each program's awareness of other programs' requirements or time frames . under the new enterprise - wide approach , nnsa has taken several steps to centralize management at an enterprise level and to coordinate explosives activities across its sites . specifically: in may 2018 , nnsa established the energetic materials enterprise manager ( enterprise manager ) position to help coordinate nnsa's explosives activities . the agency issued a may 2018 memorandum formally establishing the position , signed by the acting deputy administrator for defense programs . the memorandum specified that the enterprise manager should encourage collaboration among the sites and programs that conduct explosives activities . in september 2018 , the enterprise manager established nnsa's energetics coordinating committee ( coordinating committee ) to identify coordination challenges across the enterprise and emerging needs for critical explosive materials , among other purposes .