iv ) . this activity includes marketing , infrastructure improvement , planning , and research specifically related to developing and improving tourism , as well as supporting special events and festivals to attract visitors . illustrative examples of this activity include the following initiatives: a community in kentucky improved trails in natural areas to attract tourists for horseback riding and other recreational uses . beginning from a sample of assisted firms from dunn and bradstreet , a survey was sent to approximately 3,000 firms . the surveyed firms had received the loans 6 or 7 years prior to the questionnaire . hubzone ( historically underutilized business zone ) to examine the effectiveness of the hubzone program . data are from three databases: applications for hubzone certification , central contractor registration on small businesses , and the federal procurement data system for information on hubzone businesses that have won hubzone contracts . the report primarily used an input - output approach to estimate the impact on the hubzone areas . in this approach , direct and indirect impacts are measured using the above three databases and multipliers from bureau of economic analysis . small business innovation research program ( sbir ) study is based on national research council surveys and reviews of agency materials . study includes surveys and also case studies . stimulating technological innovation ; using small businesses to meet federal needs ; increasing private sector commercialization ; and encouraging participation of minority and other disadvantaged groups . program ( s ) reviewed value added producer grants ( vapg ) purpose of the study to identify the determinants for success among usda's vapg . data and methods used survey of 739 vapg recipients , out of which 621 responded . a statistical analysis was conducted using binary logistical regression ( logit ) and cumulative logit models . while sba conducts annual impact surveys of the sbdc , wbc , and score programs , for purposes of this report we focused on the most recent impact study conducted of these programs . william b. shear , ( 202 ) 512-8678 or shearw@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , marshall hamlett and triana mcneil ( assistant directors ) , matthew alemu , ben bolitzer , julianne dieterich , cindy gilbert , geoffrey king , terence lam , alma laris , marc molino , alise nacson , jennifer schwartz , and karen villafana made key contributions to this report . in addition to trail improvements , the community utilized survey research , marketing , and special events to draw visitors to the area . a community in north carolina entered into public - private partnerships to construct a cluster of tourist venues that included sports and arts museums , an arena , convention center , and performing arts venues . the community utilized a strategic plan for development and a branded name to market the area . a county in mississippi partnered with other regional entities to market their gaming industry and other amenities as part of a broader regional campaign . this new partnership promoted region - wide tourism and focused on key markets that the area may draw visitors from .