ownership . for - profit rural hospitals represented 11 percent of the rural hospitals in 2013 , but accounted for 36 percent of the rural hospital closures from 2013 through 2017 ( see fig . according to literature we reviewed , hospitals with for - profit status had a higher probability of financial distress and were more likely to close . for example , a 2017 study found that for - profit hospitals were more than twice as likely to experience financial distress relative to government - owned and non - profit hospitals from 2000 through 2013 . bed size . rural hospitals with between 26 and 49 inpatient beds represented 11 percent of the rural hospitals in 2013 , but accounted for 23 percent of the rural hospital closures from 2013 through 2017 . critical access hospitals have 25 acute inpatient beds or less and make up a majority of the rural hospitals , but were less likely than other rural hospitals to close . forhp officials identified the critical access hospital payment designation – in which medicare pays designated hospitals based on their costs – paired with the related medicare rural hospital flexibility grant program as the most effective hhs payment policy and program to support rural hospitals' financial viability and rural residents' access to hospital services . according to literature we reviewed and stakeholders we interviewed , rural hospital closures were generally preceded and caused by financial distress . in particular , rural hospitals that closed typically had negative margins which made it difficult to cover their fixed costs . for example , one 2016 study found that rural hospitals that closed from 2010 through 2014 had a median operating margin of - 7.41 percent in 2009 . in contrast , rural hospitals that remained open during the same time period had a median operating margin of 2.00 percent in 2009 . in addition , there is evidence that for - profit hospitals have been more sensitive to changes in profitability and more likely to experience financial distress , which could explain the disproportionate number of closures among rural hospitals with for - profit ownership type . the literature we reviewed and stakeholders we interviewed identified multiple factors that likely contributed to increased financial distress and closures among rural hospitals . one such factor was a decrease in patients seeking inpatient care at rural hospitals due to the following: increased competition for the small volume of rural residents . rural residents may choose to obtain services from other health care providers separate from the local rural hospital , for example from an increasing number of federally qualified health centers or newer hospital systems outside of the area . the competition for the small volume of rural residents between rural hospitals and other health care providers potentially increased due to the shift to paying for value instead of volume , and technology changes . this increased competition for a small volume of rural residents could explain disproportionate closures among hospitals receiving the low volume hospital medicare payment designation , hospitals that by definition have a low medicare volume and that research has found have lower margins than other rural hospitals .