we do not express an opinion on this information . however , we compared this information for consistency with the schedules and discussed the methods of measurement and presentation with bpd officials . based on this limited work , we found no material inconsistencies with the schedules or u.s. generally accepted accounting principles . management is responsible for ( 1 ) preparing the schedules of federal debt in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles ; ( 2 ) establishing , maintaining , and assessing internal control to provide reasonable assurance that the broad control objectives of the federal managers' financial integrity act are met ; and ( 3 ) complying with applicable laws and regulations . we are responsible for obtaining reasonable assurance about whether ( 1 ) the schedules of federal debt are presented fairly , in all material respects , in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles and ( 2 ) management maintained effective relevant internal control as of september 30 , 2007 , the objectives of which are the following: financial reporting: transactions are properly recorded , processed , and summarized to permit the preparation of the schedule of federal debt for the fiscal year ended september 30 , 2007 , in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles . compliance with laws and regulations: transactions related to the schedule of federal debt for the fiscal year ended september 30 , 2007 , are executed in accordance with laws governing the use of budget authority and with other laws and regulations that could have a direct and material effect on the schedule of federal debt . we are also responsible for ( 1 ) testing compliance with selected provisions of laws and regulations that have a direct and material effect on the schedule of federal debt and ( 2 ) performing limited procedures with respect to certain other information appearing with the schedules of federal debt . in order to fulfill these responsibilities , we examined , on a test basis , evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the schedules of federal debt ; assessed the accounting principles used and any significant estimates evaluated the overall presentation of the schedules of federal debt ; obtained an understanding of the entity and its operations , including its internal control relevant to the schedule of federal debt as of september 30 , 2007 , related to financial reporting and compliance with laws and regulations ( including execution of transactions in accordance with budget authority ) ; tested relevant internal controls over financial reporting and compliance , and evaluated the design and operating effectiveness of internal control relevant to the schedule of federal debt as of september 30 , 2007 ; considered the process for evaluating and reporting on internal control and financial management systems under the federal managers' financial integrity act ; and tested compliance in fiscal year 2007 with the statutory debt limit ( 31 u.s.c . ยง 3101 ( b ) ( supp iv 2005 ) , as amended by pub . 109-182 , 120 stat . 289 ( 2006 ) , and pub l. no . 110-91 , 121 stat .