the state had no assistance program . despite the inspector general's report and other criticisms , fema published its final rule on september 1 , 1999 . the criteria for disaster declarations remained substantially unchanged from those the agency proposed in january . fema has also begun to address the issue of insurance requirements for public buildings . in july 1999 , fema submitted draft regulations to the office of management and budget proposing that , under the public assistance program , grant funding for buildings damaged in a disaster be made available only to state and local agencies and other public entities that maintain specified minimum levels of insurance coverage . currently , the public assistance program requires insurance coverage only as a postdisaster condition . if a public facility is not insured when a disaster strikes , the responsible agency must agree to procure insurance against future disasters as a condition for receiving fema assistance . after receiving comments from us and others , fema decided to wait for the completion of a comprehensive study of what insurance requirements are reasonable before proceeding further . in its report on fema's fiscal year 2000 appropriations , the senate appropriations committee also expressed concern that the indicators the agency proposed to guide declaration recommendations were “no more stringent than those used in the past.” the committee further noted that it expected fema to apply the criteria it had published in a consistent manner and to strengthen the criteria over time , while recognizing the need to maintain some flexibility for unique circumstances . the following are gao's comments on the federal emergency management agency's letter dated august 17 , 2001 . hazard mitigation . fema attempts to encourage mitigation efforts to avert or reduce damages from future disasters by explicitly considering previous mitigation efforts that may have reduced the damages from the current disaster . fema suggests that a state that has made such efforts in the past is more likely to receive disaster assistance when the estimated public assistance damages fall below the per - capita criterion . recent multiple disasters . in evaluating a governor's request for assistance , fema also considers the cumulative impact that disasters in the previous 12 months may have had on the state's or locality's ability to respond effectively . fema includes both stafford act and state - declared disasters and the extent to which the state has spent its own funds . other federal assistance programs . fema also considers other federal sources of disaster relief that might more appropriately meet the needs created by the disaster . disaster relief in various forms is also available under the programs of a number of federal agencies , including the federal highway administration , the department of agriculture , and the small business administration . a disaster declaration can be recommended on the basis of any of these criteria , as well as of “other relevant,” but unspecified , information . we analyzed the 79 major presidential disaster declarations that were issued in the 2 years since fema published its revised regulations and in which public assistance grants were made available .