epa lists chemicals currently in commerce in the tsca inventory . of the over 82,000 chemicals currently in the tsca inventory , about 62,000 were already in commerce when epa began reviewing chemicals in 1979 . since then , approximately 20,000 new chemicals were added to the inventory and are now in use as existing chemicals . prior to the passage of tsca , chemical substances generally entered the marketplace without review or controls . without government intervention , and often with little or no knowledge of their potential adverse health and environmental impacts , some of these chemicals were produced and used in high volumes . earlier legislation on clean water and air had primarily addressed releases of chemicals into the environment . in contrast , tsca authorized epa to control the entire life cycle of chemicals from their production and distribution to their use and disposal — including options for the outright banning of chemical substances to mandating requirements for chemical testing or product labeling . now , chemical companies are required to submit to epa , 90 days before beginning to manufacture a new chemical , a premanufacture notice containing information including the chemical's identity , categories of uses , estimated production volumes , and any test data possessed by the chemical company . yet epa estimates that most premanufacture notices do not include test data of any type , and only about 15 percent include health or safety test data . chemical companies do not have an incentive to conduct these tests because they may take over a year to complete , and some tests may cost hundreds of thousands of dollars . while the hpv challenge program is a laudable effort to develop data on these chemicals , several problems remain , including that the chemical industry has not agreed to provide testing for over 200 chemicals originally identified in the hpv challenge program and that even with the test data provided under the program , epa would need to demonstrate that the chemicals pose unreasonable risks in order to control their production or use under tsca . while tsca authorizes the review of existing chemicals , it generally provides no specific requirement , time frame , or methodology for doing so . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or members of the committee may have . for further information about this testimony , please contact me mr. john b. stephenson at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . david bennett , john delicath , tyra dipalma - vigil , richard johnson , valerie kasindi , and ed kratzer made key contributions to this statement . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . while tsca does not define what risk is unreasonable , according to epa officials the standard has been difficult to meet . in order to withstand judicial scrutiny , a tsca rule must be supported by substantial evidence in the rulemaking record .