chief architect . the air force established this position in october 2018 to execute the overarching vision and strategy for abms . according to the air force , the chief architect will determine the overall design of abms , coordinate with the service - level commands and the acquisition programs involved to ensure their efforts are aligned with the overall design and development of abms , and identify the enabling technologies that will compose the abms family of systems . an october 2018 memorandum stated that individual peos and program managers that oversee programs supporting abms will retain all authority and responsibility for executing their respective programs . in november 2019 , air force acquisition issued additional abms management guidance that stated that the chief architect would select and fund abms development projects for peos to execute . however , the guidance did not address whether the chief architect has authority to direct the execution of efforts initiated and originally funded by the peos , which may support abms . specifically , there is no documentation to clarify whether the chief architect would have the authority to realign peo priorities or funding for abms projects . for example , the peo for space is currently executing a data integration project , which aligns with the cloudone development area . although some abms funds have been obligated for this project , there is no documentation to support that the chief architect will be able to direct the peo to change the project objectives or timeline to align with abms requirements once they are defined . air force warfighting integration capability ( afwic ) . in october 2017 , the air force established afwic . according to air force officials , afwic will ensure forces are operationally ready to perform jadc2 missions using abms technologies . according to an afwic senior official , in april 2019 afwic began leading multidomain command and control efforts for the air force . an october 2018 memorandum directed the chief architect to coordinate with afwic regarding the development of abms . other documentation on abms execution indicates that afwic will also coordinate with major commands on air force doctrine and operations in support of abms . those that are proven will be delivered to the warfighter . by using this approach , the air force intends to field capabilities sequentially and more quickly than if all were developed and delivered at one time as is typically done for traditional acquisitions . additionally , air force officials indicated that this approach will not lock the air force into long - term development efforts with just one contractor and will allow the air force to more easily move on from unsuccessful development efforts . the air force has not established a plan or business case for abms that identifies its requirements , a plan to attain mature technologies when needed , a cost estimate , and an affordability analysis . as a result of recent abms management and scope changes , the air force remains early in the planning process and has not yet determined how to meet the capabilities or identify systems that will comprise abms .