we then selected 2 investments per agency . as part of this selection process , we considered the following: investments that use earned value management techniques to monitor cost and schedule performance , and investments whose four different dashboard ratings appeared to be in conflict ( eg , cost and schedule ratings were “green,” yet the overall rating was “red” ) . omb agreed with one of our recommendations and disagreed with the other . in addition , omb raised concerns about the methodology used in our report . agencies also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . each agency's comments are discussed in more detail below . in e - mail comments on a draft of the report , dhs's departmental audit liaison stated that the department concurred with our recommendations . in e - mail comments , dot's director of audit relations stated that dot would consider our recommendation ; however , he also stated that the department disagreed with the way its investments were portrayed in the draft . specifically , department officials stated that our assessment was not reasonable because our methodology only incorporated the most recent 6 months of performance rather than using cumulative investment performance . as discussed in this report , combining the performance of ongoing and completed activities can mask recent performance . as such , we maintain that our methodology is a reasonable means of deriving near real - time performance , which the dashboard is intended to represent . in oral comments , treasury's chief architect stated that the department generally concurred with our recommendations and added that the department would work to update its dashboard ratings for the two selected investments . in written comments , va's chief of staff stated that the department generally concurred with our recommendations and agreed with our conclusions . further , he outlined the department's planned process improvements to address the weaknesses identified in this report . va's comments are reprinted in appendix iii . in written comments , ssa's deputy chief of staff stated that the administration agreed with our recommendation and had taken corrective actions intended to prevent future data quality errors . ssa's comments are reprinted in appendix iv . officials from omb's office of e - government & information technology provided the following oral comments on the draft: omb officials agreed with our recommendation to update the dashboard's schedule calculation for in - progress activities to more accurately represent the variance of ongoing , overdue activities . these officials stated that the agency has long - term plans to update the dashboard's calculations , which they believe will provide a solution to the concern identified in this report . omb officials disagreed with our recommendation to develop cost and schedule rating calculations that better reflect current investment performance . according to omb , real - time performance is always reflected in the ratings since current investment performance data are uploaded to the dashboard on a monthly basis . regarding omb's comments , our point is not that performance data on the dashboard are infrequently updated , but that the use of historical data going back to an investment's inception can mask more recent performance .