aphis . aphis restricts the importation of live animals that it has determined may pose a disease risk to agricultural animals , such as cattle , horses , poultry , sheep , and swine . what is your telephone number ? what is your e - mail address ? did you complete a survey in round 1 or are you a new participant in round 2 ? i completed a survey in round #1 – skip to question #8 i am a new participant in round #2 – continue to question #7 7 . what is your background or expertise related to live animal imports ? based on your knowledge of aphis's statutory and regulatory framework , do you believe changes are or are not needed to prevent the importation of zoonotic and animals diseases ? importation of zoonotic and animal diseases ? don't know no response one expert provided two responses , “strongly support” and “somewhat support” for question 9c . based on your knowledge of cdc's statutory and regulatory framework , do you believe changes are or are not needed to prevent the importation of zoonotic diseases ? importation of zoonotic diseases ? based on your knowledge of fws's statutory and regulatory framework , do you believe changes are or are not needed to prevent the importation of zoonotic and animal diseases ? importation of zoonotic and animal diseases ? based on your knowledge of the current statutory and regulatory framework , do you believe a centralized agency should be created to regulate all live animal imports ? within which of the following should a centralized agency be placed ? animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) customs and border protection ( cbp ) centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) fish and wildlife service ( fws ) 16 . how much , if at all , do you support or oppose the creation of a workgroup to help federal agencies collaborate in preventing the importation of zoonotic and animal diseases ? how important , if at all , is representation from the following entities on such a workgroup ? what other entities , if any , should be included on such a workgroup ? answers included american college of laboratory animal medicine ; american medical association ; american veterinary medical association ; association of fish and wildlife agencies ; council of state and territorial epidemiologists ; county departments of public health ; defenders of wildlife ; food and agriculture organization of the united nations ; international union for the conservation of nature ; national association of state public health veterinarians ; national institutes of health ; national science foundation ; pet industry joint advisory council ; u.s. agency for international development ; u.s. coast guard , u. s. department of health and human services office of global health affairs ; u.s. department of state ; the wildlife society ; wildlife disease association ; wildlife trust . how important , if at all , are the following activities for a workgroup to help federal agencies collaborate in preventing the importation of zoonotic and animal diseases ? based upon your knowledge of interagency collaboration at ports of entry , do you believe communications among the agencies are adequate ?