these time frames have lengthened . currently , of those 70 assessments , 58 have now been ongoing for more than 5 years — and 31 of those for more than 9 years . we also found that epa's efforts to finalize iris assessments have been thwarted by a combination of factors . these factors include ( 1 ) the office of management and budget's ( omb ) requiring two additional reviews of iris assessments by omb and other federal agencies with an interest in the assessments , such as the department of defense , and ( 2 ) epa management decisions , such as delaying some assessments to await the results of new research . the two new omb / interagency reviews of draft assessments involve other federal agencies in epa's iris assessment process in a manner that limits the credibility and transparency of , and hinders epa's ability to manage , iris assessments . for example , some of these agencies' review comments could be influenced by the potential for increased environmental cleanup costs and other legal liabilities if epa issued an iris assessment for a chemical that resulted in a decision to regulate the chemical to protect the public . moreover , the input these agencies provide to epa is treated as “deliberative” and is not released to the public . regarding epa's ability to manage its iris assessments , in 2007 omb required epa to terminate five assessments that for the first time addressed acute , rather than chronic , exposure — even though epa had initiated this type of assessment to help it implement the clean air act . the changes to the iris assessment process that epa was considering but had not yet issued at the time of our 2008 review would have added to the already unacceptable level of delays in completing iris assessments and further limited the credibility of the assessments . for example , the changes would have allowed potentially affected federal agencies to have assessments suspended for up to 18 months to conduct additional research . as we reported in 2008 , even one delay can have a domino effect , requiring the assessment process to essentially be repeated to incorporate changing science . in april 2008 , epa issued a revised iris assessment process . as we testified before this subcommittee in may 2008 , the new process was largely the same as the draft we had evaluated during our review and did not respond to the recommendations in our march 2008 report . moreover , some key changes were likely to further exacerbate the credibility and productivity concerns we had identified . for example , epa's revised process formally defined comments on iris assessments from omb and other federal agencies as “deliberative” and excluded them from the public record . as we have stated , it is critical that input from all parties — particularly agencies that may be directly affected by the outcome of iris assessments — be publicly available . in addition , the estimated time frames under the revised process , especially for chemicals of key concern , would have likely perpetuated the cycle of delays to which the majority of ongoing assessments have been subject .