security plan . dhs does not have a security plan for us - visit . although program officials provided us with a draft document entitled security & privacy: requirements & guidelines version 1.0,1 this document does not include information consistent with relevant guidance for a security plan . the entities are ( 1 ) the homeland security council ( hsc ) , ( 2 ) the dhs investment review board ( irb ) , and ( 3 ) the us - visit federal stakeholders advisory board . the hsc is tasked with ensuring the coordination of all homeland security - related activities among executive departments and agencies and is composed of senior - level executives from across the federal government . according to the expenditure plan , the hsc helps to set policy boundaries for the us - visit program . according to dhs's investment management guidance,1 the irb is the executive review board that provides acquisition oversight of dhs level 1 investments2 and conducts portfolio management . the primary function of the irb is to review level 1 investments for formal entry into the budget process and at key decision points . the plan states that the irb is to monitor the us - visit program's achievement of cost , schedule , and performance goals . dhs management directive 1400 , investment review process ( undated ) . level 1 investment criteria are contract costs exceeding $50 million ; importance to dhs strategic and performance plans ; high development , operating , or maintenance costs ; high risk ; high return ; significant resource administration ; and life cycle costs exceeding $200 million . according to the dhs cio , us - visit is a level 1 investment . according to its charter , the advisory board provides recommendations for overseeing us - visit management and performance activities , including providing advice on the overarching us - visit vision ; recommending the overall us - visit strategy and its responsiveness to all operational missions , both within dhs and with its participating government agencies ; recommending changes to the us - visit vision and strategic direction ; providing a communication link for aligning strategic direction , priorities , and resources with stakeholder operations ; reviewing and assessing us - visit programwide institutional processes to ensure that business , fiscal , and technical priorities are integrated and carried out in accordance with established priorities ; and reviewing and recommending new us - visit program initiatives , including the scope , funding , and programmatic resources required . open recommendation 6: ensure that human capital and financial resources are provided to establish a fully functional and effective program office . dhs established the us - visit program office in july 2003 and determined the office's staffing needs to be 115 government and 117 contractor personnel . as of february 2004 , dhs had filled all the program office's 12 key management and 29 other positions , leaving 74 positions to be filled . all filled positions are currently staffed by detailees from other organizational units within dhs , such as immigration and customs enforcement .