page . we believe that the gao has underreported the number of telephones that were forwarded and reforwarded to ring at different telephones throughout and between the eeob and west wing . as set forth in the table ( see specific comment no . 26 ) , seven white house staff reported that roughly 100 telephones were forwarded to ring at other numbers . we will be back in four ( 4 ) years ! ( 1 / 93 ) ” ; shown to gao writing on a pull - out tray on desk that reads “w happens” ; shown to writing in top left drawer of desk that reads “get out” ; shown to writing in top middle drawer of desk that reads “hail to the thief” ; writing in middle drawer of desk that wishes all “who work here” “good luck” ; shown to gao 62 . page 47 . the gao has underreported the number of pieces of furniture that were observed overturned . our notes show ( notes that were provided to the gao and the gao did not dispute ) that five white house employees , one oa employee , and one gsa employee reported seeing at least 14 to 19 pieces of furniture that were on their sides or overturned , not the “8 to 10 pieces” that the gao reports . the table detailing each observation of overturned furniture is found above in specific comment no . page 47 . the gao writes that “four eop staff said they saw furniture that appeared to have been moved from areas where they did not appear to belong , such as desks moved up against doors.” there were actually five such individuals – specifically , three who employees , one ovp employee and one nsc employee . pages 47-48 . we believe that the gao is mistaken when it reports that “he director of gsa's white house service center said that furniture could have been overturned for a variety of reasons other than vandalism , such as to reach electrical or computer connections.” indeed , according to our notes , just the opposite is true: two gsa managers told the gao that cleaning staff would “not move” large pieces of furniture in this fashion , and none of these things would happen in the normal course of “moving” out of an office . page 48 . the gao's description of the “four to five desks found with a sticky substance on them” is incomplete . first , it is unclear from the gao's description that the vandalized desks were in the vice president's west wing office area and included the vice president's own desk . second , the “sticky substance” was a thick layer of an oily glue - like substance ( which one observer described as something like a mixture of vaseline and glue ) . third , the substance was smeared on the bottom of the middle drawer of the desks . consequently , when someone sat at the desk the substance would get on the person's legs or , when you tried to open the drawer ( which had no handles ) it would get on your hands .