services are free to seniors . provides a variety of services , including demand - response , curb - to - curb transportation service offered to the general public ; a circular shuttle route serving the entire community that is also senior friendly ; a “family and friends” mileage reimbursement program ; and a comprehensive , one - on - one training program developed to teach seniors how to use their community transit alternatives . coordinates its services with local transit authority and taxicab services . provides a driver - training program that emphasizes safety and customer service . uses brightly - decorated vehicles to attract senior ridership . helps provide vehicles and funding to local communities in the service area . local communities that receive the vehicles and funding design and operate services independently according to local needs . provides coordinated demand - response transportation services using computerized scheduling . there are a number of limitations to this type of data . for example , a few aaas reported that waiting list data were not reliable in measuring the unmet needs of seniors because the data allowed multiple - counting of seniors who are wait - listed by more than one transportation provider or who periodically call for rides and are added to the waiting list each time they call . in addition , aaas reported that waiting list data were not entirely representative of unmet needs because these data include information only on seniors who call for service and not on seniors who do not call ( because no services are available , because they do not know what services are available , because they are tired of being turned down , because they moved to an assisted living facility since they had difficulty obtaining transportation , or because of some other reason ) but who may still need rides . the computerized scheduling software will allow accurate and on - time scheduling through the use of global positioning systems technology that tracks the location of vehicles . provides senior transportation services 7 days a week and serves approximately 40 designated senior nutrition and social center sites . also implemented a community bus program that circulates within a specific community to encompass shopping areas , senior residences , and senior day programs . type of practice ( as described by the providers and in the literature ) reimburses volunteer drivers to transport individuals where no transit service exists or when the individual is too frail to use other transportation . operates a demand - response service for seniors who need transportation services to medical facilities . also works with local senior centers to provide transportation services . provides free transportation using volunteers , who use their private vehicles to transport seniors to medical appointments , shopping , and errands . in addition to the individuals above , bert japikse , jessica lucas - judy , kristen sullivan massey , sara ann moessbauer , elizabeth roberto , and maria romero made key contributions to this report . the government accountability office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people .