rrif . rrif provides direct loans and loan guarantees to finance the development of railroad infrastructure , such as rehabilitating passenger equipment and acquiring or rehabilitating track and bridges . created in 1998 , the rrif program is authorized to provide up to $35 billion in credit assistance , and rrif dedicates part of this funding to providing vital access to financing for smaller , short - line and regional railroads , which have historically lacked the access to private financing . the rrif statute permits appropriations of budget authority to be used for the cost of providing financing , but appropriations acts have typically prohibited the use of appropriations for such purposes . this prohibition , however , was not included in the fiscal year 2018 consolidated appropriations act and appropriations were , for the first time , made available to pay the cost of providing financing . rrif loans totaling over $5 billion have supported 39 projects as of february 2019 . the federal railroad administration ( fra ) administered rrif before it was moved to the bureau . pab for highway and surface freight transfer facilities . pab provides private - sector developers of certain types of surface transportation projects with access to tax - exempt financing . in contrast to tifia and rrif , where the federal government directly provides loans and other forms of credit assistance , pab does not directly provide financing but enables a state or city to borrow on behalf of private companies and nonprofits . pab does , however , impose costs on the federal government through forgone tax revenues . the total amount of pab for surface transportation is limited by statute to $15 billion , and the secretary of transportation allocates this available capacity among qualified projects . as of february 2019 , dot had allocated about $10.3 billion in pab to 27 projects . a different office within ost previously administered pab . infrastructure for rebuilding america ( infra ) . the fast act authorized dot to award $4.5 billion in discretionary grants for nationally significant freight and highway projects for fiscal years 2016 through 2020 . in response , dot developed the infra grant funding program . states and local governments are among the eligible entities that may apply for infra grants . dot may fund freight or highway projects that meet statutory requirements , such as reserving at least 25 percent of available funds for rural areas . in june 2018 , dot announced its most recently proposed infra grants totaling nearly $1.5 billion for 26 projects . the fast act also created the council on credit and finance ( council ) to review and make recommendations to the secretary on applications for dot's financing programs , regularly review projects that have received financing , and conduct other duties the secretary establishes . the council is mostly comprised of dot political appointees , including the deputy secretary of transportation , under secretary of transportation for policy , and administrators of fra , fhwa , and the federal transit administration ( fta ) . the fast act outlined specific responsibilities for the bureau , some of which relate to administering the above programs .