information security . while the secure flight program office has completed important steps to incorporate security into the system's development , it has not fully completed other steps to ensure security is effectively addressed . federal standards and guidance identify the need to address information security throughout the life - cycle of information systems , and specifies a minimum set of security steps needed to effectively incorporate security into a system during its development . the secure flight program has performed several steps that incorporate security into the system's development , including performing a security risk assessment , identifying and documenting recommended security control requirements , and testing and evaluating security controls for the system and incorporating identified weaknesses in remedial action plans . however , other steps pertaining to ensuring that security requirements are tested , preparing security documentation , and conducting certification and accreditation activities were not adequately completed . for example , security requirements planned for release one did not always trace to test activities for this release . risk management . in october 2006 , tsa issued a risk management plan for identifying , managing , and mitigating secure flight program risks that was consistent with relevant guidance and best practices . tsa also acquired an electronic tool to guide its risk management efforts . however , tsa has not yet provided us with evidence that it has implemented all aspects of the plan , including developing an inventory of risks and related information to demonstrate that its risk management tool has been populated and is being used to identify , prioritize , mitigate , and monitor risk . schedule estimate . we reported that tsa also did not fully follow best practices for developing a reliable and valid schedule estimate . gao's cost assessment guide includes 9 best practices , which if followed correctly , should result in high quality , reliable , and valid schedule estimates . without a reliable schedule baseline and careful monitoring of its status , a program may not be able to determine when forecasted completion dates differ from planned dates . tsa has made progress in developing a reliable and valid schedule estimate , including capturing key activities and accounting for the development of program requirements and testing . however , tsa officials could not provide evidence that their scheduling software can produce a critical path ( i.e. , the longest path of sequential activities in a schedule ) driven by discrete lower level tasks . best practices call for the critical path to be generated using scheduling software . we also reported that the schedule is not fully integrated because several lower level activities were not connected in a logical manner , as called for by best practices . as a result , the secure flight schedule estimate may not provide a meaningful benchmark from which to gauge progress , identify and address potential problems , and make informed decisions . for example , the inability to institute a reliable schedule could affect tsa's ability to effectively measure contractor performance in meeting deliverables . tsa officials stated that their scheduling software can create a critical path , and that lower level tasks in their schedule were logically linked together ; however , they did not provide evidence that supported this .