we conducted the other interviews by telephone . we also reviewed these communities' annual action plans and other relevant documentation . lastly , we judgmentally selected three communities from the communities we visited , taking into account geographic and program diversity , and interviewed stakeholders involved in the cdbg process , such as community organizations and members of citizen advisory committees . in baltimore and los angeles , we interviewed recent and current nonprofit cdbg subrecipients to discuss their understanding of their cities' processes for distributing funds , as well as the transparency of those processes . in chicago , we interviewed the executive members of the community development advisory committee , which comprises community members who provide input on cdbg funding priorities and recommendations to discuss their role in chicago's funding process and their views about how the process works . to identify and describe examples of the various methods by which states distribute cdbg funds to non - entitlement communities , we reviewed the most recently available annual action plans covering 2008 through 2010 ( required and reviewed by hud ) for all 50 states to identify the types of methods of distribution . from this review , we judgmentally selected five states that represented a variety of distribution methods to conduct interviews ( see fig . in selecting states , we considered the distribution methods , geographic dispersion ( at least one state from the northeast , midwest / central , south , and west regions ) , funding amount , and states and regions represented by the 20 entitlement communities we reviewed . we interviewed the cdbg administrators for each state to obtain an understanding of their methods of distribution and the level of transparency in their process and reviewed relevant documentation . we also interviewed officials from two non - entitlement communities from each sample state to obtain their views on their respective state's cdbg distribution process and how information is communicated to the public . finally , we interviewed a representative from the council of state community development agencies to obtain general information on how its members distribute their cdbg funds . most of the discussions at these hearings focused on areas of need or on projects that did not receive funding . citizens also can contact their local hud office to express concerns about the cdbg program . overall , several of the field office staff with whom we spoke stated that they had received a few complaints but none pertained to methods of distribution . several field office staff told us that hud investigates complaints they receive to ensure that grant recipients are in compliance with the program requirements . local non - entitlement community officials with whom we spoke confirmed that they have not contacted hud to express concerns about the states' methods of distribution . the lack of concerns raised about methods of distribution through these venues corroborates hud officials' findings that methods of distribution are not a high - risk area for compliance with program requirements . a cpd director heads each unit in the field offices .