are taken into account . statutory and effective rates may differ , for example , because depreciation allowances for specific types of capital investments exceed ( or fall short of ) the true ( economic ) depreciation . other differences arise because income from foreign subsidiaries is generally not taxed until it is repatriated to the united states . special incentives , such as the research tax credit , that are designed to encourage certain behavior , also cause the effective rate of the tax to differ from its statutory rate . a recent congressional budget office ( cbo ) study found that the united states' statutory corporate tax rates are high relative to organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) countries but comparable with the rates for what were then the g - 7 countries . comparisons of effective rates depend on the type of investment and the type of financing . according to cbo , u.s. effective corporate tax rates in 2003 were the g - 7 median for equity - financed investments in machinery , second lowest for debt - financed investment in machinery , and second highest for equity - financed investment in industrial structures . differences in effective tax rates across types and sources of income are pervasive , reflecting the complexity of the tax code . the corporate income tax ( 1 ) reduces the after tax return on capital income and , therefore , affects the incentive individuals have to save and invest ; ( 2 ) taxes corporations differently than partnerships and sole proprietorships ; ( 3 ) taxes u.s. corporations operating in foreign countries differently than those operating domestically and differently than foreign governments tax corporations ; ( 4 ) taxes different types of corporate investments , such as machinery or structures , unevenly ; and ( 5 ) taxes debt - financed investment at lower rates than equity - financed investment . these differences in effective tax rates alter both investment decisions and the reporting of corporate income as firms try to minimize their taxes . such tax avoidance , much of it legal but some illegal , reduces tax revenue . guiding investments to lightly taxed activities rather than those with high before tax productivity may reduce economic growth , further reducing tax revenue from what it otherwise would have been . at about $277 billion , corporate income taxes are far smaller than the $841 billion in social insurance taxes and $998 billion in individual income taxes that omb estimates will be paid in fiscal year 2006 to fund the federal government . figure 1 shows the relative importance of federal taxes . figures 1 and 2 show the trend in corporate tax revenues since 1962 . tax experts have written that corporate tax revenues fell from the 1960s to the early 1980s for several reasons . for example , corporate income became a smaller share of national income during these years , partly due to the fact that corporate debt , and therefore deductible interest payments , increased relative to corporate equity , reducing the tax base . in addition , tax expenditures , such as more generous depreciation rules and corporate tax rate reductions lowered corporate taxes .