management activities . we also determined how frequently each of the eight internal control weaknesses was found among oia grant projects in the database ( see table 2 ) . internal control weaknesses associated with grant recipient activities were the most common internal control weaknesses we found , accounting for 62 percent of the weaknesses exhibited by oia grant projects . by accepting a grant , recipients agree to a set of terms and conditions that are part of oia's internal controls . we assessed grant recipients' consistency in meeting requirements of the grant terms and conditions by examining project files for adherence to four key requirements that we determined are relevant to a grant management program: semiannual financial and narrative reporting , project close - out reporting , grant expiration dates , and reimbursable funding . for example , grant recipients are required to submit regular financial and status reports to oia within a set time frame . we found that recipients in 60 percent of grant projects with semiannual reporting requirements did not submit these reports as required . in many cases , reports were submitted after the deadline had passed , but in some cases , reports were never submitted . these financial and narrative status reports are a key monitoring tool for oia grant managers , and incomplete information can hinder oia's ability to identify and address any issues . in addition , we found that recipients of 58 percent of grant projects failed to submit final reports ( or project close - out reports ) on time . final financial and narrative reports are required to be submitted within 90 days of grant expiration or project termination ; failure to do so can delay the deobligation of any unspent grant funds from the project account . for example , the cnmi recently imposed a $17,000 damage claim and initiated debarment proceedings against a delinquent contractor in an oia commonwealth health center project , according to the cnmi capital improvement project administrator . according to the oia grant manager responsible for capital improvement project grants in american samoa , american samoa regulations require performance bonds for contracts over $100,000 , usvi regulations allow but do not mandate the government to require performance bonds , and guam generally requires 100 percent surety performance bonds , but some exceptions have been made to allow only 50 percent . varying effectiveness of central grant management offices . american samoa , the cnmi , and the usvi have central grant management agencies that are similarly structured and act as a liaison between oia and the local government agencies receiving grants . however , the effectiveness of the central grant management agencies varies , in part based on the capacity of their staff . in the cnmi , oia capital improvement project grants are largely administered through the governor's capital improvement project office . oia officials noted that the cnmi central management office is more effective , particularly in comparison to american samoa's central grant management agencies . the oia grant manager that works with the cnmi office said that the staff are essential to her efforts to monitor ongoing projects ; however , a cnmi office representative reported concerns about limited resources .