irs has no estimates for some areas of the tax gap . according to irs officials , irs has higher amounts of confidence in all of the underpayment components , because they are based on data from systems that can distinguish enforcement and late payments from other payments ( irs has the most confidence in these components ) ; the individual income nonfiling component , because it is based on a new methodology combining two methods that incorporate improvements to the methods used in prior estimates ; the individual income underreporting component , because it is primarily based on adjusted npr examination data , which is a statistically representative sample of individual tax returns ; and the corporation underreporting component , because it is based on operational examination data , adjusted for selection bias . irs has a lesser amount of confidence in the estate nonfiling and underreporting data , because they are forecasts updating estimates based on assumptions made in studies completed in 2000 ; and the withholding taxes ( fica and fuca ) part of the employment underreporting data , because the data are partially a forecast based on data from an older compliance study . the methodologies used to develop the component estimates differ by component , resulting in a mix of statistical sample and operational - based data being used , as well as forecasts from earlier estimates . irs is therefore unable to calculate confidence intervals for any of the tax gap estimates . we interviewed irs officials from raas about their research and analysis of the nrp data , and we gathered related documentation where available . irs officials described the quality review and data reliability processes they used to collect data from the nrp examinations . because the nrp sample was based on random selections , the sample was only one of a large number of samples that irs could have drawn . since each sample could have provided different estimates , we express our confidence in the precision of our estimates based on the sample as a 95 percent confidence interval plus or minus a margin of error . this is the interval that would contain the actual population value for 95 percent of the samples that could have been drawn . the estimates presented in appendix ii have margins of error of less than 10 percent or 10 percentage points . in analyzing the nrp data , we conducted several reliability tests to ensure the data we used were sufficiently complete . for example , we electronically tested the data for obvious errors . we concluded that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report based on these steps and on our previous reviews of tax gap estimates and nrp data . we conducted this performance audit from july 2016 to october 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .