ii ) . concerning our first recommendation , ssa stated that it is developing training for fall 2002 to enhance field office employees' technical proficiency in both the di and ssi programs . it is also developing and refining its supportive software systems to print referral forms for use in routing program information . we believe additional training should help to improve the technical proficiency of field office employees in both programs . however , ssa may need to consider the time field employees will need to develop proficiency after completing the training . reliable , user - friendly program guidance could help reinforce this training as well as be a reference to these and future employees . therefore , we continue to believe that program guidance should be modified to more completely explain the interactions of the two programs when concurrent beneficiaries work . further , while the enhancements to software should provide ssa with an additional tool for sharing information between programs , ssa may wish to consider developing procedures to ensure that such available tools are being used appropriately to share information . concerning our second recommendation , ssa said that the systems it now has under development and scheduled for release in november 2002 will provide the necessary management information capabilities needed to ensure actions related to beneficiaries working are taken on a timely basis . as acknowledged in our report , the new system under development has the potential for improving the timeliness of actions in concurrent cases . however , because the system is still under development , we are unable to determine how effective it will be in identifying and controlling work activity . for example , we cannot confirm at this time whether the databases being developed will contain information about all working beneficiaries nationwide that can be accessed by all field offices or local databases that can only be accessed by the employees in one office , similar to those being tested in a number of field offices . concerning our third recommendation , ssa stated that it would develop a fact sheet for concurrent beneficiaries that explains the interaction of the two programs in language they can understand . the agency will also modify another publication to make it clear that beneficiaries should contact the agency for an explanation because the interaction of work activity with the two programs is so complex that it requires individualized explanations . we believe a fact sheet that explains the interactions of the di and ssi programs should be useful for concurrent beneficiaries . in addition , we agree that the interaction of work with di and ssi benefits is complex and that individualized explanations may provide concurrent beneficiaries with the most complete information . in relying on individualized explanations provided by ssa employees , ssa may wish to consider developing methods to ensure that concurrent beneficiaries have access to employees who are knowledgeable in both programs regardless of the method of contact . for example , given that many beneficiaries may contact ssa through its 800 number teleservice centers , ssa could either deploy knowledgeable staff in the teleservice centers or establish procedures to ensure that these calls are referred to staff who are knowledgeable in both programs .