tsa conducts foreign airport assessments . tsa efforts to assess security at foreign airports — airports served by u.s. aircraft operators and those from which foreign air carriers operate service to the united states — also serve to strengthen international aviation security . through tsa's foreign airport assessment program , tsa utilizes select icao standards to assess the security measures used at foreign airports to determine if they maintain and carry out effective security practices . tsa also uses the foreign airport assessment program to help identify the need for , and secure , aviation security training and technical assistance for foreign countries . in addition , during assessments , tsa provides on - site consultations and makes recommendations to airport officials or the host government to immediately address identified deficiencies . in our 2007 review of tsa's foreign airport assessment program , we reported that of the 128 foreign airports that tsa assessed during fiscal year 2005 , tsa found that 46 ( about 36 percent ) complied with all icao standards , whereas 82 ( about 64 percent ) did not meet at least one icao standard . in our 2007 review we also reported that tsa had not yet conducted its own analysis of its foreign airport assessment results , and that additional controls would help strengthen tsa's oversight of the program . moreover , we reported , among other things , that tsa did not have controls in place to track the status of scheduled foreign airport assessments , which could make it difficult for tsa to ensure that scheduled assessments are completed . we also reported that tsa did not consistently track and document host government progress in addressing security deficiencies identified during tsa airport assessments . however , not all foreign governments agree that these are the primary threats to air cargo or believe that there should be a distinction between the threats to passenger air carriers and those to all - cargo carriers . according to a prominent industry association as well as foreign government representatives with whom we spoke , some countries view aviation security enhancement efforts differently because they have not been a target of previous aviation - based terrorist incidents , or for other reasons , such as overseeing a different airport infrastructure with fewer airports and less air traffic . resource availability affects security enhancement efforts . in contrast to more developed countries , many less developed countries do not have the infrastructure or financial or human resources necessary to enhance their aviation security programs . for example , according to dhs and tsa officials , such countries may find the cost of purchasing and implementing new aviation security enhancements , such as technology , to be prohibitive . additionally , some countries implementing new policies , practices , and technologies may lack the human resources — for example , trained staff — to implement enhanced security measures and oversee new aviation security practices . some foreign airports may also lack the infrastructure to support new screening technologies , which can take up a large amount of space . these limitations are more common in less developed countries , which may lack the fiscal and human resources necessary to implement and sustain enhanced aviation security measures .