as appropriate . according to cms officials , the agency intends to use these systems to monitor contractors to ensure that they are promptly identifying and referring eligible debts to psc . accurate tracking information is critical for monitoring debt - referral practices . cms found , however , that its non - msp debt - tracking systems contain inaccurate information because a significant number of contractors have not been adequately updating information in the systems . cms performed contractor performance evaluations for fiscal year 2000 on 25 contractors and found that 19 were not adequately updating information in the non - msp debt - tracking systems . for 5 of the 19 contractors , cms considered the problems to be significant enough to require the contractors to develop written performance improvement plans . our work at the 2 selected contractors involved in the non - msp pilot project corroborated cms's own findings . cms periodically sent non - msp pilot contractors a list of eligible part a debts from the agency's debt - tracking system for possible referral to psc . for the 2 non - msp contractors we reviewed , cms selected $1.3 billion of debts from the part a non - msp debt - tracking system . the contractors determined that $289 million of the debts , or about 23 percent , were actually ineligible for referral because they were in bankruptcy , under appeal , or under investigation for fraud . in addition , we identified $21 million of debts that 1 of the 2 non - msp pilot contractors had misclassified on the cms debt - tracking system as bankruptcy debt and ineligible for referral . these debts had actually been dismissed from the bankruptcy proceedings and therefore should have been reported in the debt - tracking system as eligible for referral . in this case , the contractor had not updated its own internal system for $8 million of the debts and was therefore not pursuing postdismissal collection actions on them . for the remaining $13 million , the contractor had updated its internal system and was pursuing collection but had failed to properly update the cms debt - tracking system . to effectively monitor contractor performance , cms must have the ability to determine whether contractors are referring debts promptly . however , cms's non - msp debt - tracking systems lack the capacity to indicate whether contractors are promptly entering non - msp debts into the debt - referral system after they mail dcia intent letters because the systems do not track the date of status code changes ( eg , the date when the dcia letter was issued ) . we found that cms's non - msp debt - tracking system for part a debts did not identify $5.2 million of debts that had been pending referral for at least 9 months at one of the two non - msp contractors that we reviewed . in response to our work , cms officials stated that they are in the process of modifying the non - msp debt - tracking systems to allow the agency to monitor how promptly contractors are referring debts in the future . cms has not developed a comprehensive plan that covers all types of medicare debt eligible for referral .