older . power companies' plans indicate they are more likely to retire older coal - fueled electricity generating units than newer units . today's fleet of operating coal - fueled units was built from 1943 through 2012 , with the bulk of the capacity built in the 1970s and early 1980s . as shown in figure 4 , units that power companies plan to retire are generally older , on average 54 years old compared with units with no retirement plans that average 39 years old . some stakeholders we interviewed said that power companies are more likely to retire older units because these units may be reaching the end of their useful lives , can be less efficient at converting coal to electricity , and can be more expensive than newer units to retrofit , maintain , and operate . smaller . the smaller a unit is , the more likely a power company is to be planning to retire it . ( see fig . size can be important when assessing the economics of additional investments needed to continue to operate coal - fueled units , as smaller units can be more expensive to retrofit , maintain , and operate on a per - mw basis . for example , some power companies may choose to install flue gas desulfurization units — known as scrubbers — to control so and other air emissions . according to an epa report , a typical 100 mw coal - fueled unit could incur capital costs 66 to 74 percent higher per mw to install a scrubber than a 700 mw unit . in addition , smaller generating units are generally less fuel - efficient than larger units . units that are planned for retirement average 175 mw of capacity compared with units that are not planned for retirement that average 351 mw of capacity . figure 5 shows the number of coal - fueled units by capacity in mw . as we reported in july 2012 , power companies may retrofit many coal - fueled electricity generating units with new or upgraded pollution control equipment in response to new environmental regulatory requirements.though the requirements and deadlines these regulations may establish for generating units are somewhat uncertain at this time , epa's analyses and two other studies we reviewed in our prior report suggest that one - third to three - quarters of all coal - fueled capacity could be retrofitted or upgraded with some combination of pollution control equipment , including scrubbers and other technologies to reduce so , mercury , and other emissions . once retrofitted with this pollution control equipment , the coal - fueled fleet would be capable of generating electricity and emitting much lower levels of pollution . for example , epa projects that mercury emissions from coal - fueled electricity generating units will decrease by 75 percent as a result of its new regulatory requirements . nevertheless , even the cleanest running coal - fueled unit may still be more polluting than generating units that use other fuel sources . for example , the 10 least - emitting coal - fueled units emitted over 10 times as much so per million btu compared with an average of 0.0006 for combined cycle units .