emergency directives issued . to help support providers in vaccinating only those individuals in cdc's priority groups , a number of states , such as california and florida , issued emergency public health directives requiring health care providers to limit influenza vaccination to people in priority groups and to refrain from vaccinating individuals not in cdc's priority groups . some of these directives , including those of the district of columbia and michigan , explicitly stated that providers failing to comply with these directives could face penalties , such as fines or imprisonment . but some states chose not to issue emergency directives . for example , minnesota state health officials reported that they had such strong voluntary compliance and cooperation from the state's provider community that they decided it was not necessary to post a directive mandating compliance . surveys conducted of providers and long - term - care facilities . during mid - october , working with national professional organizations , cdc conducted a survey of long - term - care facilities to identify those that had placed orders with chiron . a number of health departments , including six we visited , had also surveyed long - term - care facilities , and at least two , minnesota and seattle – king county in washington state , completed their surveys before cdc began administering its version . what were the lessons learned from the strategies implemented at the federal , state , and local levels to ensure that high - risk individuals had access to influenza vaccine ? to address these objectives , we reviewed documents and interviewed officials from ( 1 ) cdc and hhs's national vaccine program office ; ( 2 ) national organizations , including the association of state and territorial health officials , the association of immunization managers , and the national association of county and city health officials ; ( 3 ) organizations that conduct mass immunization clinics ; ( 4 ) sanofi pasteur , the remaining major manufacturer of influenza vaccine available for people at high risk of influenza - related complications ; and ( 5 ) kaiser permanente , a health system that is a large purchaser of influenza vaccine . we also conducted site visits to a judgmental sample of states ( california , florida , maine , minnesota , and washington ) and localities ( san diego and san francisco , california ; miami – dade county , florida ; portland , maine ; stearns county , minnesota ; and seattle – king county , washington ) . we selected these states and localities to reflect a mix of geographic locations , population size , and vaccination success rates . in each state , we reviewed documents and interviewed officials from public health agencies , professional associations , and provider organizations . we also interviewed local representatives of home health organizations that conduct mass immunizations and representatives of the minnesota multistate contracting alliance for pharmacy , which arranges purchase of vaccines for use in 43 states . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards from march through september 2005 .