linking . finally , the experts presented a wide range of opinions regarding the extent to which a program benefits from linking to other trading programs . linking occurs when covered entities in one program can use the allowances from another trading program for compliance and , sometimes , vice versa . for example , linking the eu ets to a u.s. trading program could allow covered entities in the united states to purchase euas and use them to cover emissions . in theory , linking can enhance the cost - effectiveness of the participating programs by enabling covered entities to take advantage of differences in the costs of abatement options . according to available information and experts , the design features of the program also will carry through to the linked program . as a result , it may be difficult and less cost - effective to link programs in practice . many of the experts discussed the complications resulting from linking programs with different cost containment measures , in particular a safety valve . safety valves are mechanisms , such as maximum allowance price , that trigger cost containment actions . for example , one kind of safety valve might allow the government to sell additional carbon allowances if the market price for allowances exceeded a predetermined amount — the increased supply may lower the market price but also would increase the emissions cap . linking a program with a safety valve to another program without one would carry the safety valve through to the latter program . about one - third of experts concluded that linking programs with different cost containment measures may compromise the environmental integrity of the programs . the third and final category of lessons relates to wealth transfer , as the ets demonstrated that giving away allowances can create and transfer substantial assets of considerable value . the distribution of wealth creates a strong incentive for regulated entities to influence the design and implementation of a trading program . five experts clarified that while lobbying pressure from stakeholders is inevitable , steps should be taken to minimize the effects . along those lines , some of the experts stated that auctioning allowances would minimize the adverse impact of lobbying activity — that is , it would reduce pressure to increase individual allocations that may compromise the emissions cap . another expert noted that the inevitable lobbying activity warrants having decision makers set the cap in federal legislation to ensure greater accountability . finally , available information also indicates that while there may be advantages to starting with a small program and expanding it , modifying emissions trading programs can introduce technical and political challenges . as an official at an international research organization observed , it is difficult to change who gains and who loses under a trading program after it has been established . according to available information and experts , the cdm has enabled industrialized countries to make progress toward achieving their emissions targets at less cost and has involved developing countries in these efforts ; however , the program's effect on emissions is uncertain , and its impact on sustainable development has been limited .