ii ) . opm and the departments of defense , energy , the interior , and justice had no comments . the department of veterans affairs provided technical comments which we incorporated as appropriate . in addition , we interviewed officials in gsa's office of government - wide policy , office of federal high - performance green buildings , office of human resources management , and public buildings service as well as representatives of several industry groups . ( see table 1. ) to determine what actions agencies have taken in response to the act , we selected five federal agencies — the departments of defense ( dod ) , energy ( doe ) , the interior ( doi ) , justice ( doj ) , and veterans affairs ( va ) — on the basis of the gross square footage of federal real property they occupy , according to 2014 federal real property profile data , and because they were included in initial meetings about the act that gsa held in 2011 . together with gsa , the agencies we selected occupy about 90 percent of federal real property gross square footage , according to the 2014 federal real property profile . our determination of agency actions in response to the act included interviews of agency program and human capital officials ( see table 1 ) and reviews of agency documentation and reports . for example , we reviewed dod's report from the first phase of its act - related pilot at the defense health agency and doe's report documenting its assessment of staff's compliance with the core competencies . we did not assess the effectiveness or results of selected agencies' use of the core competencies . to determine the factors that have affected implementation of the act , we reviewed the act and agency studies and reports , including dod's phase 1 pilot report and doe's summary analysis of the proficiency of its workforce in the 12 competency areas . we also reviewed prior gao work on internal controls and human capital related to enhancing agency accountability and planning and developing training programs and interviewed agency officials and representatives from professional societies , industry associations , non - profit organizations , and private and government training groups . we also discussed with the office of personnel management ( opm ) opm's role in implementing the act government - wide . for the agency interviews , we used standardized data collection instruments to maintain consistency across the interviews . in addition to the contact named above , steve cohen , assistant director ; gary guggolz , analyst - in - charge ; hannah laufe ; malika rice ; kelly rubin ; pamela vines ; and michelle weathers made key contributions to this report . we did not evaluate the effectiveness of the core competencies and recommended curriculum that gsa developed . we also discussed with the office of personnel management ( opm ) opm's role in implementing the act government - wide . no interagency group has been created to ensure consistent implementation of the act across the government , a situation that has resulted in a lack of coordinated implementation policy and guidance .