the study was conducted in two phases . phase 1 was a review of the data collection methods and outcomes , as well as an analysis of the self - reported veteran experience data gathered in the registry . phase 2 was focused on the assessment of the effectiveness of the actions taken by the department of veterans affairs and dod and provided recommendations for improving the methods enacted . the committee released its final report in february 2017 . as we reported in september 2016 , considering the results of this review as well as the methodology of the 2011 institute of medicine study as part of an examination of the relationship between direct , individual exposure to burn pit emissions and long - term health effects could better position dod to fully assess those health risks . in our september 2016 report we recommended that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics to: take steps to ensure centcom and other geographic combatant commands , as appropriate , establish processes to consistently monitor burn pit emissions for unacceptable exposures ; and in coordination with the secretary of veterans affairs , specifically examine the relationship between direct , individual , burn pit exposure and potential long - term health - related issues . as part of that examination , consider the results of the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine's report on the department of veteran affairs registry and the methodology outlined in the 2011 institute of medicine study that suggests the need to evaluate the health status of service members from their time of deployment over many years to determine their incidence of chronic disease , with particular attention to the collection of data at the individual level , including the means by which that data is obtained . dod concurred with the first recommendation , stating that the department will ensure that geographic combatant commands establish and employ processes to consistently monitor burn pit emissions for unacceptable exposures at the point of exposure and if necessary at individual sources . in a may 2018 status update regarding this recommendation , dod stated that it will be updating applicable department policy and procedures , its tactics techniques and procedures manual , and guidance for sampling and analysis plans to improve monitoring of burn pit emissions and other airborne hazard emissions . specifically , dod stated it will update dod instruction 6490.03 , deployment health ; that the update will provide revised procedures on deployment health activities required before , during , and after deployments , including occupational and environmental health site assessments ; and that it estimates this will be completed by the 4th quarter of fiscal year 2018 . in addition , the department stated it will update its occupational and environmental health site assessments tactics , techniques , and procedures manual and update guidance for sampling and analysis plans and that the updates will provide revised tactics , techniques , and procedures that will improve the quality of health risk assessment .