phase 2 modifications . while phase 2 work has begun , aoc is awaiting the contractor's proposal on the costs to address the requirements outlined in four “design bulletins” issued by aoc that , in part , describe changes to the project's scope based on lessons learned in phase 1 . aoc estimates that the contract modifications described by the design bulletins will increase the cost of phase 2 . phase 3 and 4 modifications . aoc expects that it will award these future phases of the project at higher amounts than it initially planned based , in part , on the estimated cost of incorporating the additional work described in the design bulletins . in august 2019 , aoc began updating its integrated cost - schedule risk analysis , with the aim of more accurately determining the extent to which the project's costs are increasing and its estimated cost at completion . by updating the analysis , aoc should be better able to make informed decisions as construction progresses . further , updating the analysis should enable aoc to more precisely estimate the cannon project's cost at completion and better position aoc to make a more accurate budget request to congress for remaining costs . chairperson lofgren , ranking member davis , and members of the committee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . if you or your staff has any questions concerning this testimony , please contact terrell dorn at ( 202 ) 512-6923 or dornt@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . in addition to the contacts named above: michael armes ( assistant director ) ; george depaoli ( analyst - in - charge ) ; geoffrey hamilton ; malika rice ; kelly rubin ; steve schluth ; and amelia michelle weathers made key contributions to the testimony . other staff who made contributions to the reports cited in the testimony are identified in the source products . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . ( see fig . the cannon building houses 142 office suites , five conference rooms , four hearing rooms , and the caucus room , which can accommodate large meetings . the building also includes a library , food servery , and a health unit . aoc began developing the scope for the cannon project in approximately 2004 when its consultant conducted a facility condition assessment that identified the building's deficiencies . this condition assessment identified , for example , that the hot water heating and air - handling systems had components dating back to the 1930s that are in need of replacement . in addition , the assessment identified deficiencies such as an outdated fire alarm system for which repair parts were difficult to obtain , worn and damaged marble tile in corridors , and original windows that were damaged and often nonfunctional .