we provided a draft of this report to dhs for review and comment . some components offered examples of contracts they leveraged with other agencies . for example , customs and border protection leveraged a contract with the department of defense for air and marine assets in 2008 and the secret service partnered with the defense information systems agency and white house communications agency in 2012 to obtain an event planning , scheduling and reporting system . in another example , the coast guard received price discounts for its hc - 130j aircraft starting in 2000 by leveraging an air force vehicle rather than contracting directly with the manufacturer . however , most components found it more efficient to use dhs's strategic sourcing vehicles than to leverage contracts with other agencies . the department also has several new initiatives under development . for goods and services ranging from ammunition to dhs policies encourage components to consider , but do not require , the use of departmentwide strategic sourcing contract vehicles . usage of all departmentwide contracts is “mandatory for consideration” unless otherwise approved by the under secretary for management , and therefore must be considered by dhs components prior to awarding a contract . before pursuing their own procurements , components are to review the dhs - wide intranet site that lists available strategic sourcing contract vehicles . some component officials said that their staff routinely check that list to determine whether one of those vehicles can be used before initiating a new procurement effort . further , to encourage increased establishment of strategic sourcing contract vehicles , the hsam requires the components to involve the strategic sourcing program office to determine if the requirement lends itself to the establishment of a departmentwide contract . in addition to the contact named above , the following individuals made key contributions to this report: katherine trimble , assistant director ; laura holliday , andrea bivens , laura greifner , and sylvia schatz . if a dhs component makes a decision to implement its own contract instead of a departmentwide contract , it must document in the acquisition plan and contract file the rationale for doing so and notify the chief procurement officer for review and approval . dhs is taking steps to strengthen the use of strategic sourcing at the department and has drafted , but not yet issued , a management directive that would make use of strategic sourcing contract vehicles mandatory with exceptions . the chief procurement officer has identified increasing strategic sourcing as a departmentwide priority and ocpo encourages the utilization and development of strategic sourcing vehicles in a variety of ways . ocpo officials explained that they host quarterly meetings and training sessions with the dhs strategic sourcing working group , meet with individual component programs and procurement offices , and post all contract information and ordering guides on the strategic sourcing web page . ocpo includes metrics in its quarterly reports to track components' strategic sourcing contract vehicle utilization rates and savings , though it has not established component - specific goals or targets to further encourage use and development of strategic sourcing contract vehicles .