complaints not recorded in database . five of our complaints were never recorded in whd's database . these complaints were filed with four different field offices and included three complaints in which whd performed no investigative work and two complaints in which whd failed to record the investigative work performed . for example , we left a message at one whd office alleging that underage children were working at a meat packing plant during school hours and operating heavy machinery , such as meat grinders and circular saws . delays investigating complaints . when the complainant asked why whd couldn't provide him more assistance , the investigator replied , “i've done what i can do , i've asked her to pay you and she can't…i can't wring blood from a stone,” and then suggested the complainant contact his congressman to ask for more resources for whd to do their work . according to whd policy and interviews with staff , whd doesn't have the resources to conduct an investigation of every complaint and prefers to investigate complaints affecting large numbers of employees or resulting in large dollar amounts of back wages . one district director told us that conciliations result from “a mistake” on the part of the employer and he does not like his investigators spending time on them . however , when whd cannot obtain back wages in a conciliation and decides not to pursue an investigation , the employee's only recourse is to file private litigation . low wage workers may be unable to afford attorney's fees or may be unwilling to argue their own case in small claims court , leaving them with no other options to obtain their back wages . failure to follow up on employers who agree to pay . in 2 of our cases , the fictitious employer agreed to pay the back wages due and whd recorded the conciliation as successful , even when the complainant notified the investigator that he had not been paid . in both cases , the investigator told the employer he was required to submit proof of payment , but only one of the investigators followed up when the employer failed to provide the required proof . the complainant in both cases later contacted the investigator to report he had not been paid . the investigator attempted to negotiate with both fictitious employers , but did not update the case entry in whd's database to indicate that the complainant never received back wages , making it appear as though both cases were successfully resolved . these two cases cast doubt on whether complainants whose conciliations are marked “agreed to pay” in the whd database actually received their back wages . poor complaint intake process . we found that whd's complaint intake process is time - consuming and confusing , potentially discouraging complainants from filing a complaint . of the 115 phone calls we made directly to whd field offices , 87 ( 76 percent ) went directly to voicemail . while some offices have a policy of screening complainant calls using voicemail , other offices have staff who answer the phone , but may not able to respond to all incoming calls .