( see app . ii for the steps taken within each selected state. ) in addition , hhs stated that our report's findings and analysis will be helpful as hhs drafts implementing regulations relevant to these tanf requirements . hhs also provided technical comments that we incorporated , as appropriate . the purpose of tanf is to help needy families achieve self - sufficiency . providing tanf benefits by means of electronic benefit cards helps the banked and unbanked tanf recipients , gives tanf recipients an alternate to cash , and allows states to use existing infrastructures . however , any misuse of tanf funds not only deprives low - income families of needed assistance , but also diminishes public trust in both the integrity of the program and the federal government . before congress passed the welfare integrity and data improvement act , as part of the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 , some states acted independently to implement restrictions on certain tanf transactions . as a result , their approach to enacting restrictions varies significantly . however , until hhs issues regulations or provides further guidance as to what policies and practices are sufficient to comply with the new federal requirements , it is unclear to what extent the various restrictions implemented by states would be in compliance . the experience of these states — especially any information related to the cost - effectiveness and success rates for various restrictions — could be beneficial for hhs to consider as it works toward determining what policies and practices are sufficient to comply with the new federal law . as we heard from officials in multiple states , preventing unauthorized transactions can be time - intensive and is impaired by flaws in available transaction data and other challenges . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . our objective was to determine the extent to which selected states have taken action to prevent unauthorized temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) transactions . to conduct our work , we reviewed tanf laws , regulations , and other documentation — including the welfare integrity and data improvement act , part of the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 , which introduced new state requirements for preventing certain tanf transactions — and interviewed officials from health and human services ( hhs ) . from each selected state , we reviewed information related to its laws , policies , practices , and other factors affecting its tanf program . in addition , we interviewed and reviewed documentation from several key industry stakeholders related to states' efforts to prevent unauthorized tanf transactions . we also interviewed officials from the top 10 states in terms of tanf basic block - grant dollars — california , new york , michigan , ohio , pennsylvania , illinois , florida , texas , massachusetts , and washington . addressing the limitations we found in transaction data that impede the identification and monitoring of certain locations could require significant resources .