irs prioritizes and compares it assets against each other . specifically , irs business units identify line item activities for which they are requesting funding . for each activity , business units address , among other things , placement within irs's established priorities ; proposed high - level capabilities and a cost estimate ; a 1-year usable segment ; and the date funding is needed and subsequent mitigation strategy if funding is not received by the specified date . further , several meetings are held to review requested funding activities . according to irs , the purpose of these meetings is to provide a cross - organization review and evaluation of it - related demands . cade 2 is intended to provide daily processing of taxpayer accounts . a policy - driven , structured method for reselecting ongoing projects provides the organization's investment board with a common understanding of how ongoing projects will be reselected for continued funding . in addition , executives funding decisions should be aligned with the selection decision . specifically , the organization's executives have discretion in making the final funding decisions on it proposals . however , their decisions should be based upon the analysis that has taken place in the previous activities . further , the office of management and budget's ( omb ) capital programming guide requires , among other things , that agencies have a disciplined capital programming process that addresses project prioritization and comparison of assets against one another to create a prioritized portfolio . as a result , we could only determine the performance of portions of these investments . fatca and rrp: during fiscal year 2015 and the first quarter of fiscal year 2016 , irs reported quarterly cost , schedule , and scope performance information for each of the fatca and rrp projects it was working on . specifically , it reported metrics for these investments via its investment performance tool . table 6 summarizes the performance of the fatca and rrp investments ( see appendix ii for detailed analyses ) . as shown in table 6 , fatca and rrp performed under cost , with varying schedule performance , and delivered most of the scope that was planned . in 2015 , irs developed and implemented a process known as the portfolio investment planning process to prioritize its operations support activities . irs reported completing work at $12.4 million less than budgeted and delivering 91.7 percent of planned scope with an 8 percent schedule overrun for these projects . irs stated that the reasons for these variances include , among other things , issues with the requirements management process ; an overestimation of costs ; and a reduction in the amount of work completed versus what was planned . irs was developing three projects to support the rrp investment during fiscal year 2015 and the first quarter of 2016 . irs reported completing work at $24.5 million less than budgeted and delivering 99.9 percent of planned scope with a minor schedule overrun for these projects . irs stated that the reasons for these variances include , among other things , overestimation of costs ( including irs labor ) and unplanned work that needed to be completed .