we compared these assessments against dod criteria . we collected and analyzed a non - generalizable sample of these assessments to review . for the mission assurance assessments , we requested and received a sample of documents from the services to review . from our request , we received and reviewed a total of 11 mission assurance assessments — 2 from the army , 2 from the navy , and 7 from the marine corps . with respect to intelligence assessments , we requested and received 1 assessment from the defense intelligence agency and 1 from the office of the director of national intelligence — documenting the challenges related to the iot . to assess the extent to which dod has developed policies and guidance related to iot devices , we interviewed officials from the office of the secretary of defense , the joint staff , the military services , the defense information systems agency , u.s. cyber command , the defense intelligence agency , the national security agency , and the defense logistics agency to identify current policies and guidance applying to a range of iot devices , including wearable fitness devices , portable electronic devices , smartphones , and infrastructure devices . we reviewed these policies and guidance — including the dod chief information officer's dod policy recommendations for the internet of things ( iot ) — and identified their general characteristics , applicability , and focus areas . when we interviewed officials from the organizations noted above , we also asked them whether there are any gaps in policies and guidance for iot devices , applications , or procedures . we compiled their responses to identify a few commonly cited policy and guidance gaps where security risks may not be addressed . additionally , we reviewed core dod security policy documents on cybersecurity , operations security , physical security , and information security ( see table 2 in the report ) to assess whether these documents addressed iot devices or security risks associated with iot devices . figure 2 highlights a few examples of these scenarios . the first notional iot scenario , the “sabotage of mission,” illustrates a few security risks that could adversely impact dod operations . the increase of iot devices used to monitor and control dod infrastructure could increase the number of attack points through which a network or system could be attacked . many of these devices are insecure because of a limited ability to patch and upgrade devices , or due to poor security design . as a result , the successful penetration of a smart electrical meter could lead to cascading effects that negatively impact an industrial control system and degrade an ongoing mission . in the second notional iot scenario , “sabotage of equipment,” the combination of poor password management and an insider threat could lead to unauthorized access to a utility system , such as a water system in a dry dock . the insider threat could then manipulate the water control system to flood the dry dock and damage the ship , according to navy officials . the third notional iot scenario , “operations security and intelligence collection,” illustrates the adverse impacts on operations security that can emerge from smart televisions .