at some point . three influenza pandemics occurred in the 20th century . notable among these was the influenza pandemic of 1918 , called the notable among these was the influenza pandemic of 1918 , called the “spanish flu,” which killed over 50 million people worldwide , including “spanish flu,” which killed over 50 million people worldwide , including over 675,000 in the united states . pandemics have spread worldwide over 675,000 in the united states . pandemics have spread worldwide within months , and a future pandemic is expected to spread even more within months , and a future pandemic is expected to spread even more quickly given modern travel patterns . while health experts cannot predict quickly given modern travel patterns . while health experts cannot predict with certainty which strain of influenza virus will be involved in the next with certainty which strain of influenza virus will be involved in the next pandemic , the avian influenza virus that began in hong kong in 1997 , pandemic , the avian influenza virus that began in hong kong in 1997 , known as h5n1 , could lead to a pandemic if it acquires the genetic ability known as h5n1 , could lead to a pandemic if it acquires the genetic ability to spread efficiently from person to person . to spread efficiently from person to person . unlike incidents that are discretely bounded in space or time ( eg , most unlike incidents that are discretely bounded in space or time ( eg , most natural or man - made disasters ) , a pandemic is not a singular event , but is natural or man - made disasters ) , a pandemic is not a singular event , but is likely to come in waves , each lasting weeks or months , and pass through likely to come in waves , each lasting weeks or months , and pass through communities of all sizes across the nation and the world simultaneously . communities of all sizes across the nation and the world simultaneously . an influenza pandemic could result in 200,000 to 2 million deaths in the an influenza pandemic could result in 200,000 to 2 million deaths in the united states , depending on its severity . further , an influenza pandemic united states , depending on its severity . further , an influenza pandemic could have major impacts on society and the economy . according to a study by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , a severe pandemic ( similar to the 1918 pandemic ) could result in a 5 percent reduction of the gross domestic product in the united states over the subsequent year . further , an influenza pandemic could cause high rates of absences in schools and workplaces . according to the centers for disease control and prevention , in a severe pandemic , absences attributable to illness , the need to care for ill family members , and fear of infection may reach 40 percent during the peak weeks of a community outbreak , with lower rates of absence during the weeks before and after the peak . to date , the h5n1 virus has been confirmed in birds in 60 nations , up from 16 nations reported in may 2005 .