sustainability . twelve of the 14 evaluations that we reviewed addressed the sustainability of wash activities . specifically , these evaluations broadly discussed wash sustainability issues , and 7 of the 12 had findings related to wash sustainability challenges . these challenges included limitations related to capacity building , a lack of spare parts , and a lack of funding for operations and maintenance . for example , the evaluation of tanzania's integrated water , sanitation , and hygiene program reported on factors that improved sustainability , such as the ease of repairing a rope pump . monitoring . evaluations reported on various issues , including monitoring , wash indicators , indicators' limitations , and data related to gender . all 14 evaluations reported on monitoring of wash activities . ten evaluations reported on one or more of usaid's indicators related to access to drinking water , sanitation , and hygiene , including whether wash activities were on track to meet their targets . five evaluations discussed limitations in the quality of one or more indicators used to monitor wash activities . for example , an evaluation of senegal's yaajeende activity noted limitations of the indicator for the number of individuals trained on improved hygiene behaviors . the evaluation stated that , according to usaid's guidance , the success of training and other interventions related to human and organizational capacity building is to be measured by improvement in organizational output and performance , not simply by the number of individuals trained . five evaluations presented and discussed data related to gender , thereby filling some gaps that we had identified related to a lack of disaggregated gender data in monitoring reports . for example , the evaluations for the primary wash activities in ethiopia and senegal assessed women's participation in community water management committees , which were generally responsible for operations and maintenance ( see fig . outcomes . six of the 14 evaluations that we reviewed provided insights into wash activity outcomes . specifically , these evaluations had findings related to outcomes such as disease incidence , health expenses , school attendance , time spent getting water , economic impacts , and beneficiary satisfaction . for example , the evaluation of ethiopia's water sanitation and hygiene transformation for enhanced resiliency found that the activity resulted in access to safe water at a much closer distance than before and also increased access to safe latrines and improved health practices ( such as handwashing ) . in addition , the evaluation found that activity results included increased time for beneficiaries to participate in other productive and income - generating activities , including more time at school , as well as reduced health expenses . the tanzania evaluation also noted challenges related to capacity building for community water committees . the evaluation assessed 10 of 26 committees as having “fair” usage and maintenance , where community fees were generally not collected or maintenance was spotty , and rated 6 of the 26 as “poor” for underperformance relative to the rest of the project .