although the u.s . marshals service had reported 95 percent of its obligations as fixed price , discussions with contracting officials revealed that many of their obligations should have been coded as labor - hour contracts and not as fixed - price contracts . marshals service officials told us that they have taken steps to correct these coding errors in fpds - ng . the remaining nine agencies , together with the percentage of their fiscal year 2007 obligations using fixed - price contracts , are presented below . court services and offender supervision agency , pretrial services agency , washington , d.c. – 99.8 percent department of agriculture , agricultural marketing service , washington , department of agriculture , farm service agency , washington , d.c. – 98 department of agriculture , agricultural research service , washington , department of defense , defense commissary agency , fort lee , virginia – 100 percent department of defense , defense logistics agency , fort belvoir , virginia – department of the interior , office of surface mining reclamation and enforcement , washington , d.c. – 97 percent department of justice , federal prison system , washington , d.c. – 97 general services administration , public buildings service , washington , finally , to identify agencies' procedures for surveillance of contractor costs , we reviewed contract files and documents maintained by surveillance officials for each contract and order in our review . we also reviewed agency cost surveillance procedures , relevant parts of the defense contract audit agency's contract audit manual and our cost estimating and assessment guide , which provides information on practices for ensuring credible cost estimating , including earned value management . in addition , we interviewed contracting officers and the personnel responsible for the surveillance . where appropriate , we supplemented our analysis with reviews of prior gao reports , agency inspector general reports , and recent statutory and regulatory actions pertaining to cost - reimbursement contracts . we conducted this performance audit from july 2008 to september 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the contact named above , michele mackin , assistant director ; julie hadley ; daniel hauser ; julia kennon ; leanna parkey ; kenneth patton ; matthew shaffer ; and sylvia schatz made key contributions to this report . from a management standpoint , that information should be recorded and available to help ensure that this contract type is used only when suitable . setting forth a full and specific explanation showing why a cost - reimbursement contract was selected for award could , for example , provide agency personnel and their managers with helpful information as they consider awarding future contracts or exercising options on an existing contract . of the 92 contract files we reviewed , we found that 28 , or 30 percent , contained no documentation showing why a cost - reimbursement contract was selected for award , including in the acquisition plans .