gao - 03-881t . to view the full product , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . recognizing the growing importance of pathogens in accounting for the nation's impaired waters , epa developed numeric criteria for pathogens in 1986 — although states are having difficulty using these criteria and are awaiting additional epa guidance . epa is also currently working with states to develop nutrient criteria and has entered into a research phase for sedimentation . epa explained that the delay in developing and publishing key criteria has been due to various factors , such as the complexity of the criteria and the need for careful scientific analysis , and an essentially flat budget accompanied by a sharply increased workload . epa also explained that for several decades , the agency and the states focused more on point source discharges of pollution , which can be regulated easily through permits , than on nonpoint sources , which are more difficult to regulate . states reporting that different water bodies would be slated for cleanup if the process of changing standards were improved www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? for more information , contact john b. stephenson at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or stephensonj@gao.gov . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: thank you for the opportunity to discuss our work assessing the environmental protection agency's ( epa ) and states' actions under the clean water act to improve water quality standards . water quality standards are critical in making accurate , scientifically based determinations about which waters are most in need of attention . without accurate standards , our nation runs the risk of wasting valuable resources by “overprotecting” some waters or facing unacceptable environmental consequences by “underprotecting” others . water quality standards comprise two key components — designated uses and water quality criteria . states are responsible under the clean water act both for determining uses and for setting criteria . both actions require epa approval . designated uses identify the purposes for which a given body of water is intended to serve , such as drinking water , contact recreation ( eg , swimming ) , and aquatic life support ( eg , fishing ) . water quality criteria are used to determine whether a water body is achieving its designated uses by specifying pollutant limits , such as the maximum allowable concentration of a pollutant , or an important physical or biological characteristic that must be met ( for example , an allowable temperature range ) . to develop criteria , states rely heavily on epa - developed “criteria documents.” these documents contain the technical data that help states adopt pollutant levels that , if not met , may preclude a water body from supporting its designated uses . states may adopt these criteria as recommended by epa , adapt them to meet state needs , or develop their own criteria using other scientifically defensible methods . the clean water act also requires that states periodically review their standards and revise them as needed . before any revisions can take effect , however , a state must submit them to its epa regional office for approval .