training . an estimated 8 percent of agriculture specialists identified elements of classroom and on - the - job training as going well . some observed that new hires are well trained and that agriculture - related classroom training at the professional development center in frederick , maryland , is adequate for their duties . general job satisfaction . an estimated 6 percent of agriculture specialists were generally satisfied with their jobs , reporting , among other things , that they were satisfied in their working relationships with cbp management and coworkers and that they believed in the importance of their work in protecting u.s. agriculture from foreign pests and diseases . and ( 2 ) what would you like to see changed or improved with respect to your work as an agriculture specialist ? in november 2006 , we separately reported on the common themes in the narrative responses . my testimony today is based on these two reviews . we conducted the reviews from april 2005 through october 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . this morning i will focus on three key findings: cbp and aphis have taken steps intended to strengthen the aqi program since the transfer of inspection responsibilities from usda to dhs following passage of the homeland security act of 2002 . cbp and aphis have expanded the hours of agricultural training for cbp officers and developed a national standard for this training ; given agriculture specialists access to cbp's automated targeting system to focus inspections on higher - risk passengers and cargo ; and established a joint review process for assessing compliance with the aqi program on a port - by - port basis . lastly , cbp has created new agricultural liaison positions at the field office level to advise regional port directors on agricultural issues . we have not assessed the implementation and effectiveness of these actions . our survey of cbp agriculture specialists found that many believe the agriculture inspection mission has been compromised by the transfer . although 86 percent of agriculture specialists reported feeling very well prepared or somewhat prepared for their duties , 59 and 60 percent of specialists answered that they were conducting fewer inspections and interceptions , respectively , of prohibited agricultural items since the transfer . when asked what is going well with respect to their work , agriculture specialists identified working relationships ( 18 percent ) , nothing ( 13 percent ) , salary and benefits ( 10 percent ) , training ( 10 percent ) , and general job satisfaction ( 6 percent ) . when asked what areas should be changed or improved , they identified working relationships ( 29 percent ) , priority given to the agriculture mission ( 29 percent ) , problems with the cbp chain of command ( 28 percent ) , training ( 19 percent ) , and inadequate equipment and supplies ( 17 percent ) . agriculture specialists typically provided more examples or went into greater detail in answering these questions and submitted 185 pages of comments about what needs improvement — roughly 4 times more than their responses about what was going well .