bus . prof. code 17200 et seq . and 17500 et seq . operating subsidiaries , which operate effectively as divisions or departments of their parent national bank , also may be subject to such state laws . pursuant to 12 cfr 7.4006 , state laws apply to national bank operating subsidiaries to the same extent that those laws apply to the parent national bank , unless otherwise provided by federal law or occ regulation . although occ published this guidance before it issued the bank activities rule , at the time of the guidance occ had been following the same preemption standard it applied in the rulemaking . we found differing views among state officials with respect to the applicability of state consumer protection laws , particularly their udap laws , to national banks . officials from some state attorney general offices said that their states' udap laws probably are preempted by the bank activities rule , while officials in one state were unclear . state banking department officials we spoke with also had mixed views regarding the applicability of state udap laws . in one state , a banking department official said that the state's udap statute would likely be preempted . in another state , an official said that state's udap laws would not be preempted . two other state banking department officials were unclear about the status of their states' udap laws . representatives of national banks also had mixed views about the applicability of state udap laws . representatives of one national bank stated that state udap laws were preempted , whereas representatives of two other national banks stated that state udap laws were , in fact , applicable to national banks and their operating subsidiaries . the status of state udap laws is not clear because , some argued , those laws generally are consistent with federal laws and policies and , therefore , might not obstruct , impair , or condition the ability of national banks and operating subsidiaries to carry out activities authorized by the national bank act . in addition to uncertainty over the applicability of state consumer protection laws , state officials , consumer groups , and others asserted that the effects of the preemption rules will remain unclear until legal arguments are resolved . the legal disputes pertain to whether occ correctly articulated and applied the federal preemption standard , occ's reasons for including certain subjects of state law in the preemption lists , and the application of state laws to national bank operating subsidiaries . these issues , which essentially concern occ's legal authority and rationale for the rules , are summarized in appendix ii . according to most state officials we contacted , the preemption rules have limited the actions states can take to resolve consumer issues and negatively affected the way national banks respond to consumer complaints and inquiries from state officials . more specifically , the state officials asserted that , after the preemption rules went into effect , some national banks and operating subsidiaries became less responsive to actions by state officials to resolve consumer complaints .