in addition , sffas no . tough choices are inevitable . particularly troubling are the many big - ticket items that taxpayers will eventually have to deal with . the federal government has pledged its support to a long list of programs and activities , including pension and health care benefits for senior citizens , medical care for veterans , and contingencies associated with various government - sponsored entities , whose claims on future spending total trillions of dollars . despite their serious implications for future budgets , tax burdens , and spending flexibilities , these unfunded commitments get short shrift in the federal government's current financial statements and in budgetary deliberations . the federal government's gross debt as of september 2003 was about $7 trillion , or about $24,000 for every man , woman , and child in this country today . but that number excludes items such as the gap between promised and funded social security and medicare commitments and veterans health care benefit commitments provided through the department of veterans affairs . if these items are factored in , the burden for every american rises to well over $100,000 . in addition , the new medicare prescription drug benefit will add thousands more to that tab . the new drug benefit is one of the largest unfunded commitments ever undertaken by the federal government . the trustees of the social security and medicare trust funds will include an official estimate of the discounted present value cost of this new benefit over the next 75 years in their annual report , which is scheduled for issuance later this month . preliminary estimates of its long - term cost range up to $7 trillion in discounted present value terms over a 75-year period . to put that number into perspective , it is as much as the total amount of the federal government's gross debt outstanding as of september 30 , 2003 . even before the prescription drug benefit was enacted , our long - term budget simulations showed that by 2040 , the federal government may have to cut federal spending in half or double taxes to pay for the mounting cost of the government's current unfunded commitments . either would be devastating . proper accounting and reporting practices are essential in the public sector . after all , the u.s. government is the largest , most diverse , most complex , and arguably the most important entity on earth today . its services — homeland security , national defense , social security , mail delivery , and food inspection , to name a few — directly affect the well - being of almost every american . but sound decisions on the future direction of vital federal government programs and policies are made more difficult without timely , accurate , and useful financial and performance information . fortunately , we are starting to see efforts to address the shortcomings in federal financial reporting . the president's management agenda , which closely reflects gao's list of high - risk government programs , is bringing attention to troubled areas across the federal government and is taking steps to better assess the results that programs are getting with the resources they are given .