endorsement of measures . nqf has taken steps to provide for the endorsement of quality measures . prior to its contract with hhs , nqf established a process for endorsing quality measures . under this process , organizations that develop quality measures submit them to nqf for consideration , in response to specific solicitations by nqf . these projects relate to quality measurement in nursing homes , patient safety , and patient outcomes , and are scheduled to be completed between december 2010 and may 2011 . in addition to endorsing measures , nqf also hired a subcontractor to evaluate its endorsement process and recommend ways to improve its efficiency and effectiveness . these plans can include work begun in prior contract years that has not been completed . the subcontractor's report and nqf's approval of proposed enhancements to the process are due january 2011 . maintenance of endorsed quality measures . recommendations on a national strategy and priorities for quality measurement . nqf has taken steps to begin the duty of making recommendations on a national strategy and priorities for quality measurement . in october 2009 , nqf established a committee of stakeholders that is expected to develop recommendations about a national strategy and priorities for quality measurement . nqf published the recommended priorities in may 2010 . the committee's recommendations are expected to be based on a synthesis of evidence that nqf has collected , using a subcontractor , on 20 conditions that account for the majority of medicare's costs . the subcontractor collected evidence on existing quality measures for these conditions and identified gaps where quality measures did not exist . by the end of the first contract year , nqf had not determined completion dates for maintenance of the 191 measures . as of may 2010 , maintenance of the 191 measures identified by hhs is scheduled to be completed by the end of 2012 . promotion of the development and use of electronic health records . nqf has taken steps towards completing the duty of promoting the development and use of electronic health records for use in quality measurement . as of january 13 , 2010 , nqf had begun to implement a framework that defines a standardized set of data that should be captured in patients' electronic health records . the framework , known as the quality data set ( qds ) , is intended to allow data from electronic health records to be collected and used in quality measurement . implementation and maintenance of the qds is scheduled to continue through the end of the 4-year contract , which ends january 13 , 2013 . to further promote the development and use of electronic health records in quality measurement , nqf began additional activities . for example , nqf established a panel of experts to recommend additional capabilities to measure utilization . according to nqf officials , efforts under this duty are scheduled for completion between march 2010 and january 2013 . annual report to congress and the secretary of hhs . nqf submitted its first annual report to congress and the secretary of hhs on march 1 , 2009 . hhs published this report , with its comments , in the federal register on september 10 , 2009 .