( see fig . these evaluation criteria reflect a broad range of benefits and effects of the proposed project , such as cost - effectiveness , as well as the ability of the project sponsor to fund the project and finance the continued operation of its transit system . fta has developed specific measures for each of the criteria outlined in the statute . on the basis of these measures , fta assigns the proposed project a rating for each criterion and then assigns a summary rating for local financial commitment and project justification . these two ratings are averaged together , and then fta assigns projects a “high,” “medium - high,” “medium,” “medium - low,” or “low” overall rating , which is used to rank projects and determine what projects are recommended for funding . our literature review included articles identified through searches of research databases and the internet , as well as suggestions of experts we interviewed . team members analyzed and summarized the evidence from these articles in consultation with a gao methodologist and economist . we conducted this performance audit from october 2007 to june 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the transportation system user benefits ( tsub ) measure is intended to capture all the significant user benefits of a proposed transit project . the measure includes predicted travel time savings and accounts for other benefits by quantifying the effect of nontravel time factors that influence travel behavior . the unit of the tsub measure is equivalent to minutes of in - vehicle travel time . project sponsors use local travel demand models to forecast ridership and simulate trips taken in 2030 , which is the forecast year used for estimating benefits over time , for two alternatives . the baseline alternative assumes low - cost improvements to the transportation network , while the second alternative ( the “build alternative” ) assumes the proposed new starts transit project ( eg , fixed guideway transit infrastructure investment ) is constructed . travel time savings from a proposed transit project can result from a shorter wait , a shorter walk , or shorter in - vehicle times . to adequately account for the time saved for each of these , the predicted travel time savings for wait and walk times are weighted by a factor of two or three , compared to in - vehicle time savings , because behavioral surveys have shown that travelers perceive these out - of - vehicle times as more onerous . the exact weighting factor is usually derived from local travel models calibrated based on local travel surveys . other factors beyond travel time — namely , travel time reliability and the convenience and comfort of the travel mode — are also incorporated into the measure of user benefits through what is commonly referred to as a modal constant . the modal constant varies by locality based on the results of the model's calibration .