open for consideration . for federal back - up benefit , should be similar to criteria under current state programs . uses criteria of workers' compensation program for federal employees . same as for current subtitle b claimants who worked for energy contractors . open for consideration — should flow from type of benefit and the nature of the population it is designed to compensate . open for consideration . open for consideration . no interaction issues . open for consideration . similar cases in different states could receive differing compensation . similar cases in different states could receive similar compensation . same as current program for cases with willing payer , but would need a source for federal back - up benefit . trust fund already established by section 3612 of eeoicpa . open for consideration — appropriations or trust fund . for federal benefit , selection criteria should include how quickly agency could implement and how well it was situated to process and pay cases . energy would still need to secure records for all cases and process claims with willing payers . department of labor / office of workers' compensation administers current program ; also administers subtitle b program . energy would still need to secure records . department of labor — same as current subtitle b program . open for consideration — depends on type of benefit , experience in administering benefit program , and funding source . program is implemented , but few cases have been completely processed . relatively short to implement since it is based on existing program . infrastructure would have to be established and rules developed to provide for federal benefits that mirror those of the state programs . longer than option 1 . infrastructure in place , but regulations for existing federal workers' compensation program would need to be expanded to cover new benefit . longer than option 1 – structure in place to administer existing subtitle b program — new rules need to be developed for evaluating additional illnesses . potentially longest of all options . depends on administrator and whether infrastructure exists or would need to be built . in either event , need to publish rules and establish procedures . federal costs could increase since benefits for cases without willing payers would be paid directly from federal funds . federal costs could be greater than for current program since benefits would be based on the often more generous workers' compensation program for federal workers . to the extent that the option would ensure a source of benefits , could increase federal costs . however , the extent of these higher costs could be mitigated because many of the claimants who would have filed for subtitle b and d benefits in the current system would be eligible for only one cash benefit regardless of the number or type of illnesses . open for consideration — depends on type of benefit and eligibility criteria . mr. chairman , this completes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have at this time .