gao - 10-66 . washington , d.c.: december 22 , 2009 . flood insurance: opportunities exist to improve oversight of the wyo program . gao - 09-455 . washington , d.c.: august 21 , 2009 . each of those proposals has potential benefits as well as challenges . in a previous report , we discussed some of the challenges associated with implementing a combined federal flood and wind insurance program . while such a program could provide coverage for wind damage to those unable to obtain it in the private market and simplify the claims process for some property owners , it could also pose several challenges . for example , fema would need to determine wind hazard prevention standards , adapt existing programs to accommodate wind coverage , create a new rate - setting process , raise awareness of the program , enforce new building codes , and put staff and procedures in place . fema would also need to determine how to pay claims in years with catastrophic losses , develop a plan to respond to potential limited participation and adverse selection , and address other trade - offs , including delays in reimbursing participants , litigation , lapses in coverage , underinsured policyholders , and larger - than - expected losses . as we have previously reported , private business interruption coverage for flood damage is expensive and is generally purchased only by large companies . adding business interruption insurance to nfip could help small businesses obtain coverage that they could not obtain in the private market , but nfip currently lacks resources and expertise in this area . fema has also adjusted its expense reimbursement formula . while these are all encouraging developments , fema is still unlikely to ever pay off its current $18.8 billion debt . we have identified a number of operational issues that affect nfip , including weaknesses in fema's oversight of wyo insurers and shortcomings in its oversight of other contractors , as well as new issues from ongoing work . gao - 09-271 . washington , d.c.: january 2009 . flood insurance: options for addressing the financial impact of subsidized premium rates on the national flood insurance program . gao - 09-20 . washington , d.c.: november 14 , 2008 . flood insurance: fema's rate - setting process warrants attention . gao - 09-12 . washington , d.c.: october 31 , 2008 . national flood insurance program: financial challenges underscore need for improved oversight of mitigation programs and key contracts . gao - 08-437 . washington , d.c.: june 16 , 2008 . natural catastrophe insurance: analysis of a proposed combined federal flood and wind insurance program . gao - 08-504 . washington , d.c.: april 25 , 2008 . national flood insurance program: greater transparency and oversight of wind and flood damage determinations are needed . gao - 08-28 . washington , d.c.: december 28 , 2007 . national disasters: public policy options for changing the federal role in natural catastrophe insurance . gao - 08-7 . washington , d.c.: november 26 , 2007 . federal emergency management agency: ongoing challenges facing the national flood insurance program . gao - 08-118t . washington , d.c.: october 2 , 2007 .