both of these activities are key security management practices . without a documented process , policies or procedures could be inconsistently implemented throughout the department , which could prevent the ciso from effectively ensuring departmentwide compliance with fisma . in addition , without a defined process and responsibilities , va will have limited assurance that the management and implementation of security policies and procedures are effectively coordinated and communicated . developing and documenting these policies and procedures are essential for achieving an improved and effective security management process under the new centralized management model . accordingly , among the actions we recommended to the department was to document clearly defined coordination responsibilities for the director of field operations and security and the director of cyber security , as well as to develop and implement a process for these officials to coordinate on the implementation of it security policies and procedures throughout the department . we also made 15 other recommendations to improve the department's ability to protect its information and systems , including the development of various processes and procedures to ensure that tasks in the department's security action plans have time frames for implementation . va generally agreed with our recommendations and stated that it had already implemented some of the recommendations and had actions under way to address the others . in light of reported weaknesses in va inventory controls and reported thefts of laptop computers and data breaches , the adequacy of such controls has been an ongoing concern . completion of the realignment is scheduled for july 2008 . at your request , my testimony today will summarize our work on the department's efforts in moving to a centralized it management model , which will affect all of va's it programs and initiatives . in this context , we will also discuss our recent work on inventory control over it equipment , ● migrating existing ( “legacy” ) benefits systems to modern platforms , ● sharing electronic health information with the department of defense ( dod ) and the prognosis for a dod / va bidirectional interoperable electronic health record . in developing this testimony , we reviewed our previous work in these areas . all work covered in this testimony was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . va's mission is to promote the health , welfare , and dignity of all veterans in recognition of their service to the nation by ensuring that they receive medical care , benefits , social support , and lasting memorials . its three major components , the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) , the veterans health administration ( vha ) , and the national cemetery administration , are primarily responsible for carrying out this mission . over time , the use of it has become increasingly crucial to the department's effort to provide benefits and services . va relies on its systems for providing access to medical information to ensure high - quality health care for veterans as well as for processing benefit claims , including compensation and pension and education benefits .