broadcast meetings . stakeholders and experts said that broadcasting meetings using technology , such as the telephone , television , or the internet , could be one way to increase meeting attendance . for example , during public hearings on developing the halibut and sablefish ifq program , the north pacific council used conference calls to broadcast meetings , giving stakeholders in remote locations the opportunity to learn about and provide input on ifq program options . while broadcasting meetings could increase meeting attendance , it may not entirely replace the value of direct contact through face - to - face meetings . hold informal discussions with stakeholders on dap issues . the program could not be authorized under the magnuson - stevens act . stakeholders wanted to ensure that they got their way . to what extent would the following activities improve the effectiveness of stakeholder participation in the development of dap programs ? to what extent does each item hinder participation for the following stakeholder groups in your region ? how effective do you think each of these actions would be in improving stakeholder participation in the development of dap programs ? this appendix describes the nine dap programs that have been implemented in the united states for fisheries under the management authority of the regional fishery management councils . the term “ifq” as used in this appendix includes individual transferable quota . surfclams and ocean quahogs are mollusks found along the east coast , primarily from maine to virginia , with commercial concentrations off the mid - atlantic coast . while ocean quahogs are found farther offshore than surfclams , the same vessels are largely used in each fishery . these vessels tow hydraulic clam dredges that extract clams from the ocean floor . the catch is emptied into metal cages holding roughly 32 bushels each , off - loaded at one of a small number of landing sites , and sold to processing facilities . surfclams are used in strip form for fried clams and in chopped or ground form for soups and chowders . ocean quahogs are used in soups , chowders , and white sauces . the fishery consists of a few large firms that both catch and process , small processors , and independent fishermen . the surfclam fishery developed after world war ii . when the surfclam fishery declined in the mid - 1970s , the ocean quahog fishery arose as a substitute . disease and overfishing led the mid - atlantic fishery management council to develop a management plan for surfclams and oceans quahogs — the first such plan in the united states . between 1977 and 1990 , the council and nmfs used a variety of controls to limit the harvest to sustainable levels , such as restrictions on fishing times , areas fished , clam sizes , gear , vessels , who fished , and how fishing occurred . an ifq program was established for the surfclam / ocean quahog fishery in 1990 — the first dap program approved under the magnuson - stevens act .