data available . data processing times for the 9 states ranged from less than 1 month in 2 states to 18 months or more in 2 others . the sections below discuss each criterion . for example , to develop their 2005 highway safety plans during 2004 , 4 of the 9 states used data from 2000 , 2001 , or 2002 , and the remaining 5 states used 2003 data . ( see fig . for 6 of the 9 states , three factors accounted for their not meeting the timeliness criterion: slow data entry , data integration delays , and lengthy data edits . as a result , the state safety plans are unable to take recent crash trends into account in these states . generally , those states submitting data electronically from local law enforcement agencies to the state traffic safety data system had much faster entry of crash information into centralized databases . in contrast , states that processed reports manually by keying in information from paper forms at the state level had longer data entry time frames . the availability of data was also sometimes delayed by inefficient data completion processes . in states where this is not done automatically , crash data and location information are often manually entered into the traffic safety data system . in addition , checks for accuracy also delayed data availability . for example , 1 of the states that had to use data from 2000 to develop its highway safety plan , had used electronic methods to enter more recent data , but detailed edit checks delayed the data's release considerably . seven of the 9 states we visited had crash forms that could be used to collect data across all jurisdictions within the state , helping to ensure that data collected within the state are consistent . however , no state had forms that met all of the consistency criteria recommended in the model minimum uniform crash criteria ( mmucc ) guidelines that were developed collaboratively by state and federal authorities . these guidelines provide a recommended minimum set of data elements to be collected for each crash , including a definition , attributes , and the rationale for collecting each element . while variation in the crash data collected by states can be attributed to varying information needs , guidelines help to improve the reliability of information collected and also assist in state - to­ state comparisons and national analyses . the variation between states can be seen among the 17 states we analyzed that contribute to nhtsa's sds program . for example , the mmucc guidelines recommend reporting on whether alcohol was a factor in the crash by indicating the presence or absence of an alcohol test , the type of test administered , and the test results . however , several of the states collected information on impaired driving without specifying the presence of an alcohol test , the test type , or the test result ; thereby making it difficult to determine whether alcohol - use contributed to the crash . in addition , the states were not uniform in collecting and reporting the vin , another element recommended in the mmucc .