gao - 04-557t . washington , d.c.: march 31 , 2004 . these represent challenges to overcome . while some of these challenges will be resolved with time , analysis , and oversight , there are other challenges that bear even more careful watching , because they may prove to be considerably more difficult to overcome . i would like to highlight three of those challenges , providing examples from our recent work . these three challenges involve ( 1 ) design and implementing programs , ( 2 ) coordinating between different agencies and stakeholder interests , and ( 3 ) determining how to pay for these efforts . i will discuss today two illustrative examples related to challenges in program design and implementation that we have identified from our work . these include the ( 1 ) lack of planning and performance measures for program design and ( 2 ) lack of experienced personnel for program implementation . one effect of having to design programs quickly is that they may lack such elements as strategic plans and performance measures needed to set program goals and monitor performance . the lack of such tools can create problems that need to be resolved as the program unfolds . for example , we have reviewed cbp's actions to establish a system meant to reliably identify potentially risky cargo containers . our work has shown that a need exists for additional efforts in several homeland security activities , including securing cargo , in order to help ensure the effectiveness of the approach . as we noted in a july 2003 report , the former u.s. customs service , part of which is now cbp initiated the container security initiative ( csi ) in january 2002 in response to security vulnerabilities created by ocean container trade and the concern that terrorists could exploit these vulnerabilities to transport or detonate wmds in the united states . during the first year , program officials quickly designed and rolled out the initiative , modifying operations over time . the service achieved strong initial participation among the countries that it sought to enroll in the initiative , reaching agreement with 15 governments to place u.s. personnel at 24 seaports , and placing teams in 5 of these seaports . however , cbp had not taken adequate steps to incorporate human capital planning , develop performance measures , and plan strategically — factors essential to the program's long - term success and accountability . we noted , for example , that: more than 1 year into the implementation of the initiative , cbp had not developed a systematic human capital plan to recruit , train , and assign the more than 120 program staff that would be needed for long - term assignments in a wide range of foreign seaports , some of which could require language capabilities and diplomatic skills . cbp lacked performance measures for the initiative that demonstrated program achievements and established accountability . for example , the service lacked measures that assessed the impact of collocating u.s. and foreign customs officials in foreign seaports to determine which containers should be targeted for inspection .