lbj hospital . the portion of the grant designated for lbj hospital enters the hospital's budget as a revenue source , whereupon its specific uses cannot be traced . in fiscal year 2003 , the $7.7 million represented about 26 percent of lbj hospital's $29.3 million revenue . high court . according to doi and american samoa budget documents , the grant provides all of the high court's budget . the primary goal of the government operations grant is to provide financial assistance to help ensure that the american samoa government is providing adequate government systems and services . doi's secondary goal for this grant is to promote self - sufficiency for american samoa . the performance standards define the services that grantees are to provide to the children and the families they serve and constitute the head start program's expectations and requirements that grantees must meet . the performance standards cover five service areas including services for children with disabilities ; education ( i.e. , classroom instruction ) ; building family and community partnerships ; health , including medical , dental , and mental health screening as well as nutrition and safety ; and program management and operation . the head start act and accompanying regulations require the hhs head start bureau to conduct an on - site review every 3 years to ensure that performance standards are met . the grantee must respond in writing with a plan for correcting any findings of noncompliance with federal standards . in addition to undergoing the on - site reviews , grantees are required to submit an annual “program information report” that tracks program characteristics and performance data . several processes exist to ensure the financial accountability of the national head start program . first , an hhs fiscal analyst completes an annual checklist for assessing a grantee's financial accountability and makes a recommendation for approving funding to the grantee . second , the grantee's budget figures are included in the annual application , which the fiscal analyst reviews to make sure that they are allowable . the grantee must have an approved indirect cost rate and must certify that administrative costs do not represent more than 15 percent of the total approved costs of the program . third , the single audit reports test for accountability of the program . these estimates are approximations . although the participant populations may occasionally overlap ( eg , a wic recipient might also have received free school lunches ) , the distinct target populations in american samoa would not allow enough overlap to greatly affect our estimates . to identify local conditions that affected the uses of the selected grants , we interviewed federal and american samoa officials , reviewed program documents , and made observations in american samoa in march 2004 . specifically , we looked at the availability of professional staff to administer grants services or projects , the adequacy of facilities to deliver services , and the availability of funds to deliver services or complete projects as specified by program officials or supporting documents for the 12 key grants that we reviewed .