department of defense . dod has exclusive responsibility for research , development , and acquisition of medical countermeasures to prevent or mitigate the health effects of biological agents and naturally occurring diseases on armed forces personnel . dod contributes to dhs's terrorism risk assessments , including the identification of biological global threats , and also coordinates with hhs on efforts to identify common medical countermeasure priorities and jointly stockpile countermeasures , as appropriate . the defense intelligence agency also performs its own threat analysis for chemical , biological , and radiological defense , called a capstone threat assessment , at least every 2 years . cbdp leads dod's efforts to anticipate , respond to , mitigate , and manage the health effects of biological threat agents that could affect the warfighter . according to dod directive 5160.05e , which assigns roles and responsibilities associated with cbdp , the assistant secretary of defense for nuclear , chemical , and biological defense programs , through the deputy assistant secretary of defense for chemical and biological defense , is responsible for overseeing cbdp activities , policy guidance , and interagency coordination.have key roles in medical countermeasure efforts: within cbdp , the following organizations chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , in consultation with the commanders of the combatant commands ; the secretaries of the military departments ; and the director , defense intelligence agency , validates and prioritizes cbrn threats to dod personnel , equipment , and weapon systems . joint requirements office , which is part of the joint staff , sets requirements for medical countermeasures — including performance parameters and quantity — and develops dod's biological threat lists and joint priorities list to ensure that countermeasures will be feasible for dod use . joint science and technology office performs applied research and engages in early development of medical countermeasures against biological threat agents . joint program executive office supports advanced development of potential medical countermeasures . the army , as cbdp executive agent , supports the views of the military services and combatant commands during the program objective memorandum process , and is responsible for reviewing cbdp's funding requirements . department of homeland security . dhs leads federal interagency coordination and planning for emergency response to cbrn incidents in the united states and is responsible for assessing the risks to the civilian population posed by various cbrn agents , as directed by the project bioshield act of 2004,10 ( biodefense for the 21st century ) , hspd 18 ( medical countermeasures against weapons of mass destruction ) , and hspd 22 ( national domestic chemical defense ) . dhs's science and technology homeland security presidential directive ( hspd ) applied , or translational , research builds on basic research by validating and testing concepts in practical settings to identify potential products . successful concepts move from the applied research stage into the early development stage to demonstrate basic safety , reproducibility , and ability to be used in humans . “life - cycle management” includes the maintenance of medical countermeasures that have been acquired and the removal of expired products from stockpiles .