we added this information to our report . labor's statistical sampling is intended to develop an improper payment rate and provides little useful information about the program's risks of improper payments . while the results from its accountability reviews could potentially provide data on program risks , owcp officials gave us no indication that that they using the results for this purpose . while owcp officials did not share with us during our review their plans to develop reason codes for improper payments , we support the steps they are proposing to better track improper payments , steps that are consistent with our recommendations . we also encourage owcp to develop performance goals for reducing improper payments based on these improved data . while the ssa oig did not review individual cases to verify that an improper payment occurred , it focused on a specific population of feca payment recipients who should not be earning any wages — individuals who were totally disabled for the entire year . ( 3 ) how well does owcp ensure the recovery of identified feca overpayments ? to respond to these questions , we reviewed labor's annual performance and accountability reports , the feca procedures manual and internal controls , owcp's accountability reviews , relevant agencies' office of inspector general reports , and applicable laws and regulations as well as interviewed officials at owcp headquarters . we also reviewed the methodology used by labor to estimate its risk of improper feca payments and interviewed audit contractor staff who were involved in developing these estimates . in addition , we requested data from owcp on the magnitude and causes of overpayments and underpayments . owcp did not have data on causes or the number of improper payments that occurred in specific years , but it created a unique report for us that included all debts , including overpayments , that owcp identified in fiscal year 2006 . to assess the reliability of these data , we ( 1 ) reviewed existing documentation related to the data sources ; ( 2 ) electronically tested the data to identify obvious problems with completeness or accuracy , such as missing or inconsistent data ; and ( 3 ) interviewed knowledgeable agency officials about the data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we removed all debts that were not in final determination or terminated status and that were not related to wage - loss - compensation payments . we analyzed these data and reviewed the claims files for a random , projectable sample of these overpayments , as well as the 10 largest , to confirm whether they represented improper payments and to determine their causes and final outcomes . because we discovered after reviewing these data that some of the debts included in owcp's report either ( 1 ) were not improper payments or ( 2 ) were identified prior to fiscal year 2006 , we excluded these debts from our analysis . we used the results from our file review to estimate the total dollar amount of improper overpayments identified by owcp in 2006 , and the percentage that were attributable to different causes .