make or buy decision . to address whether the effect of test program initiatives enhanced small business subcontracting opportunities , we selected the period of fiscal years 2006 through 2013 for analysis . this selection was made because prior dod reviews released in 2002 and 2007 assessed participants' performance against goals and initiatives through fiscal year 2005 and fiscal year 2013 was the last full year of data available . the 2002 study used data from fiscal years 1991 to 2000 , and the 2007 study used data from fiscal years 2001 to 2005 . we reviewed the available plans , memorandums , and reviews used by dcma to assess participant performance from fiscal years 2006 through 2013 . this included: 80 annual comprehensive subcontracting plans submitted by participants to dcma , 60 dcma memorandums documenting negotiations with the participants , and 85 annual form 640 reviews performance reviews by dcma . we also analyzed the three dod - commissioned reviews . to provide context for the negotiation process , as well as to gather different viewpoints about the initiatives as a whole , we interviewed representatives from dcma's small business programs division , dod's office of small business programs ( osbp ) , and five test program participants . to address whether the test program enhances subcontracting opportunities for small businesses by successfully achieving its annual goals , we reviewed test program participants' comprehensive subcontracting plans and negotiation support memorandums and analyzed performance data from fiscal years 2006 through 2013 . we compared the actual performance contained in the form 640 reviews against the approved subcontracting goals . we also obtained information about the small business subcontracting performance of dod in general from dod's osbp . participants may make decisions to produce components in - house rather than buying them from a supplier in order to reduce the overall contract cost . this decision thus reduces the amount of subcontracting dollars available to small businesses . to achieve another perspective on test program performance , we analyzed dcma performance ratings for the individual participants . in our review of 85 annual performance reviews for fiscal years 2006 through 2013 , test program participants generally received positive annual performance ratings from dcma . dcma is responsible for annually evaluating the performance of test program participants and making recommendations as to their continued participation in the program . when evaluating the participants , dcma is to consider their performance on both goals and initiatives and , if they failed to achieve these , whether the participants made a “good faith effort” to do so . participants receive an annual overall program rating ranging from “unsatisfactory” to “outstanding.” participants that do not receive at least an “acceptable” rating are required to submit to dcma a detailed corrective action plan to account for and improve on known deficiencies . for example , for fiscal year 2013 , the 12 participating firms received the following ratings: five participants received an outstanding rating — meaning they generally exceeded the annual negotiated small business goals and two additional socioeconomic category goals and had exceptional success with numerous specific initiatives to assist , promote , and utilize small businesses .