survey . the questionnaire asked about each state's current and planned toll road facilities . we sent the questionnaire to the directors of state dots in 49 states and washington , d.c. we did not send a questionnaire to the louisiana dot because we administered our survey only a few weeks after hurricane katrina struck new orleans and the gulf coast . to minimize nonsampling error , such as measurement errors that can be introduced when respondents do not understand questions or when they do not have information to answer a particular question , we undertook several quality assurance steps . our social science survey specialists designed draft questionnaires and conducted pretests with state dot officials in four states . during these pretests , we assessed the extent to which respondents interpreted questions and response categories consistently , the time respondents needed to complete the survey , and the extent to which respondents had the information needed to answer the survey questions . no question 6: do any of these facilities charge tolls that vary by time of day ? yes 2 . no question 7: in what year did the first toll road facility in your state open to traffic ? ( please do not consider facilities that opened before 1938. ) question 8: in what year did the most recent toll road facility in your state open to traffic ? ( please do not consider facilities that opened before 1938. ) question 9: which of the following agencies participate in managing the toll road facilities in your state ? state department of transportation 2 . public toll authority 3 . other state agency 4 . local or regional government agency 5 . private entity question 10: are there plans in your state to build any toll road facilities for which an environmental review and a record of decision have been completed ? yes 2 . no ( skip to question 19. ) in addition to the individual named above , steve cohen , assistant director ; mark braza ; jay cherlow ; bess eisenstadt ; simon galed ; moses garcia ; bert japikse ; terence lam ; liz mcnally ; and don watson made key contributions to this report . yes 2 . yes 2 . no question 5: are any of these facilities hot lanes ( in which single occupancy vehicles can gain access to hov lanes by paying a toll ) ? yes 2 . yes 2 . yes 2 . using the results of these pretests , we revised the questionnaire . we administered the survey to the directors of state dots via the internet during september and october 2005 , e - mailing the directors a web link to our questionnaire and requesting that they or their designees complete it . we received responses from 49 states and washington , d.c. — a 100 percent response rate . we analyzed the data using statistical software . we compared the responses to key survey questions with information obtained from our interviews with state dot officials and from state applications to the fhwa's tolling pilot program . in four instances , data from these sources were inconsistent . we contacted dot officials in these states to resolve these inconsistencies and adjusted the survey results accordingly . semistructured interviews .