see 48 c.f.r . § 1452.280-4 for the indian economic enterprise representation provision included in buy indian solicitations . the buy indian act specific challenge process at bia . ihs handles challenges according to the protest procedures set out in the federal acquisition regulation . to deter intentional misrepresentations of indian - owned status , both agencies rely on the suspension and debarment process , and prosecution under the federal false statement statute . both agencies' regulations require firms that are awarded a contract under the buy indian act to give preference to indians in employment , training , and subcontracting . contracts awarded under the buy indian act , and all resulting subcontracts , are required to contain the indian preference clause , which specifically requires the contractor to provide a preference to indians in employment , training , and subcontracting opportunities under the contract . the clause further requires the contractor to maintain sufficient records indicating compliance . agency officials at both bia and ihs told us they have regulations limiting subcontracting with other than indian - owned firms to no more than 50 percent of the work , although only bia implements this requirement through the inclusion of a contract clause . violations of contract clauses can have serious consequences such as contract termination . this approach is similar to how limitations on subcontracting might be handled for some small business contracts . for example , when awarding an 8 ( a ) contract , the federal acquisition regulation directs contracting officers to include the limitations on subcontracting clause , under which the contractor agrees that the 8 ( a ) firm will perform a certain percentage of the work . according to bia and ihs officials , neither agency employs systematic monitoring or compliance protocols — such as systematic reporting on specific buy indian requirements — to ensure that contractors comply with key requirements and contract clauses beyond regular contracting officer oversight . the buy indian act is not necessarily unique in this regard . the small business administration's women - owned small business and economically disadvantaged women - owned small business programs generally rely on self - certification and oversight by the contracting officer as well . certain contracts or types of work involve more stringent , and more specific , monitoring requirements . for example , for contracts over $50,000 , bia requires contractors to appoint a liaison officer in charge of keeping records for its indian preference program and to issue semi - annual reports . ihs monitors compliance in a similar fashion , requiring a liaison officer for non - construction contracts equal to or over $50,000 and construction contracts equal to or over $100,000 . federal internal control standards state that , for an entity to run and control its operations , it must have relevant , reliable , and timely communications , and that information is needed throughout the agency to achieve all of its objectives . the standards further state that operating information is needed to determine whether an agency is complying with various laws and regulations . we found that bia and ihs headquarters officials have limited insight into the buy indian act implementation in the regional offices .