dhs agreed with our recommendations . while s&t developed a 5-year r&d plan in 2008 to guide its efforts and is currently finalizing a new strategic plan to align its own r&d investments and goals , dhs has not yet completed a strategic plan to align all r&d efforts across the department , as we previously recommended . our work on doe national laboratories provides additional insights related to oversight of r&d efforts that could be useful for dhs s&t . in 1995 , we reported that doe's national laboratories did not have clearly defined missions focused on accomplishing doe's changing objectives and national priorities . doe , at that time , managed the national laboratories on a program by program basis which inhibited cooperation across programs and hindered doe's ability to use the laboratories to meet departmental missions . we recommended , among other things , that doe develop a strategy that maximized the laboratories' resources . in responding , doe said that it had undertaken a new strategic planning process which resulted in a strategic plan . though doe developed a strategic plan intended to integrate its missions and programs , in 1998 we reported that the laboratories did not function as an integrated national research and development system and recommended that doe develop a comprehensive strategy to be used to assess success in meeting objectives , monitor progress , and report on that progress . doe acknowledged that it needed to better focus the laboratories' missions and tie them to the annual budget process , but that it would take time to accomplish . more recently , we reported in june 2009 that doe could not determine the effectiveness of its laboratories' technology transfer efforts because it has not yet defined its overarching strategic goals for technology transfer and lacks reliable performance data . instead , individual doe programs such as the national nuclear security administration and doe's office of science articulated their own goals for technology transfer at the national laboratories . we recommended , among other things , that doe articulate department wide priorities and develop clear goals , objectives , and performance measures . doe generally agreed with our findings . dod agreed with this recommendation . as a result , we recommended that dod within dhs itself , we reported in may 2004 that dhs did not have a strategic plan to guide its r&d efforts . we recommended that dhs complete a strategic r&d plan and ensure that the plan was integrated with homeland security r&d conducted by other federal agencies . we also recommended that dhs develop criteria for distributing annual funding and for making long - term investments in laboratory capabilities , as well as develop guidelines that detailed how doe's laboratories would compete for funding with private sector and academic entities . epa generally agreed with our findings and recommendations . chairman lungren , ranking member clarke , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have . for questions about this statement , please contact david c. maurer at ( 202 ) 512-9627 or maurerd@gao.gov .