hiv infection . thus , spermicides alone are not recommended for std / hiv prevention . ii ) . in its written comments , hhs stated that the final sentence in the draft report — that said the public may be at risk until fda finalizes the warning labels for n - 9 vaginal contraceptive products and n - 9 condoms — may unintentionally undermine efforts to inform the public of the protection provided by condoms . hhs suggested we modify this to say that consumers may be left in doubt about the appropriate uses of these products . we have revised the conclusion to acknowledge that until fda finalizes its warning labels , consumers may be left in doubt about the appropriate uses of these products . however , the conclusion also states that the public may be at risk if the products are used inappropriately . in its written comments , hhs stated that the draft did not indicate that fda had never permitted condom labeling to claim that n - 9 provides any additional protection against hiv or other stds . to ensure clarity on this issue , we have added this statement to the report . hhs's written comments also stated that it is important to make clear that the barrier features of condoms provide the primary protection against stds and the primary contraceptive protection . while this is an important fact in educating consumers about methods to protect themselves against stds , the objectives of this report were focused on n - 9 and its potential as a microbicide . hhs's written comments also stated that fda's primary means of public health communication is through product labeling oversight and that fda has , on occasion , provided supplementary information through consumer outreach efforts . the draft report noted the role fda has in labeling oversight and described fda's proposed warning labels for n - 9 vaginal contraceptive products and its efforts to develop proposed warning labels for n - 9 condoms . the draft report also described the information fda provided to the public through a brochure that it posted to its web site and through fda consumer magazine articles . hhs's written comments also stated that the supplementary statements fda provided to the public through consumer outreach efforts always acknowledged the scientific uncertainty concerning the effectiveness of n - 9 as a protection against stds . examples of fda's acknowledgement of scientific uncertainty were provided in the draft report . hhs also commented that the timeline in appendix i should begin with the 1988 cdc brochure understanding aids , which advised that n - 9 , when used with a condom , might provide additional protection against hiv . we mentioned this brochure in the introduction to the draft report when we stated that in the mid - 1980s n - 9 showed promise as a potential microbicide for stds , including hiv . however , as we stated in the scope and methodology section of the draft report , we focused our review on efforts to research and provide public information on n - 9 and hiv from 1990 to the present because concerns about the safety of n - 9 in preventing hiv first began to surface in about 1990 .