national security . doe and usec engaged in 6 transactions for national security purposes . specifically , doe engaged in one transaction in 2012 to secure unobligated leu from usec to meet national security needs for the production of tritium for up to 18 months , and doe engaged in a second transaction later in 2012 to secure unobligated leu from usec to meet national security needs for the production of tritium for up to 15 years . the other 4 transactions in this category supported the research and development of the american centrifuge technology to meet long - term national security needs for unobligated leu , such as for tritium production . for example , in 2010 , doe and usec signed a cooperative agreement to share the cost of usec's development and demonstration of the american centrifuge technology for a year . to provide its share of the cost , doe took title to and financial responsibility for the disposal of depleted uranium tails from usec . facilities management . in one transaction beginning in 1999 , doe agreed to pay usec to provide safeguards and security services for heu that doe stored at the portsmouth gdp . in another transaction beginning in 1999 , usec contracted with doe for the storage of enriched uranium that exceeded the amount of material usec could possess in its facilities under nrc limits . in the third transaction , from 2005 through 2008 , doe contracted with a usec subsidiary to manage the u.s. government's nuclear materials tracking system , called the nuclear materials management and safeguards system . issues from prior transactions . doe and usec engaged in 3 transactions to address issues with previous transfers of uranium when doe had inadvertently provided usec with uranium that did not conform to industry standards or more uranium than originally agreed on by the parties . for example , in march 2000 , usec discovered that uranium that it had received from doe prior to privatization was contaminated with technetium , a radioactive metal that is considered a contaminant by commercial specifications for nuclear fuel . in a 7- year transaction that began in 2002 , doe ( 1 ) contracted with usec to clean up some of the contaminated uranium , ( 2 ) provided replacement uranium and monetary payment to usec , and ( 3 ) took title to some of usec's depleted uranium . in a second transaction , in 2003 , doe transferred heu to usec to replace other material that doe transferred to usec prior to privatization that did not conform to industry standards . in a third transaction , doe and usec addressed the fact that they had underestimated the amount of material stored in certain heu cylinders that doe had transferred to usec prior to privatization . specifically , doe had transferred to usec about 0.8 metric tons of heu more than initially agreed on . to address this issue , in 1998 , usec agreed to pay doe about $35 million more than originally agreed on by the parties . doe and usec engaged in 3 other transactions since 1998 .