learn . provides agencies with education , workshops , outreach , and communication tools on developing and managing digital services . to provide the products and services offered by each business unit , 18f relied on 173 staff to carry out its mission , as of march 2016 . the staff are assigned to different projects that are managed by the business units . according to18f officials , the program used special hiring authorities for the vast majority of its staff: schedule a excepted service authorities were used to hire 162 staff . additionally , usds has engaged with 6 of the 10 priority it projects identified in the june 2015 report , including the department of health and human services' healthcare.gov project and the department of homeland security's u.s . citizenship and immigration services transformation . additionally , according to a usds staff member , usds considered the remaining 4 projects and decided not to engage with them to date . however , usds has yet to develop a quarterly report on the 10 high priority programs , which it was directed by congress to develop . specifically , in december 2015 , congress modified its direction for the executive office of the president to develop the reports regarding the top 10 high priority programs and specifically called for usds to do so on a quarterly basis . according to a usds staff member , a second top 10 high priority investment report has been drafted and will be finalized prior to the issuance of our report . however , the second top 10 report will address the former congressional direction for the executive office of the president to develop reports and omb did not have a time frame for when usds would begin to develop reports that address the modified congressional direction . until usds develops a time frame for the report on the top 10 programs , develops the report within that time frame and on a quarterly basis thereafter , and considers the programs identified in these reports as part of its prioritization process , usds has less assurance that it will apply resources to the it projects with the greatest need of improvement . to help agencies effectively deliver digital services , the president's budget for fiscal year 2016 proposed funding for digital service teams at 25 agencies — the 24 chief financial officers act agencies , as well as the national archives and records administration . according to usds policy , agencies are to , among other things , hire or designate an executive for managing their digital services teams . after agreeing to a charter , according to usds , agencies can use usds's hiring pipeline for digital service experts . of the 25 agencies that requested funding to establish teams , omb has established charters with 6 agencies for their digital service teams — the departments of defense , health and human services , homeland security , the treasury , state , and veterans affairs . the charters establish the executives for managing digital service teams and describe the reporting relationships between the team leaders and agency leadership .