trade . commerce has revised the ear to create a new “support for the cuban people” export license exception that authorizes exports ( 1 ) to improve living conditions and support independent economic activity in cuba , ( 2 ) to strengthen civil society ( 3 ) to improve the free flow of information among , and with , the cuban people , and ( 4 ) of items sold directly to individuals in cuba for their personal use or their immediate family's personal use . in addition , commerce has made regulatory changes to broaden existing license exceptions available for cuba . for example , commerce modified the license exception “consumer communications devices” to allow for the commercial sale , lease , or loan of authorized items ; previously , items covered by the exception could only be donated . commerce has also modified its licensing policy to allow for the general approval of export licenses to cuba for certain items , including telecommunications items and items that will support environmental protection . as part of the regulatory revisions , the u.s. government has also developed a list of items that are allowed for import into the united states from cuba , if produced by independent cuban entrepreneurs . according to various agency officials , the u.s. government has sought to refine the regulations over time to reflect input from u.s. businesses and to reflect the realities of the cuban system . for example , treasury officials stated that as part of the third set of regulatory revisions , treasury modified the cacr to allow u.s. businesses to procure legal services in cuba after hearing from the u.s. business community that to successfully operate in cuba they needed to be able to obtain such services . u.s. regulatory changes have generated a significant amount of interest and exploratory work among u.s. businesses . an official at the u.s. embassy in havana noted that the number of u.s. companies participating in a major trade fair in cuba more than doubled from 2014 to 2015 . there have also been several state and local u.s. trade missions to cuba . for example , the governor of new york led a trade mission to cuba in april 2015 that included more than a dozen business leaders from the state . remittances . treasury has made regulatory changes to the cacr that removed caps on remittances to cuban nationals that had been previously set at $500 a quarter . there are now no limits on the amount of remittances given as a donation that can be sent to cuban nationals . financial services . treasury has made a number of revisions to the cacr related to financial services . for example , treasury has modified the cacr to remove financing restrictions on most types of exports and has modified the definition of “cash in advance,” a requirement for exportation of agricultural products , from “cash before shipment” to “cash before transfer of title and control.” in addition , treasury has allowed credit and debit cards issued by u.s. banks to be used in cuba .