postal service ( the service ) . how should mailer issues regarding the implementation of intelligent mail be addressed ? what exclusions , if any , should be allowed under the service's reporting of annual results ( eg , exclusions for the holiday mailing period and incorrectly addressed and / or prepared mail ) ? the postal service and prc will continue to be challenged to successfully implement the extensive regulatory changes required by the act . currently , the prc is reviewing the may 2008 rate increases filed by the service and has asked for public comment on this filing . in addition to the prc's regulatory responsibilities for rate setting and monitoring service performance discussed earlier , these parties will be challenged to implement other requirements related to postal costing , accounting , and financial reporting . we have reported on specific challenges the postal service has faced in these areas . with respect to its financial reporting , the service has made significant improvements in the frequency , content , and availability to address our earlier recommendations . furthermore , in 2005 we reported on the long - standing issues of ratemaking data quality , many of which persist today . the act establishes new reporting and accounting requirements that should help to address these challenges . for example , some mailers have said they need detailed , real - time information to help identify and address delivery problems . in what format should information be available , and how should privacy be protected ? how frequently should information be reported and / or accessible ( eg , quarterly , annually , or in real - time ) ? should mailers pay for some of the information ? the major change is the establishment of , and authority provided to the new prc to help enhance the collection and reporting of information on the service's postal rates and financial performance . the prc has oversight responsibilities in such areas as: market - dominant products: the prc must prescribe by regulation the form and content of annual service reports that analyze costs , revenues , and rates , using methods that prc must also prescribe ; specify which reported information shall be made public ; initiate proceedings as necessary to improve the quality , completeness , or accuracy of this information ; and assess compliance and complaints . competitive products: the prc must establish regulations that ensure that each competitive product covers its attributable costs , prohibit the cross - subsidization of competitive products by market - dominant products , and ensure that competitive products collectively cover what prc determines to be an appropriate share of the service's institutional costs ( overhead costs ) , as well as to assess complaints .