this process. ) inventory of existing workforce capabilities in august 2009 , nara published its first strategic human capital plan , which covers fiscal years 2009 through 2014 . linked to the agency's overall strategic plan , this strategic plan discusses strategies for achieving each of its five human capital goals: strategic alignment , leadership and knowledge management , results - oriented performance culture , talent management , and accountability . the strategic plan includes a set of improvements that would give nara the capability to strategically manage its human capital , as called for in our human capital framework . specifically , section 3 , “workforce planning,” includes all five of the elements of our strategic human capital framework . the plan also includes related goals , such as being able to hire people faster by automating manual and paper - based processes ; nara's director of human resources cited this as one of the agency's highest priorities . the agency has taken some initial steps to implement its plan . specific strategies support each of these goals . these strategies include , for example , “we will continue to make the business case at senior levels throughout the federal government that records and information are important government assets and that records management is an important tool,” “we will ensure that all of our holdings are in appropriate space,” “we will identify permanently valuable electronic records wherever they are , capture them , and make them available in usable form as quickly as practical,” and “we will identify and implement the cultural changes that we need to better serve our customers in a changing environment.” nara has also established policies and procedures that define its organization and determine lines of authority and areas of responsibility . responsibilities at the agency are approved by the archivist through a defined process and are codified , along with the change process , in nara directive 101: nara organization and delegation of authority . for tasks that cut across organizational structures , nara has procedures for setting up committees , task forces , and working groups , which are governed by charters establishing their goals and membership . it has a directive governing creation of these charters . some departments do not have a departmental records officer . some department - level records officers responded for the entire organization , but , in at least one case , the department - level contact did not respond and deferred to the components . for instance , some respondents answered “no” when their comments indicated they should have answered “yes,” and vice versa . in addition , nara found that some questions on the survey were not applicable to very small organizations ( less than 100 ftes ) , but a “no” answer reduced their score , so that these organizations were penalized inappropriately in the scoring . nara has taken steps to reduce the effect of these issues on the second survey . according to nara officials , they gathered additional information on records contacts , including the areas covered by departmental records officers , to ensure that the survey went to the appropriate contacts and that nara understood those contacts' areas of responsibility .