these have informed its oversight of the project . as previously discussed , fta established the fwso office in october 2015 to provide temporary and direct safety oversight of wmata in the absence of an effective state oversight authority , according to fta . when wmata first notified fta of its plans to implement the safetrack project on may 6 , 2016 , the fwso had been conducting inspections on the integrity of wmata's track since march 2016 . the fwso was in the process of developing a directive requiring wmata to take corrective actions to address concerns with its track construction , maintenance , and inspection resources , among other issues . according to fta , fwso inspectors conducted 76 inspections of wmata's metrorail system from october 2015 through may 2016 . for example , in march and april of 2016 , fta inspected over 60 miles of track on all six metrorail lines , with additional follow - up inspections between late april and june . fta found that wmata's track inspection program did not fully account for differences in track types , locations , and train traffic volume when wmata prioritized its inspections . in addition , fta found that wmata maintenance departments did not jointly review inspection results to develop coordinated mitigations and assign limited resources to highest priority issues . we examined: 1 . the extent to which wmata's planning of the safetrack project was consistent with leading project management practices ; 2 . the extent to which wmata's implementation of safetrack was consistent with these practices ; and , 3 . the steps that were taken by fta to oversee safetrack . to address our first two research questions on safetrack's planning and implementation , we examined documentation on how wmata planned safetrack , including the alternative plans it developed , as well as how it carried out work for safetrack . we also examined fta's project construction guidelines and its quality management guidelines for their applicability to safetrack work . we also examined wmata documentation on the quality control and quality assurance frameworks in place for safetrack as well as the results of wmata's own safetrack quality reviews . we also obtained and summarized data from wmata on work tasks planned for and completed during safetrack . based on interviews with wmata officials , we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for our purpose of summarizing work planned and completed to date under safetrack . further , we examined the results of fta's inspections of wmata track infrastructure . we also reviewed recent investigations and studies regarding wmata , including those from the american public transportation association , dot's office of inspector general ( oig ) , ntsb , and wmata's oig . to further address our first two research objectives , we interviewed officials from wmata and other organizations . specifically , during the course of each safetrack surge , wmata officials collect and document information about the work performed and the condition of assets . wmata officials also develop lessons learned during and after each surge period , and use those lessons during subsequent maintenance and planning efforts .