ii ) . except for treasury , other agencies providing written comments generally provided additional information on their foia programs or provided suggestions on the draft . epa and nsf offered additional information about their foia operations . such requests are generally granted in full . other agencies , on the other hand , receive numerous requests whose responses must routinely be redacted . for example , nsf reported in its annual report that most of its requests ( an estimated 90 percent ) are for copies of funded grant proposals . the responsive documents are routinely redacted to remove personal information on individual principal investigators ( such as salaries , home addresses , and so on ) , which results in high numbers of “partial grants” compared to “full grants. for 2005 , the reported time required to process requests ( by track ) varied considerably among agencies . table 6 presents data on median processing times for fiscal year 2005 . for agencies that reported processing times by component rather than for the agency as a whole , the table indicates the range of median times reported by the agency's components . as the table shows , seven agencies had components that reported processing simple requests in less than 10 days ( these components are parts of the cia , energy , the interior , justice , labor , transportation , and the treasury ) ; for each of these agencies , the lower value of the reported ranges is less than 10 . on the other hand , median time to process simple requests is relatively long at some organizations ( for example , components of energy and justice , as shown by median ranges whose upper end values are greater than 100 days ) . for complex requests , the picture is similarly mixed . components of four agencies ( epa , dhs , the treasury , and va ) reported processing complex requests quickly — with a median of less than 10 days . in contrast , other components of several agencies ( dhs , energy , epa , hhs , hud , justice , state , transportation , and the treasury ) reported relatively long median times to process complex requests , with median days greater than 100 . six agencies ( aid , hhs , nsf , opm , sba , and ssa ) reported using single - track processing . the median processing times for single - track processing varied from 5 days ( at an hhs component ) to 173 days ( at another hhs component ) . the changes from fiscal year 2004 to 2005 also vary . for agencies that reported agencywide figures , table 7 shows how many showed increased or decreased median processing times . table 8 shows these numbers for the components that were reported separately . in general , these tables show that no trend emerges across tracks and types of reporting , and the numbers of agencies and components involved vary from track to track . the picture that emerges is of great variation in processing times according to circumstances .