the training did not provide this information . fema has appointed an ssi program manager . fema appointed its first ssi program manager in january 2010 , and this individual has developed a standard operating procedure that , in accordance with dhs' 2005 management directive , establishes fema's protocols for recognizing , identifying , and safeguarding ssi . according to the ssi program manager , the standard operating procedure was reviewed by transportation security administration ( tsa ) and coast guard officials , and approved by officials in fema's office of security before distribution to fema staff in mid - august . the ssi program manager also reported that he is planning to develop an ssi instruction guide for fema gpd in november 2010 that will identify the types of information in grant documents handled by fema gpd staff that should and should not be marked and treated as ssi . according to the ssi program manager , this guide will be completed in collaboration with fema gpd , tsa , and the coast guard , and will be applicable to fema gpd staff , contractors , and grantees . further , the ssi program manager reported to us that he is developing a self - inspection program based on an ssi evaluation program that the coast guard currently uses . this will fulfill the management directive's instruction to conduct self - inspections for effective management , and consistent and appropriate application and use of ssi , at least once every 18 months . he expects to conduct fema's self - inspection in december 2010 . in addition , in response to our questions regarding the extent of ssi training offered to gpd staff , the program manager provided training to fema's gpd staff in mid - july on identifying , handing , and safeguarding ssi . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . moreover , when conducting its data quality review , fema does not have a distinct process for comparing recipients' quarterly reports against ssi criteria to ensure that sensitive information , similar to that which is described in the recipients' investment justifications , is not included in the recovery act reporting and thus made publicly available . fema also lacks a protocol for informing recipients when their draft recovery act reports contain sensitive information and should be safeguarded appropriately . finally , fema has not provided instruction to recipients cautioning them up front against revealing ssi in their recipient report submissions and guiding them on what an appropriate level of detail would be . two officials within gpd were responsible for performing quality reviews on recipients' quarterly submissions to federalreporting.gov before these submissions were posted to recovery.gov in february 2010 , the reporting period we reviewed . one official told us that he and his former colleague drafted a standard operating procedure after they were charged with reviewing recipients' reports in 2009 which described the recovery act recipient report reviewing process they undertook . this draft standard operating procedure included descriptions of the reporting cycle , the various elements recipients report , sources of the reporting data , the recovery act process for reviewing recipient information , and directions on how to compile and report the required information .