iii ) . county clerks or recorders ( hereinafter referred to as recorders ) and certain state agencies often maintain records that contain ssns because these offices have traditionally been the repository for key information that , among other things , chronicles various life events and other activities of individuals as they interface with government . for example , they often maintain records on an individual's birth , marriage , and death . they maintain documentation that an individual has been licensed to work in certain professions , such as medical , legal , and public accounting . in addition , they may maintain documentation on certain transactions , such as property ownership and title transfer . this is done , according to recorders we met with , to make ownership known and detect any liens on a parcel of land before making a purchase . ssns appear in these public records for a number of reasons . they may already be a part of a document that is submitted to a recorder for official preservation . for example , military veterans are encouraged to file their discharge papers with their local recorder's office to establish a readily available record of their military service , and these documents contain the ssn because that number is the individual's military identification number . also , documents that record financial transactions , such as tax liens and property settlements , contain ssns to help identify the correct individual . the information we used from that effort is based on interviews with and documentation provided by the ftc , ssa's office of inspector general , irs , federal bureau of investigation , u.s. secret service , and credit bureaus among others . we performed our work at ssa headquarters in baltimore , maryland ; at maryland state offices in annapolis , maryland ; washington d.c. ; and at selected locations including austin , texas ; harris county , texas ; olympia , washington ; king county , washington ; st. paul minnesota ; and aitkin county minnesota . we conducted our work between february 2001 and march 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the following federal laws establish a framework for restricting ssn disclosure: the freedom of information act ( foia ) ( 5 u.s.c . 552 ) – this act establishes a presumption that records in the possession of agencies and departments of the executive branch of the federal government are accessible to the people . foia , as amended , provides that the public has a right of access to federal agency records , except for those records that are protected from disclosure by nine stated exemptions . one of these exemptions allows the federal government to withhold information about individuals in personnel and medical files and similar files when the disclosure would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy . according to department of justice guidance , agencies should withhold ssns under this foia exemption . this statute does not apply to state and local governments . the privacy act of 1974 ( 5 u.s.c . 552a ) – the act regulates federal government agencies' collection , maintenance , use and disclosure of personal information maintained by agencies in a system of records .