gao - 11-565 . publicly posted its revised guidance . notwithstanding these weaknesses , we found that 19 agencies reported anticipating about $2.4 billion in cost savings between 2011 and 2015 . we also reported that none of five selected agencies had a master program schedule or cost - benefit analysis that was fully consistent with best practices . to assist agencies with their data center consolidation efforts , omb had sponsored the development of a fdcci total cost of ownership model that was intended to help agencies refine their estimated costs for consolidation ; however , agencies were not required to use the cost model as part of their cost estimating efforts . accordingly , we reiterated our prior recommendation that agencies complete missing plan and inventory elements and made new recommendations to omb to publically post guidance updates on the fdcci website and to require agencies to use its cost model . omb generally agreed with our recommendations and has since taken steps to address them . more specifically , omb posted its 2012 guidance for updating data center inventories and plans , as well as guidance for reporting consolidation progress , to the fdcci public website . further , the website has been updated to provide prior guidance documents and omb memoranda . in addition , omb's 2012 consolidation plan guidance requires agencies to use the cost model as they develop their 2014 budget request . the 24 agencies have collectively made progress towards omb's data center consolidation goal to close 40 percent , or approximately 1,253 of the 3,133 data centers , by the end of 2015 . to track their progress , omb requires agencies to report quarterly on their completed and planned performance against that goal via an online portal . after being reviewed for data quality and security concerns , the gsa fdcci program management office makes the performance information available on the federal website dedicated to providing the public with access to datasets developed by federal agencies , http: / / data.gov . we have previously reported that oversight and governance of major it initiatives help to ensure that the initiatives meet their objectives and performance goals . when an initiative is governed by multiple entities , the roles and responsibilities of those entities should be clearly defined and documented , including the responsibilities for coordination among those entities . we have further reported , and omb requires,executive - level body be responsible for overseeing major it initiatives . among other things , we have reported that this body should have documented policies and procedures for management oversight of the initiative , regularly track progress against established performance goals , and take corrective actions as needed . as the fdcci executive - level body , omb has put in place a governance hierarchy that is responsible for fdcci oversight activities ; while most of these activities are being performed , several weaknesses exist . the weaknesses in oversight are due , in part , to omb not ensuring that assigned responsibilities are being executed . omb's march 2013 memorandum made significant changes to fdcci ; however , the impact on several key fdcci oversight responsibilities is not addressed .