drmo losses . our statistical samples identified missing turn - ins at two of the five drmos we tested and missing quantities at all five drmos tested , including many items that were in new , unused , and excellent condition . because drmo officials did not have documentation to show whether these items had been reutilized , transferred , sold , or destroyed , there is no assurance of whether the missing items reflected bookkeeping errors or if they related to theft . missing items in our columbus drmo sample included turn - ins of 72 chemical and biological protective suits and 47 wet weather parkas that were subject to demilitarization controls and 7 sleeping bags , a cold weather coat , 4 pairs of cold weather trousers , 4 canteens , a central processing unit ( cpu ) , and various other items . most of the quantity errors we found at the columbus drmo related to military clothing items . missing items in our richmond drmo sample included a computer ; 10 cpus ; 13 computer monitors ; 2 scanners ; and 2 items that require trade security control , including an arm assembly for a helicopter blade and a computer data signal coder / decoder . based on these losses , we requested drms summary reports on losses for all drmos during fiscal years 2002 , 2003 , and 2004 for further analysis . reported losses include lost , damaged , and stolen items and adjustments for recordkeeping errors . we determined that the loss summary reports do not include all known losses . for example , only one of the nine turn - ins in our statistical sample that included missing items that were subject to demilitarization controls was included in the fiscal year 2004 loss summary reports . quantity errors . separate from missing turn - ins , quantity errors involved items that exceeded or fell short of quantities recorded on a turn - in transaction . circuit cards . on september 7 , 2004 , we requisitioned two circuit cards with a total original acquisition cost of $8,684 , from the hill drmo . we paid $5 shipping cost and received the circuit cards on september 27 , 2004 . circuit cards are circuit boards consisting of a series of flat plastic or fiberglass layers ( usually 2 to 10 ) that are glued together after a circuit has been etched in them . in a computer , a circuit card holds the integrated circuits and other electronic components that provide power to perform certain designated functions , such as computerized program functions or electronic communications functions . according to the navy inventory item manager and the national security agency technical support team leader , the circuit cards that we obtained are used in secure satellite communications gear . the circuit cards that we obtained were turned in by the dla supply depot in ogden , utah , as excess to air force needs in february 2004 . the navy item manager told us that although the circuit cards were no longer being purchased , they were still in active inventory and were still being used by some navy units and foreign military sales customers at the time we obtained them .