gao - 03-578 . washington , d.c.: april 30 , 2003 . washington , d.c.: october 5 , 2001 . bioterrorism: federal research and preparedness activities . infectious disease outbreaks: bioterrorism preparedness efforts have improved public health response capacity , but gaps remain . the remaining state was discussing such a plan . however , only one of the states we visited has tested in an exercise its plan for conducting mass smallpox vaccinations . we found that most hospitals lack the capacity to respond to large - scale infectious disease outbreaks . persons with symptoms of infectious disease would potentially go to emergency departments for treatment . most emergency departments across the country have experienced some degree of crowding and therefore in some cases may not be able to handle a large influx of patients during a potential sars outbreak . in addition , although most hospitals across the country reported participating in basic planning activities for large - scale infectious disease outbreaks , few have acquired the medical equipment resources , such as ventilators , to handle large increases in the number of patients that may result from outbreaks of diseases such as sars . our survey found that most emergency departments have experienced some degree of overcrowding . persons with symptoms of infectious disease would potentially go to emergency departments for treatment , further stressing these facilities . the problem of overcrowding is much more pronounced in some hospitals and areas than in others . in general , hospitals that reported the most problems with crowding were in the largest metropolitan statistical areas ( msa ) and in the msas with high population growth . for example , in fiscal year 2001 , hospitals in msas with populations of 2.5 million or more had about 162 hours of diversion ( an indicator of crowding ) , compared with about 9 hours for hospitals in msas with populations of less than 1 million . also the median number of hours of diversion in fiscal year 2001 for hospitals in msas with a high percentage population growth was about five times that for hospitals in msas with lower percentage population growth . diversion varies greatly by msa . figure 1 shows each msa and the share of hospitals within the msa that reported being on diversion more than 10 percent of the time — or about 2.4 hours or more per day — in fiscal year 2001 . areas with the greatest diversion included southern california and parts of the northeast . of the 248 msas for which data were available , 171 ( 69 percent ) had no hospitals reporting being on diversion more than 10 percent of the time . by contrast , 53 msas ( 21 percent ) had at least one - quarter of responding hospitals on diversion for more than 10 percent of the time . hospitals in the largest msas and in msas with high population growth that have reported crowding in emergency departments may have difficulty handling a large influx of patients during a potential sars outbreak , especially if this outbreak occurred in the winter months when the incidence of influenza is quite high . thus far , the largest sars outbreaks worldwide have primarily occurred in areas with dense populations .