technologies . for example , nhtsa revised the cost of turbocharging and downsizing an engine — a cost range of $512 to $1,098 , depending on engine type , compared to the range of $822 to $1,129 used for the model year 2011 cafe standards — using data available from epa's ongoing teardown study with fev , an automotive research , design , and development company . it also revised the costs of several other key technologies such as cylinder deactivation — a cost range of $28 to $190 , compared to the range of $306 to $400 used for the model year 2011 cafe standards . however , despite this concerted effort , nhtsa and epa were not able to make further refinements because the anticipated nas study of vehicle technology was not completed on schedule . indirect costs to manufacturers . nhtsa adopted research that epa had contracted for to refine estimates of the indirect costs to manufacturers of manufacturing more fuel - efficient vehicles . these costs include research and development and marketing costs associated with the introduction of a new technology and give decision makers a more comprehensive view of the total costs a manufacturer would incur for implementing new technology than direct costs alone can provide . epa supplemented an initial contractor report on this subject with an additional in - house study , which involved significant staff resources . the social cost of carbon dioxide emissions . enhanced safety . manufacturers would not have an incentive to comply with cafe standards by pursuing strategies that compromise safety — such as ( 1 ) reducing the size of vehicles ( applicable fuel - economy targets now become higher as size decreases ) or ( 2 ) designing models to be classified as light trucks rather than cars , which can increase a vehicle's propensity to roll over — in order to comply with cafe standards . under a single standard , manufacturers could reduce vehicle size as one approach for cafe compliance . more even disbursement of the regulatory cost burden . fuel - economy improvements would be spread across the industry , instead of concentrating on manufacturers of heavier , lower fuel - economy vehicles . addressing concerns about consumer choice . manufacturers now must improve the fuel economy of all light trucks , regardless of size , which addresses criticisms that single , fleetwide cafe standards were hindering the efforts of some companies to offer a mix of vehicles matching consumer desires . for instance , under the previous system , instead of installing more fuel - saving technologies across their fleets , manufacturers might have moved toward building fewer large vehicles and more small vehicles to meet new cafe standards , even though consumers typically have not demanded small vehicles . in a footprint - based standard , manufacturers must improve the fuel economy of all light trucks , no matter their size . the cafe requirement for each manufacturer — which is the basis for determining compliance — will be determined at the end of the model year based on actual production . for example , manufacturers selling a greater proportion of large vehicles will have a lower average target to meet than will manufacturers focusing on smaller vehicles .