and senate . i think there are opportunities to streamline with better coordination.” “ a timeline from start to finish would be helpful . i also recommend that congress prioritize ig confirmations above most other confirmations.” “faster consideration and vote would be useful.” “the senate be required to act on ig candidates within 90 days of their nomination by the president.” “although i think it is very important for any ig to have a strong working relationship with the agency head , it seems inappropriate for the agency head to have a strong voice in selecting the nominee for a residentially appointed , senate - confirmed ig who is supposed to provide independent oversight of the agency . i suggest changing the process to omit the pre - selection interview with the agency head and substitute instead a pre - nomination courtesy meeting. we provided a draft of this report to cigie for comment and cigie shared the draft with the 64 oigs active under the ig act . cigie and the oigs at the national credit union administration and u.s. election assistance commission provided written comments , which are discussed below and reprinted in appendixes ii , iii , and iv , respectively . cigie expressed appreciation for the review and analysis efforts that we conducted for the purposes of this report . cigie also noted some information regarding the central intelligence agency ig and the intelligence community ig , which were outside the scope of our work . cigie stated that both igs are pas and that the central intelligence agency ig position has been vacant for over 3 years . the national credit union administration oig stated that while it did not have a vacancy during the 10-year period we reviewed , it agreed that looking at this area to reduce ig vacancies is an important endeavor . the u.s. election assistance commission oig expressed concurrence with the facts as they pertain to its office and stated that the report will contribute to improving the appointment process for igs . in addition , cigie and the oigs at the appalachian regional commission , denali commission , department of commerce , department of education , department of housing and urban development , federal deposit insurance corporation , general services administration , national reconnaissance office , and u.s. election assistance commission provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . the remaining oigs did not provide comments . we are sending copies of this report to the executive director of cigie and to the 64 ig act offices listed in this report as well as interested congressional committees . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2623 or davisbh@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v .