i and ii ) . state said that our draft report provided a generally accurate account of the complex and difficult relationship that existed between the department of state and incsf . state said its actions with respect to incsf were responsible and fully in accordance with u.s. law and administration policy . state also said it believed our observation that state and incsf , through their inability to work together to restart liberty tv , missed a chance to reach the iraqi people at critical times prior to and during the war in iraq lay outside the scope of our review . we disagree and believe that it is important to lay out the potential consequences of not successfully restarting liberty tv , particularly in view of the significance that both state and incsf attributed to television broadcasting into iraq . state also provided some technical comments and suggested wording changes , which we have incorporated into the report as appropriate . incsf agreed that due to the inability of state and incsf to work together to restart liberty tv , important opportunities to broadcast to the iraqi people were lost . state rejected the proposal . similarly , in september 2001 , incsf requested $23 million over 5 months . according to the proposal , liberty tv operations would be expanded to 24 hours a day , and radio operations would be initiated via a transmitter inside iraq . state rejected incsf's proposal but in late september 2001 made a counteroffer of $8 million for a 5-month cooperative agreement . state renewed the same offer in early november 2001 . while emphasizing that it was not prepared to fund incsf activities inside iraq , state did offer to fund a series of activities , including publication of the newspaper , satellite tv broadcasting , information collection analysis , and startup of radio broadcasting using a transmitter based in iran . incsf declined state's offer . three main concerns affected state's funding decisions for incsf and thwarted the parties' ability to negotiate and conclude long - term funding agreements: concerns over incsf's financial management and accountability based largely on the results of audits of incsf ; the desire of incsf to operate inside iraq , which was inconsistent with u.s. policy ; and state's increasing concerns about the appropriateness and merits of funding incsf's information collection program . state officials acknowledged that the use of frequent short - term amendments to the cooperative agreements , plus the substantial period of time that an agreement was not in force in 2002 , significantly complicated management of the program and made it difficult for incsf to accomplish its objectives . however , state officials said that these arrangements were necessary in view of the financial management , policy , and operational issues that arose during the program . incsf repeatedly claimed that the short - term nature of state's funding led to financial problems in the organization and disrupted liberty tv's ability to pay its bills . in the very early stages of state's agreements with incsf , state received strong indications that incsf had inadequate controls over cash transfers . for example , in 2000 , a cpa firm reviewed incsf's controls as part of agreement 1 .