we recommended the bureau do so in our prior report . the bureau took some steps to collect data , but did not fully evaluate the performance of the hhcs . for instance , the contractor provided the bureau with data such as average transmission times collected from transmission logs on the hhc , as required in the contract . but the bureau has not used these data to analyze the full range of transmission times , nor how this may have changed throughout the entire operation . without this information , the magnitude of the handheld computers' performance issues throughout dress rehearsal was not clear . see figure 3 for more details . the hhc included several applications that varied depending on the role of the user: software enabling listers to complete their time and expense electronically ; text messaging software enabling listers to communicate via text message ; software enabling staff to review all work assigned to them and enabling crew leaders to make assignments ; software enabling staff to perform address canvassing ; and an instrument enabling quality control listers to perform quality assurance tasks . the dress rehearsal address canvassing started may 7 , 2007 , and ended june 25 , 2007 , as planned . the bureau reported in its 2008 census dress rehearsal address canvassing assessment report being able to use the hhc to collect address information for 98.7 percent of housing units visited and map information for 97.4 percent of the housing units visited . copies will be made available to others upon request . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions on matters discussed in this report , please contact mathew j. scirè at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or sciremj@gao.gov , or david a. powner at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or pownerd@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . our objectives for this report were to analyze u.s. census bureau ( bureau ) and contractor data showing how handheld computers ( hhc ) operated and its implications on operations , and examine implications the redesign may have on plans for address canvassing in the 2010 census . to determine how well the hhc worked in collecting and transmitting address and mapping data , and what data the bureau and contractor used in assessing hhc performance during address canvassing , we examined bureau documents , observed hhcs in use , and interviewed bureau and contractor officials . for example , we reviewed census bureau memos that outline the data on hhc performance the bureau planned to collect . we reviewed the field data collection automation ( fdca ) contract , focusing specifically on what performance specifications and requirements were included in the contract . we observed hhc use during dress rehearsal address canvassing , and interviewed bureau officials and contractor officials about hhc use and performance during the dress rehearsal of address canvassing .