iii. ) in addition to having income tests , some programs set certain limits on the assets that an individual or family may hold in order to be eligible for the program , while others do not , according to our analysis of agency data and documentation , as confirmed by the agencies . assets — referred to as “resources” by some programs — generally include financial resources — such as cash held in checking and savings accounts , individual retirement accounts , 401 ( k ) s , and other accounts that can be readily transferred into cash — and nonfinancial resources , such as a home or car . similar to income limits , three of the six selected programs — ssi , tanf , and snap under federal rules — have federally set limits on the amount or type of financial assets that an individual or family may have in order to be determined eligible for benefits . the remaining families received benefits from three or more programs . to start with , a different federal agency or office administers each program we reviewed . for example , fns administers snap , cms administers medicaid , and the office of public and indian housing within hud administers the housing choice voucher . these different federal agencies generally develop regulations separately for each program , which may affect program rules . furthermore , as discussed earlier , state governments are also involved in administering and funding some of these programs . specifically , for programs that allow state flexibility , state governments also establish some program rules , making it more difficult to streamline or align program rules within or across these programs at the federal level . for example , for tanf cash assistance , the development of eligibility and benefit rules is primarily delegated to state agencies administering the program , while for snap , state agencies have some flexibility in determining eligibility rules within federally - established parameters . regarding program funding , while states may partially fund tanf cash assistance benefits , the federal government funds the full cost of snap benefits . as a result of these different roles , streamlining eligibility rules and benefits across multiple programs would entail , in part , modifying and realigning complex administrative relationships among a range of federal and state government entities . finally , financial or program cost implications pose a major challenge to streamlining financial eligibility and benefit rules for low - income programs , according to our previous work . however , certain nonfinancial assets , such one vehicle , do not count toward this limit . for snap , under federal rules , there is a limit of $2,250 in countable resources or $3,250 in countable resources if at least one person is age 60 or older or is disabled , and since 2008 , these limits have been adjusted annually and rounded to the nearest $250 based on changes to the consumer price index ( cpi ) . in recent years , some states have moved away from having asset limits for certain low - income programs .