surveys . from april through june 2015 , we conducted two separate self - administered web - based surveys: one survey of all 1,389 cfpb employees ( nonsupervisors and supervisors below executives ) who were employed as of january 31 , 2015 , and another survey of 57 senior cfpb executives . we chose to survey all staff instead of a sample in order to provide the largest possible number of cfpb employees a chance to voice their opinions . the nonexecutive survey included questions on ( 1 ) hiring , compensation , and retention ; ( 2 ) employee opportunities , development and performance management ; ( 3 ) employee complaint processes ; ( 4 ) leadership , management , and communication ; ( 5 ) diversity and inclusion efforts ; ( 6 ) organizational culture and climate ; and ( 7 ) employee demographic information . the separate survey of all cfpb executives covered the same topic areas , but omitted many questions not relevant for executives . the full set of questions and results for both surveys is available as an e - publication supplement to this report , consumer financial protection bureau: survey results from employees and executives on personnel management and organizational culture ( gao - 16-138sp , may 2016 ) . furthermore , we report results for groups of respondents by race , ethnicity , gender , and age , but we do not attempt to extrapolate the findings within each of these groups to the broader group . survey respondents self - reported their race and ethnicity . respondents were able to select more than one race , so it is possible that some respondents are represented in more than one race and ethnicity group . in tables where we summarize results by race and ethnicity , we include results for the group of respondents who chose not to identify their race or ethnicity . in addition , in tables in this report and the e - supplement , we exclude results for groups with fewer than 20 respondents . a total of 863 employees responded to our nonexecutive survey for a response rate of 62 percent . a total of 36 senior executives responded to our executive survey for a response rate of 63 percent . training . in accordance with the leading diversity management practice , cfpb has expanded its offerings of diversity and inclusion training — and made certain trainings mandatory — to help its management and staff increase their awareness and understanding of diversity and inclusion . in 2013 , cfpb contracted with a diversity expert to provide training designed to examine issues of diversity and inclusion and how they affect people in the workplace for employees at all levels . in february 2015 , cfpb made this training mandatory . in 2014 , cfpb began offering a 2-day leading diversity and inclusion workshop specifically for managers and supervisors developed by an external consultant . this training , developed to address ways to give appropriate consideration of staff differences in managerial or supervisory decisions and actions , was made mandatory in july 2015 .