( see fig . many entities marketed their products in more than one state , and some operated under more than one name or with more than one affiliated entity . these entities were concentrated in certain states and regions . seven states had 25 or more entities that operated during this period ; 5 of these states were located in the south . in addition to the 31 entities in texas , 30 were in florida , 29 each in illinois and north carolina , 28 in new jersey , 27 in alabama , and 25 in georgia . at least 15,000 employers purchased coverage from unauthorized entities , affecting more than 200,000 policyholders from 2000 through 2002 . the number of individuals covered by unauthorized entities was even greater than the more than 200,000 policyholders covered because the policyholder could be an employer that purchased coverage on behalf of its employees or the policyholder could be an individual with dependents . therefore , any one policyholder could represent more than one individual . the states reported that more than half of the entities they identified frequently targeted their health benefits to small employers . at the time of our 2003 survey , dol and states reported that the 144 entities had not paid at least $252 million in medical claims . this represents the minimum amount of unpaid claims associated with these entities identified from 2000 through 2002 because in some cases dol and the states did not have complete information on unpaid claims for the entities they reported to us . federal and state governments reported that about 21 percent of unpaid claims had been recovered from entities identified from 2000 through 2002 — $52 million of $252 million . these recoveries could include assets seized from unauthorized entities that have been shut down or frozen from other uses . licensed insurance agents who have marketed products offered by these entities have also reimbursed unpaid claims either voluntarily or through state or court action . additional assets may be recovered from the entities identified from 2000 through 2002 because investigations and federal and state actions remain ongoing . however , it is likely that many of the assets will remain unrecovered because federal and state investigators report that the entities often are nearing bankruptcy when detected or otherwise have few remaining assets with which to pay claims . a few entities were responsible for a large share of the affected employers and policyholders and the resulting unpaid claims . of the 144 unique entities , 10 alone covered about 64 percent of the employers and about 56 percent of the policyholders . they also accounted for 46 percent of the unpaid claims . in addition to the unauthorized entities selling health benefits , 14 states reported that discount plans were inappropriately marketed as health insurance products in some manner . unlike legitimate insurance , discount plans do not assume any financial risk nor do they pay any health care claims . instead , for a fee they provide a list of health care providers that have agreed to provide their services at a discounted rate to participants . in response to our survey , 40 states reported that they were aware that discount plans were marketed in their state .