validation . in the model validation phase , reviewers in the model validation unit are to examine the models to identify potential problems , ranking them by level of concern and threat to model validity . according to federal reserve policy , staff undertaking validation activities are independent of the model development process for the models they review . before 2016 , validation reviewers volunteered to leave their primary duties in the federal reserve system to assist with the stress test model review process . for example , for the ccar 2015 exercise , they spent approximately 8 weeks reviewing the models and returned for an additional 3 weeks to validate model changes made in response to the most severe findings . according to federal reserve staff and program documents , the federal reserve has been transitioning to a validation program that consists primarily of permanent , full - time staff . for each modeling team , the model validation unit employs various staff that are to review ( 1 ) model soundness and performance and ( 2 ) model change and implementation controls . economists and other subject - matter experts from across the federal reserve are to evaluate the model design for conceptual soundness and performance ( model soundness and performance review ) . development . the responsibility for executing model development lies with 11 supervisory modeling teams staffed with subject - matter experts . each of the teams are responsible for developing models to predict elements of a company's balance sheet or income statement , which are ultimately combined to predict post - stress capital ratios . for example , one modeling team is responsible for 22 separate models that predict components of net revenue before adjustments for loan loss provisions . another is responsible for models that combine output from the loss , revenue , and other models to produce the regulatory capital ratios . the model oversight group oversees the development process with assistance from the model coordination and advisory team . the model oversight group also reviews and determines whether to approve development models to replace prior production models . preliminary assessment . according to federal reserve documentation , supervisory modeling teams then conduct a preliminary assessment of the model production process after the model development phase is complete . the main purpose of the assessment is to test that all models and processes perform as expected and remediate problems before the final production of the annual stress test results . the modeling teams use loan portfolio and other financial data submitted to the federal reserve by institutions subject to the supervisory stress test as inputs to their models . they apply the current portfolio data and scenarios to the production models — including the development models awaiting approval to become production models — to test the models and provide information to the model oversight group about the effects on component model outcomes . the modeling teams analyze any differences from the previous year's results , which involves estimating how much of the overall change in a component model's result can be attributed to model changes , scenario changes , company portfolio changes , or other factors .