education did not provide other comments on the report . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of education ; and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 617 ) 788-0534 or emreyarrasm@gao.gov . provisional certification is the only approval status available to new schools . in addition , fsa may decide to recertify a school provisionally if it determines that a school has not fully complied with federal student aid requirements . fsa prohibits provisionally certified schools from opening new campus locations or offering new programs without approval from fsa , and provisionally certified schools that are denied recertification have a less substantive appeals process than fully certified schools . further , recertified schools in provisional status are subject to more fsa oversight than schools that are fully certified . fsa procedures allow for some discretion in determining for how long to certify a school . provisional recertification generally lasts 1 to 3 years , while full recertification generally lasts 4 to 6 years . education's fsa regional staff draw information from a variety of sources during the certification process to assess a school's capability to administer federal student aid . according to fsa documents , regional staff are to review information collected from schools and third parties , such as annual compliance audits conducted by independent auditors , among other information sources . fsa staff responsible for different functional areas , such as financial and compliance audits , accreditation status , and student loan default rates , compile and review information on schools , according to fsa procedures . fsa officials told us that these staff meet to discuss any potential program eligibility issues and to ensure that all information relevant to a school is considered before making a certification decision . fsa's certification procedures outline some of the key information that regional staff should assess , some of which is relevant to both initial and recertification decisions , and some of which is specific to each type of certification process ( see fig . documents and policies provided by schools: fsa regional staff are directed to review documents submitted by schools , including school catalogs , and certain school policies — such as admissions and student refund policies — that are relevant to assessing administrative capability . we selected these regional offices based on high certification decision volume and geographic dispersion . we also reviewed case file documents for a non - generalizable sample of 21 certification decisions from fiscal years 2015 and 2016 , selecting cases that included a mix of certification decisions , regional offices , and school characteristics ( eg , 2-year and 4-year , and public , nonprofit , and for - profit ) . to determine how often schools are approved and denied certification , we obtained and analyzed data from education's postsecondary education participants system ( peps ) on school certification outcomes for calendar years 2006 through 2017 .