many of these jobs are in production occupations . from 2010 through 2016 , this industry experienced about 11 percent annual growth in tech jobs ( i.e. , jobs in the fields of computing , engineering , and mathematics ) . more than half of this growth was the result of increases in industrial engineers , engineering technicians , and miscellaneous engineers . to explore an example industry — the plastics product manufacturing industry — in further detail , we identified the number of jobs susceptible to automation within that industry , by occupation and groups of occupations . the white house office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) is responsible for coordinating ai related policy across government agencies and for overseeing the national science and technology council's subcommittees and their ongoing activities . for example , the subcommittee on machine learning and artificial intelligence was originally chartered in 2016 to monitor machine learning and artificial intelligence and to watch for the arrival of important technology milestones in the development of ai , among other things . ostp officials told us that the subcommittee has been re - chartered , now receives direction from ostp's select committee on artificial intelligence , and is presently focused on federal resources related to ai research and development . selected firms generally adopted advanced technologies through a phased process of innovation and technology adoption ( see fig . we met with officials representing 16 firms that are using advanced technologies and a systems integrator who spoke for a number of his customer firms . many firm officials described the path to integrating technology into operations as lengthy , complex , and iterative . for example , some firms we visited have had to build and test different mechanical “grippers” attached to robot arms to pick up and handle particular objects ; one firm had high school participants at a local training center develop a gripper solution for one of the firm's robots . some of the large firms we visited had their own internal teams that identified , tested , and integrated advanced technologies . other firms we visited used third - party integrator companies to help with incorporating technologies into their operations . we spoke with firm officials about their motivations for adopting advanced technologies , as well as challenges they faced throughout the process , and they identified a number of similar issues . most selected firms cited cost savings as a primary consideration for adopting advanced technologies . firm officials discussed cost - related motivations in various forms , such as remaining competitive in a global economy , increasing productivity ( i.e. , lower cost per unit ) , decreasing labor costs , and saving on physical space . firms said they adopted advanced technologies as a way of reducing operational costs — including labor costs — to increase competitiveness and profitability . some officials also specifically identified the pressure of large low - cost competitors , both in the united states and globally , as a major motivation to reduce costs and product prices .