not be in default on their loans . make 120 on - time monthly loan payments for the full amount due on their bill . these monthly payments do not need to be consecutive . repay their loans through a qualifying repayment plan . the pslf program generally requires borrowers to repay their loans through one of the eligible income - driven repayment plans or the standard repayment plan . the temporary expanded process allows borrowers to qualify for loan forgiveness if they are participating in several additional types of repayment plans , including the graduated repayment plan , extended repayment plan , consolidated standard repayment plan , and consolidated graduated repayment plan . in addition , for the temporary expanded process , the following two payments generally must be at least as much as the borrower would have paid under an income - driven repayment plan: ( 1 ) the payment made immediately prior to applying for the temporary expanded process , and ( 2 ) the payment made 12 months prior to applying for the temporary expanded process . there are key differences in the processes for applying for loan forgiveness under the pslf program versus the temporary expanded process ( see table 1 ) . despite broad borrower interest in the pslf program and the temporary expanded process , very few borrowers have been granted loan forgiveness . a large number of borrowers are pursuing the pslf program , but our 2018 analysis found that education had denied about 99 percent of borrowers that applied for loan forgiveness through the pslf program during the first 8 months that education was accepting applications ( september 2017 through april 2018 ) , according to data from the pslf servicer . according to education's most recent publically released pslf program data through march 2019 , pslf program denial rates have continued to hover around 99 percent since our 2018 review . of the 76,002 loan forgiveness applications that had been processed , the pslf servicer had denied 75,138 ( 99 percent ) , as of march 2019 . according to data as of march 2019 , close to one - half of the pslf program loan forgiveness applications the pslf servicer had processed were denied because the borrower had not yet made 120 qualifying payments . the other most common reasons pslf program applications were denied were because of missing information on the application or because the borrower did not have qualifying federal loans . for borrowers that have been approved , education had forgiven almost $31 million in outstanding student loans , an average of more than $59,000 per approved borrower . the majority of requests borrowers submitted for the temporary expanded process were ineligible for consideration and were therefore denied because the borrower had not previously submitted an application for the pslf program , according to data from the loan servicer . for the 1 percent of applications that were approved from may 2018 through may 2019 , education had granted almost $27 million in loan forgiveness under the temporary expanded process , totaling about 4 percent of the $700 million appropriated funds , according to our 2019 report . borrowers received an average of about $41,000 in loan forgiveness .