to operate the pcip in their state . twenty - seven states elected to operate a pcip for their residents , while 23 states and the district of columbia opted to allow hhs to operate their pcips . for the 27 states that chose to operate their own pcips , hhs directly contracted with states or their designated nonprofit entities . the contracts established that hhs would reimburse states or their designated entities for claims and administrative costs incurred in excess of the premiums they collected . to implement the federally run pcip for the 24 states that opted not to operate their own pcip , hhs coordinated with other federal agencies and selected the government employees health association , inc. ( geha ) to help operate the program . geha was awarded a cost - plus - award fee contract , which established that hhs would reimburse geha for claims and administrative costs in addition to granting fixed and performance - based award fees . for both the federally and state - run pcips , hhs established a limit on administrative costs of no more than 10 percent of total spending over the lifetime of the program . cciio stopped accepting applications for errp enrollment in may 2011 , anticipating the $5 billion appropriation would be exhausted . as we previously reported , at that time the total number of approved plan sponsors was more than 6,000 — most of which enrolled within the first 6 months of the program — and cciio had already spent $2.4 billion reimbursing plan sponsors for claims incurred . officials told us that in september 2012 , cciio suspended making reimbursements to plan sponsors , with reimbursements having exceeded the $4.7 billion cap established for paying claims under the original appropriation nearly a year earlier . in anticipation of exceeding the cap , cciio had issued guidance on december 13 , 2011 , stating that it would not accept reimbursement requests for errp claims incurred after december 31 , 2011 . however , the program continued to accept requests for claims incurred on or before this date and officials explained that a number of factors led to it taking until september 2012 for all $4.7 billion to be spent , including that reimbursements must go through a clearance process to make sure funds are paid appropriately . when the $4.7 billion was reached , significant demand for the program remained with 5,699 errp reimbursement requests left outstanding that accounted for about $2.5 billion in unreimbursed claims . cciio is recovering portions of the $4.7 billion from plan sponsors that were overpaid and using those funds to pay outstanding reimbursement requests in the order in which they were received . overpayments are identified through the claims adjudication process and can happen when , for example , a plan receives a rebate from a provider that lowers the total cost of a claim after the claim was initially submitted to errp . in addition , because early reimbursement requests were based on summary claims data , cciio required plan sponsors to submit a more detailed accounting of the actual costs of these requests by april 27 , 2012 .