no systems have been delivered to the navy . the navy is planning for the first 2 systems to be delivered in fiscal year 2020 and for another 2 systems to be delivered in fiscal year 2023 . the navy will attain initial operational capability with the first phase systems when two of them are delivered and tested on a host platform , a life - cycle sustainment plan is in place , and personnel are trained and equipped to operate and maintain the system from a host platform . the navy plans to field the snakehead large displacement uuvs to uuv squadron 1 . according to navy officials , the squadron is also testing or operating more than 10 other types of uuvs and expects to receive 2 or more other new types of uuvs through approximately fiscal year 2020 , along with the snakehead . although navy officials told us that it is too soon to analyze and determine the numbers of personnel required for the system at the time of this report , they plan to utilize forward - deployed operators to launch and recover the vehicle , an operator to control the vehicle from an operations center on land , and a mission payload operator as needed depending on the mission . the precise number of operators per system will be determined and updated as the systems progress through acquisition . in staffing personnel to meet requirements for uuv squadron 1 , navy officials stated that they do not directly access or recruit personnel to fill such positions . instead , these officials told us that enlisted sailors from related career ratings within the submarine community , such as sonar technicians , are assigned to the squadron generally after they have completed at least one previous assignment and have approximately 5 years of experience in the navy . according to the officials , once personnel are assigned to the squadron , they receive uuv training to qualify on the systems they will operate , and they will be identified with a navy enlisted classification code of 9550 for uuv operators . this report addresses the extent to which the navy and the marine corps have ( 1 ) evaluated workforce alternatives for their unmanned system operators , including the use of federal civilian employees and private sector contractors ; ( 2 ) developed and updated personnel requirements and related policies and goals that affect requirements for operators , maintainers , and other support personnel for selected unmanned systems ; and ( 3 ) developed approaches for staffing unmanned system operators to meet personnel requirements and have met those requirements . to address these objectives , we included in the scope of our review the navy's and the marine corps' unmanned aerial systems ( uas ) , unmanned surface vehicles ( usv ) , and unmanned underwater vehicles ( uuv ) that were programs of record in calendar year 2016 . on the basis of department of the navy documentation and interviews with knowledgeable officials , we identified 24 such systems .