, et al . , september 11: trauma and human bonds . hillsdale , nj: analytic press , 2003 . landrigan , p.j. , et al . “health and environmental consequences of the world trade center disaster.” environmental health perspectives , 112 , no . levin , s. , et al . “health effects of world trade center site workers.” american journal of industrial medicine , 42 , no . levy , b.s. sidel ( eds. ) terrorism and public health . new york: oxford university press , 2003 . lippy , b.e . “safety and health of heavy equipment operators at ground zero.” american journal of industrial medicine , 42 , no . malievskaya , e. , et al . “assessing the health of immigrant workers near ground zero: preliminary results of the world trade center day laborer medical monitoring project.” american journal of industrial medicine , 42 , no . martyny , j. , et al . “respiratory protection.” new england journal of medicine , 347 , no . niles , b.l. , et al . “posttraumatic stress disorder symptomatology in vietnam veterans before and after september 11.” journal of nervous and mental disease , 191 , no . prezant , d.j. , et al . “cough and bronchial responsiveness in firefighters at the world trade center site.” new england journal of medicine , 347 , no . rom , w.n. , et al . “acute eosinophilic pneumonia in a new york city firefighter exposed to world trade center dust.” american journal of respiratory and critical care medicine , 166 , no . rosenheck , r.a. , and a. fontana . “post - september 11 admission symptoms and treatment response among veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder.” psychiatric services , 54 , no . salzman , s.h. , et al . “early respiratory abnormalities in emergency services police officers at the world trade center site.” journal of occupational and environmental medicine , 46 , no . schlenger , w.e. , et al . “psychological reactions to terrorist attacks: findings from the national study of americans' reactions to september 11.” journal of the american medical association , 288 , no . schuster , m.a. , et al . “a national survey of stress reactions after the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks.” new england journal of medicine , 345 , no . silver , r.c. , et al . “nationwide longitudinal study of psychological responses to september 11.” journal of the american medical association , 288 , no . simeon , d. , et al . “peritraumatic reactions associated with the world trade center disaster.” american journal of psychiatry , 160 , no . skloot , g. , et al . “respiratory symptoms and physiologic assessment of ironworkers at the world trade center disaster site.” chest , 125 , no . spadafora , r. “firefighter safety and health issues at the world trade center site.” american journal of industrial medicine , 42 , no . szema , a.m. , et al . “clinical deterioration in pediatric asthmatic patients after september 11 , 2001.” journal of allergy and clinical immunology , 113 , no . thiel de bocanegra , h. , and e. brickman .