gao - 08-602r . washington , d.c.: april 1 , 2008 . we received responses from all 20 communities . we also conducted follow - up telephone interviews with each community representative to discuss their responses to our questionnaire in depth and to update information on financial assistance , and the level of detail and consistency of personnel planning information provided by the military services . we visited 3 of these locations and interviewed cognizant installation and local community officials regarding the communities' planning issues and analyzed impact and planning data from these locations as well as from 7 other locations we had visited as part of our september 2007 review of army growth installations . we also interviewed officials from several nonfederal organizations such as the association of defense communities and the national governors association , both of which are familiar with the issues facing military growth communities . to address the second objective , we reviewed applicable dod directives and presidential executive orders to determine the roles that dod and other federal agencies play in assisting affected communities , and discussed impact issues with various officials within dod . we further collected data on dod - provided financial assistance to impacted communities . in order to determine the level of assistance provided by non - dod federal agencies , we asked oea to identify the federal agencies that may have the most helpful programs for growth communities . oea identified seven agencies . using structured interview questions , we collected information from all seven agencies regarding their programs and any possible assistance they have provided to the growth communities . we followed up with some of the seven agencies to clarify their answers . we also attended selected community - oriented conferences and workshops sponsored by federal and local agencies which explored growth issues and potential solutions . we conducted our work from february 2007 through may 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives , which we have done . although we present expected personnel growth numbers at the 20 communities we surveyed , we have concerns about the completeness and consistency of these data , as discussed later in this report . we present these numbers to give a sense of the relative magnitude of growth the communities can expect . overall , we believe that the evidence obtained for this report provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . additional information regarding our scope and methodology is included in appendix i . dod is currently implementing several major force structure and basing initiatives that are expected to result in a large number of personnel movements and changes in the size and shape of its domestic installation infrastructure . first , under the 2005 brac round , dod is implementing 182 recommendations , as set forth by the base closure and realignment commission , which must be completed by the statutory deadline of september 15 , 2011 .