optimism . sponsors and planners of new transit projects anticipate good outcomes . as a result , optimistic assumptions are common on such things as operating speeds , accessibility to stations , and the amount of new development within a given area . travel models tend to compound this across - the - board optimism in many ways leading to forecasts that may be much more optimistic than any one of the inputs , and this optimism may lead sponsors to reject less - than - hoped - for ridership projections and search for ways to increase the projections . some project sponsors we interviewed also identified the following challenges affecting ridership estimates: the difficulty in developing accurate population and employment growth estimates . the unpredictability of gas price levels on ridership . for instance , higher prices will encourage higher ridership and a large decline in prices will discourage ridership . one project sponsor told us that the economy has a significant effect on ridership , and more specifically , the economy affects the price of gas and cost of parking , which in turn affects ridership . fta has taken a number of actions to support the development of ridership forecasts . these include the following: funding . according to fta officials , the agency contributes funding to state agencies and mpos to support , among many other activities , the collection of travel data and the development of travel - forecasting procedures . mpos receive annual funding from both the federal highway administration and fta , in addition to state matching funds . nationally , fta's share of this funding is about $129 million for fiscal year 2014 . technical support . fta told us that , since the inception of the capital investment grant program , it has filled at least one staff position with a nationally recognized expert in travel forecasting who is responsible for assisting project sponsors in the development of travel forecasts and for oversight of capital investment grant project ridership forecasts . fta has also allocated approximately two full - time staff to oversight activities . these activities include the following: technical assistance in travel forecasting methods development . according to fta , at the invitation of local agencies , fta staff provides comments , participates in peer - review panels , and engages in ongoing discussions with local project sponsors and their contractors during the development of new travel forecasting procedures for metropolitan areas . early reviews of methods and assumptions . fta officials also stated that the agency encourages project sponsors and their contractors to meet with fta staff early in the preparation of forecasts in support of proposed projects . these officials said that this early engagement identifies potential problems with forecasting methods and planning assumptions at a point in time when these issues can be dealt with efficiently — essentially avoiding late surprises when project sponsors have finished their forecasts . reviews of final travel forecasts . before a proposed project is approved for entry into preliminary engineering ( new starts ) or project development ( small starts ) , fta staff review the travel forecasts submitted by project sponsors in support of these projects .