investigation . investigations for the initial top secret clearances of industry personnel adjudicated in january and february 2006 took an average of 286 days , compared to omb's 180-day goal for that period ( see table 1 ) . during the same period , investigations for top secret clearance updates or “reinvestigations” took an average of 419 days , almost one and a half times as long as the initial investigations ( no goal is given for clearance updates or reinvestigations ) . the mandated february 2007 omb report to congress noted that “reinvestigation timeliness has not been addressed , because the improvement effort focused on individuals for whom initial security clearances are required to perform work.” our september 2006 report identified many factors that inhibited the speed with which opm can deliver investigative reports to disco and other adjudication facilities . those causes included backlogged cases that prevent the prompt start of work on new cases , the relative inexperience of the investigative workforce , slowness in developing the capability to investigate overseas leads , and difficulty obtaining access to data in governmental records . and ( 2 ) how complete is the documentation of the processes used to determine whether industry personnel are eligible for top secret clearances ? this statement relies primarily on gao's september 2006 report . in conducting our prior work on these two key questions , we reviewed laws , executive orders , policies , and reports related to the timeliness and completeness of security clearance investigations and adjudications for industry personnel as well as servicemembers and civilian government employees . those sources provided the criteria used for assessing timeliness and documentation completeness , and identified causes for and effects from delayed clearances and incomplete investigative and adjudicative reports . additional insights about causes of and effects from delayed clearances and incomplete investigative and adjudicative reports were obtained from interviews with and documentary evidence from personnel associated with a variety of government offices: ousd ( i ) , disco , doha , other dod adjudication facilities that make clearance determinations for servicemembers and dod civilians ; dod's defense personnel security research center ; the defense security service's training academy that offers adjudicator training ; and opm . nongovernmental organizations supplying information on conditions , causes , and effects included officials representing two of opm's investigations contractors and technology associations whose member organizations require clearances for their industry personnel . we also reviewed the february 2007 annual irpta - mandated report to congress by the security clearance oversight group . for the timeliness question , our analyses of conditions included a review of computerized data abstracted from dod's joint personnel adjudication system ( jpas ) and statistical reports on timeliness that opm produced for dod . the abstract was for the population of 1,685 industry personnel granted initial top secret clearances and 574 industry personnel granted top secret clearance updates by disco during january and february 2006 . the clearance investigations for those 2,259 industry personnel were started at various times prior to the adjudications . while we found problems with the accuracy of some of the jpas data , we determined they were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our september 2006 report .