however , these efforts are not yet complete . these responsibilities are described in more detail in appendix i . to fulfill its cybersecurity role , in june 2003 , dhs established the national cyber security division to take the lead in addressing the cybersecurity of critical infrastructures . developing a comprehensive national plan for securing the key resources and critical infrastructure of the united states , including information technology and telecommunications systems ( including satellites ) and the physical and technological assets that support such systems . this plan is to outline national strategies , activities , and milestones for protecting critical infrastructures . fostering and developing public / private partnerships with and among other federal agencies , state and local governments , the private sector , and others . dhs is to serve as the “focal point for the security of cyberspace.” improving and enhancing information sharing with and among other federal agencies , state and local governments , the private sector , and others through improved partnerships and collaboration , including encouraging information sharing and analysis mechanisms . dhs is to improve sharing of information on cyber attacks , threats , and vulnerabilities . providing cyber analysis and warnings , enhancing analytical capabilities , and developing a national indications and warnings architecture to identify precursors to attacks . provide and coordinate incident response and recovery planning efforts . providing crisis management in response to threats to or attacks on critical information systems . this entails coordinating efforts for incident response , recovery planning , exercising cybersecurity continuity plans for federal systems , planning for recovery of internet functions , and assisting infrastructure stakeholders with cyber - related emergency recovery plans . leading efforts by the public and private sector to conduct a national cyber threat assessment , to conduct or facilitate vulnerability assessments of sectors , and to identify cross - sector interdependencies . leading and supporting efforts by the public and private sector to reduce threats and vulnerabilities . threat reduction involves working with law enforcement community to investigate and prosecute cyberspace threats . vulnerability reduction involves identifying and remediating vulnerabilities in existing software and systems . collaborating and coordinating with members of academia , industry , and government to optimize cybersecurity related research and development efforts to reduce vulnerabilities through the adoption of more secure technologies . establishing a comprehensive national awareness program to promote efforts to strengthen cybersecurity throughout government and the private sector , including the home user . improving cybersecurity - related education , training , and certification opportunities . partnering with federal , state , and local governments in efforts to strengthen the cybersecurity of the nation's critical information infrastructure to assist in the deterrence , prevention , preemption of , and response to terrorist attacks against the united states . working in conjunction with other federal agencies , international organizations , and industry in efforts to promote strengthened cybersecurity on a global basis . coordinating and integrating applicable national preparedness goals with its national infrastructure protection plan . recommendations that have not yet been fully implemented perform a national cyber threat assessment . facilitate sector cyber vulnerability assessments — to include identification of cross - sector interdependencies .