sffac no . 1 objectives of federal financial reporting sffac no . 2 entity and display sffac no . 3 management's discussion and analysis sffac no . 4 intended audience and qualitative characteristics for the consolidated financial report of the united states government sffas no . 1 accounting for selected assets and liabilities sffas no . 2 accounting for direct loans and loan guarantees sffas no . 3 accounting for inventory and related property sffas no . 4 managerial cost accounting concepts and standards sffas no . 5 accounting for liabilities of the federal government sffas no . 6 accounting for property , plant , and equipment sffas no . 7 accounting for revenue and other financing sources sffas no . 8 supplementary stewardship reporting sffas no . 9 deferral of the effective date of managerial cost accounting standards for the federal government in sffas no . 4 sffas no . 10 accounting for internal use software sffas no . 11 amendments to accounting for property , plant , and equipment — definitional changes sffas no . 12 recognition of contingent liabilities arising from litigation: an amendment of sffas no . 5 , accounting for liabilities of the federal government sffas no . 13 deferral of paragraph 65-2 — material revenue - related transactions disclosures sffas no . 14 amendments to deferred maintenance reporting sffas no . 15 management's discussion and analysis sffas no . 16 amendments to accounting for property , plant , and equipment sffas no . 17 accounting for social insurance sffas no . 18 amendments to accounting standards for direct loans and loan guarantees in sffas no . 2 2001 ( continued from previous page ) . gao / aimd - 98-21.2.1 framework for federal financial management system checklist gao / aimd - 00-21.2.2 core financial system requirements checklist february 2000 gao / aimd - 00-21.2.3 human resources and payroll systems requirements checklist gao - 01-99g seized property and forfeited assets systems requirements checklist gao / aimd - 21.2.6 direct loan system requirements checklist gao / aimd - 21.2.8 travel system requirements checklist gao / aimd - 99-21.2.9 system requirements for managerial cost accounting checklist gao - 01-371g guaranteed loan system requirements checklist gao - 01-911g grant financial system requirements checklist gao - 02-171g property management systems requirements checklist gao - 02-762g benefit system requirements ( exposure draft ) . in addition to those named above , debra s. david , rosa r. harris , kristen a. kociolek , kelly a. lehr , william s. lowrey , sandra s. silzer , and bridget a. skjoldal made key contributions to this report . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet .