veterinarian workforce . our past work has indicated that problems with usda's management of its veterinarian workforce have contributed to competition among usda agencies for these staff . veterinarians play a vital role in the defense against animal diseases — whether naturally or intentionally introduced — and these diseases can have serious repercussions for the health of animals and humans , and for the nation's economy . however , there is a growing shortage of veterinarians nationwide — particularly those veterinarians who care for animals raised for food , serve in rural communities , and are trained in public health . we reported in february 2009 that this shortage has the potential to place human health , the economy , and nation's food supply at risk . specifically , we found that usda had not assessed the sufficiency of its veterinarian workforce departmentwide , despite the fact that its agencies that employed mission - critical veterinarians were currently experiencing shortages or anticipating shortages in the future . as a result , usda agencies competed against one another for veterinarians instead of following a departmentwide strategy to balance the needs of these agencies . in particular , the animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) was attracting veterinarians away from the food safety inspection service because the work at aphis was more appealing , opportunities for advancement were greater , and the salaries were higher . moreover , usda was not fully aware of the status of its veterinarian workforce at its agencies and , therefore , could not strategically plan for future veterinarian needs . we recommended , among other things , that usda conduct an assessment of its veterinarian workforce to identify current and future workforce needs while also taking into consideration training and employee development needs and that a governmentwide approach be considered to address shortcomings . in response , the office of personnel management — whose mission is to ensure the federal government has an effective civilian workforce — and relevant federal agencies , including usda , created an interagency forum and developed a strategic workforce plan to obtain a governmentwide understanding of the current status and future needs of the federal veterinarian workforce . this is a positive step , but more work remains . for example , usda still needs to complete a departmentwide assessment of its veterinarian workforce and create shared solutions to agency problems , which according to a senior agency official , it plans to do by the end of july 2011 . moreover , steps are still necessary to understand the veterinarian workforce needed during a potential catastrophic event — whether a pandemic or an attack on the food supply . rural economic development . our past work indicates that in failing to find ways to collaborate more , usda and the small business administration ( sba ) are missing opportunities to leverage each other's unique strengths to more effectively promote rural economic development and that they may fail to use taxpayer dollars in the most efficient manner . for example , we reported in september 2008 that the main causes for limited agency collaboration between these agencies include few incentives to collaborate and an absence of reliable guidance on consistent and effective collaboration .