both agencies agreed with these recommendations . creating a prioritized national and federal cybersecurity research and development ( r&d ) agenda . in june 2010 , we reported that while efforts to improve cybersecurity r&d were under way by the white house's office science and technology policy ( ostp ) and other federal entities , six major challenges impeded these efforts . among the most critical was the lack of a prioritized national cybersecurity research and development agenda . we found that despite its legal responsibility and our past recommendations , a key ostp subcommittee had not created a prioritized national r&d agenda , increasing the risk that research pursued by individual organizations will not reflect national priorities . we recommended that ostp direct the subcommittee to take several actions , including developing a national cybersecurity r&d agenda . ostp agreed with our recommendation and provided details on planned actions . we are in the process of verifying actions taken to implement our recommendations . in addition , we have ongoing work related to cyber cip efforts in several other areas including ( 1 ) cybersecurity - related standards used by critical infrastructure sectors , ( 2 ) federal efforts to recruit , retain , train , and develop cybersecurity professionals , and ( 3 ) federal efforts to address risks to the information technology supply chain . in addition to improving our national capability to address cybersecurity , executive branch agencies , in particular dhs , also need to improve their capacity to protect against cyber threats by , among other things , advancing cyber analysis and warning capabilities and strengthening the effectiveness of the public - private sector partnerships in securing cyber critical infrastructure . enhancing cyber analysis and warning capabilities . in july 2008 , we reported that dhs's us - cert had not fully addressed 15 key attributes of cyber analysis and warning capabilities . as a result , we recommended that the department address shortfalls associated with the 15 attributes in order to fully establish a national cyber analysis and warning capability as envisioned in the national strategy . dhs agreed in large part with our recommendations and has reported that it is taking steps to implement them . we are currently working with dhs officials to determine the status of their efforts to address these recommendations . strengthening the public - private partnerships for securing cyber critical infrastructure . in july 2010 , we reported that the expectations of private sector stakeholders were not being met by their federal partners in areas related to sharing information about cyber - based threats to critical infrastructure . federal partners , such as dhs , were taking steps that may address the key expectations of the private sector , including developing new information - sharing arrangements . we also reported that public sector stakeholders believed that improvements could be made to the partnership , including improving private sector sharing of sensitive information . we recommended that the national cybersecurity coordinator and dhs work with their federal and private sector partners to enhance information - sharing efforts , including leveraging a central focal point for sharing information among the private sector , civilian government , law enforcement , the military , and the intelligence community .