on street only 2 . ( check one. ) shown ( if necessary , revise answers to items 7-9. ) ( if you cannot locate an accessible route from leaving the car to the entrance of the voting room ask: ) is there an accessible path from the point at which blind persons or persons with disabilities leave their car to the entrance of the building ? would you show it to me ? ( check one. ) shown ( if necessary , revise answers to items 10 and 11. ) no ( if you cannot locate an entrance that is wheelchair accessible ask: ) is there an entrance to this building that is wheelchair accessible ? would you show it to me ? ( check one. ) shown ( if necessary , revise answers to item 12. ) ( if you cannot locate an accessible path from the entrance to the voting room ask: ) is there a path from the entrance of the building to the voting room that is accessible to blind persons and persons with disabilities ? would you show it to me ? ( check one. ) shown ( if necessary , revise answers to items 14 and 15. ) doorways and entrances that present impediments 1 . one or more doorway thresholds that exceed ½ inch in height 2 . one or more single door openings that are less than 32 inches wide 3 . one or more double door openings that are less than 32 inches wide , including situations in which one of the doors cannot be opened 4 . one or more closed doors that would be difficult for a person in a wheelchair to open ( please describe. ) other ( please specify. ) steps required to gain access to the voting room ( i.e. , no ramp or lift ) a . steps have handrails that extend at least one foot beyond the landing b . steps have handrails that extend less than one foot beyond the landing c. 7 . one or more ramps that have a slope steeper than 1:12 8 . one or more ramps rising more than 6 inches that lack 2 handrails ( i.e. , one on each side ) 9 . one or more ramps that are less than 36 inches wide at any point ( but can go down to 32 inches wide for a distance of two feet ) 10 . other ( please specify. ) ( continued ) 11 . one or more corridors that do not provide a clearance of at least 36 inches ( can go down to a clearance of 32 inches for a distance of two feet ) if there was a special path to the voting room for persons with disabilities that was different from the path that non - disabled persons would generally use , was there a temporary or permanent sign ( s ) clearly indicating that route ? ( check one. ) yes , a temporary sign only 2 . yes , a permanent sign only yes , both a temporary and a permanent sign 4 .