gao - 07-599t . washington , d.c.: march 22 , 2007 . pediatric drug research: studies conducted under best pharmaceuticals for children act . gao - 07-557 . washington , d.c.: march 22 , 2007 . fda is in the process of implementing a tracking system . fda also had underway several organizational changes that we discussed in our 2006 report . in fiscal year 2005 , ond had 715 staff and expenditures of $110.6 million . more than half of ond's expenditures in fiscal year 2005 , or $57.2 million , came from user fees paid by drug sponsors under the prescription drug user fee amendments of 2002 . ods had 106 staff in fiscal year 2005 and expenditures of $26.9 million , with $7.6 million from prescription drug user fees . after a drug is on the market , ond staff receive information about safety issues in several ways . first , ond staff receive notification of adverse event reports for drugs to which they are assigned and they review the periodic adverse event reports that are submitted by drug sponsors . second , ond staff review safety information that is submitted to fda when a sponsor seeks approval for a new use or formulation of a drug , and monitor completion of postmarket studies . when consulting with ond on a safety issue , ods staff search for all relevant case reports of adverse events and assess them to determine whether or not the drug caused the adverse event and whether there are any common trends or risk factors . ods staff might also use information from observational studies and drug use analyses to analyze the safety issue . when completed , ods staff summarize their analysis in a written consult . according to fda officials , ond staff within the review divisions usually decide what regulatory action should occur , if any , by considering the results of the safety analysis in the context of other factors such as the availability of other similar drugs and the severity of the condition the drug is designed to treat . then , if necessary , ond staff make a decision about what action should be taken . several cder staff , including staff from ond and ods , told us that most of the time there is agreement within fda about what safety actions should be taken . at other times , however , ond and ods staff disagree about whether the postmarket data are adequate to establish the existence of a safety problem or support a recommended regulatory action . in those cases , ond staff sometimes request additional analyses by ods and sometimes there is involvement from other fda organizations . in some cases , ond seeks the advice of fda's scientific advisory committees , which are composed of experts and consumer representatives from outside fda . in 2002 , fda established the drug safety and risk management advisory committee , 1 of the 16 human - drug - related scientific advisory committees , to specifically advise fda on drug safety and risk management issues . the recommendations of the advisory committees do not bind the agency to any decision .