geographic differences . generally , distances between many major cities in the united states are greater than in europe . these greater distances can affect intermodal transportation because many experts believe that for intercity rail to be competitive with air travel , the distance between cities needs to be within 2-3 hours total travel time or 100-500 miles , depending on the speed of the train . one expert stated that there are some areas in the united states — california , the northeast , and the great lakes — where it is possible that rail transportation could provide competitive service within these areas . does the airport's capital improvement plan include a proposal to add stops for local transit buses ? please consider local bus systems to include public transit buses , express buses , and bus rapid transit . do not consider either nationwide bus systems , such as greyhound , or on - demand transportation , such as taxi vans , hotel shuttles , or charter buses as local bus systems . does the airport's capital improvement plan include a proposal to build a station for a nationwide bus system , such as greyhound ? please do not consider local transit buses , charter buses , or shuttle buses to be a nationwide bus system . does the airport's capital improvement plan include a proposal to build a people mover ( that is , an automated guideway car or a moving sidewalk ) to connect any of the airport's terminals with ground transportation facilities , such as bus stations or train stations ? please consider local rail systems to include light rail , commuter rail , and subways , but not to include nationwide rail networks , such as amtrak . the answers to these questions are unreliable . see appendix i for more details . the 72 airports we surveyed reported different levels of connections to air and rail systems . as shown in table 9 , most airports had direct connections to local bus or rail systems , while fewer had connections to nationwide transportation systems . twenty airports reported plans to develop connections to local transportation systems , while only 2 reported plans to develop connections to a nationwide transportation system . airport and local transportation officials at each of our case studies reported a number of primary benefits and primary barriers associated with the development of intermodal facilities at the airport . as shown in figure 10 , the most commonly cited primary benefit for intermodal facilities at the airport was providing alternative transportation options for passengers , while the most commonly cited primary barrier to developing such facilities was restrictions on the use of faa funds . a brief description of the intermodal facilities , plans for additional facilities , and local stakeholders at each of the airports is presented in this appendix . intermodal facilities – baltimore - washington international airport has the following intermodal connections ( see fig . local bus: passengers can access local bus service at the airport's terminal . local rail: passengers can access three different local rail transit systems . a station for baltimore's local rail transit system is located at the north end of the airport's terminal .