these plans have not been finalized . for example , as of may 2003 , va had not decided whether reviewers would examine records from va's new outpatients . va does not know whether all its medical centers have adopted policies that are consistent with the specific requirements in its resident supervision handbook for the supervision of residents' diagnosis , treatment , and discharge of patients . the director of each medical center involved in gme is to establish facility policies for resident supervision that fulfill the requirements in va's handbook , but va requires a review of only one requirement involving the supervision of diagnostic and therapeutic procedures — the medical centers' requirements for the minimal acceptable level of supervision for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures . specifically , in situations in which the supervising physician is not in the operating or procedural suite , va requires that the supervisor must , at a minimum , be immediately available in the facility or campus to provide direct supervision of the procedure if necessary . network gme managers are supposed to review and approve this requirement ; they are not required to report the results of their reviews to oaa . there is no separate oaa review of any of the requirements in medical centers' supervision policies . we found that not all networks have completed the one required review and that medical centers' policies are not always consistent with va's national policy . of the 11 network gme managers we interviewed , 7 told us that they had completed this required review of the minimal requirements for supervision of procedures in medical center policies , but 4 told us that they had not . we found that the requirement of a medical center in one of the four networks that had not conducted this review was less stringent than the requirement in va's handbook for supervision of diagnostic and therapeutic procedures . the written policy at this medical center stated that the supervising physician can be immediately available by telephone rather than requiring him or her to be immediately available in the facility or on campus . one network gme manager who did review this requirement for supervision of diagnostic and therapeutic procedures told us that in 2002 , he identified three medical centers that had written requirements for supervision of these procedures that were less stringent than the requirement in va's handbook and that he instructed each of these facilities to change its policy to be consistent with va's national requirement . to learn what medical centers and networks do to monitor whether supervision is consistent with va's resident supervision handbook , va has required annual reports on residency training programs beginning with the 1999 / 2000 academic year . medical center managers are to provide narrative answers to specific open - ended questions about their monitoring processes as well as about the problems they identified and actions they took to address them for each of three areas of oversight . ( see table 2. ) these medical center reports are channeled through va's networks to oaa . network officials are to review them and summarize the strengths and weaknesses of the medical centers' gme programs in network - level annual reports , which are also submitted to oaa .