, changed the programs for which they needed baselines ) . § 604 ( e ) . each year , a state may in effect reserve some of its federal tanf funds to help it meet increased needs and costs in later years . a state's unspent funds can “accumulate” as a type of “rainy day fund” for its future use . since tanf was created in 1996 , states have been permitted to spend prior year tanf block grant funds on assistance — a category that includes cash benefits and supportive services for families receiving these benefits . however , the recovery act increased states' flexibility to spend prior year tanf block grant funds on all tanf - allowable benefits and services . this is referred to as the “new spending” test . for example , if a state has currently spent its own funds on eligible families on an allowable activity , such as a refundable earned income tax credit , it may count toward its moe only the current amount that exceeds that program's expenditures in fiscal year 1995 . state moe levels remained stable for many years and then increased more recently for several reasons . as shown in figure 2 , until fiscal year 2006 , moe levels remained relatively stable , hovering around the 80 percent required minimum or the reduced rate of 75 percent for states that met their work participation rates . from fiscal years 2006 through 2009 , they increased each year . in a 2001 report , we examined issues related to the new federal - state fiscal partnership under tanf , noting several issues related to tanf and moe spending rules . we found at that time that the moe requirement , in many cases , limited the extent to which states used their federal funds to replace state funds — an intended role for moe.situation in which many state officials said they were spending more than it also led to a might be expected in the face of the large caseload drop in the earliest years of tanf . however , states have additional flexibility in making spending decisions . since tanf was created , the factor that states have commonly relied on to help them meet their required work participation rates is the caseload reduction credit . specifically , decreases in the numbers of families receiving tanf cash assistance over a specified period are accounted for in each state's caseload reduction credit , which essentially lowers the states' required work participation rate from 50 percent . for example , if a state's caseload decreases by 20 percent during the relevant time period , the state receives a caseload reduction credit equal to 20 percentage points , which results in the state work participation rate requirement being adjusted from 50 to 30 percent . in each year since tanf was created , many states have used caseload declines to help them lower the required work participation rates . for example , in fiscal year 2009 , 38 of the 45 states that met their required work participation rates for all tanf families did so in part because of their caseload decreases ( see fig .