in total , 1,644 vehicles were identified for transfer to afghanistan . dsca has overall responsibility for administering the eda program . the director of dsca has been delegated authority to make the determination on whether a proposed transfer could adversely affect the industrial base . the military departments determine when defense items are no longer needed and can designate them as excess and , upon approval , can offer them as edas . multiple federal entities play a role in the eda program , as illustrated in figure 1 . following the interagency coordination , if dsca determines the proposed transfer will not adversely affect industry and thus can proceed , dsca notifies congress about proposed transfers that are valued at over $7 million or that contain significant military equipment . dsca is required to state the comparative foreign policy benefits that the united states would gain from a grant transfer rather than a sale when it notifies congress about a proposed transfer . there are nearly 300,000 humvees or vehicles with the humvee chassis operating globally by the u.s. military and other foreign governments . for example , for one request , dsca determined that a requested transfer was in the u.s. national interest , as equipping the foreign country's armed forces with humvees would allow them to have an increased role in military operations in the africa region . in turn , this would reduce the country's reliance on u.s. forces for nato operations . in addition to requesting vehicles for security - related operations , some countries planned to use vehicles for spare parts or had plans to refurbish the vehicles on their own . we found that about two - thirds of the humvees delivered through the eda program from fiscal years 2012 through 2018 were older models — either m900 or m1000 series — rather than the newer m1100 series . most countries receiving deliveries of older models were seeking to replace existing vehicles in their fleet or to use eda humvees for spare parts . as previously mentioned in this report , dsca has not approved any eda humvee requests since the start of fiscal year 2017 . one reason , according to our analysis of dsca data , is the manufacturer's objections to proposed transfers . another is because of the legislative provision in the fiscal year 2018 ndaa that requires humvees to be modernized with an armored or armor - capable crew compartment and new , modernized powertrain prior to transferring . the corresponding conference report stated the conferees' expectation that any modernization and refurbishment work must generally be done at no cost to dod . according to dod , the cost to modernize would be incurred by the requesting foreign government . since the provision's enactment , dod has not exercised the authority to waive this legislative requirement for any humvee request . foreign governments have not been willing to pay for the modernization , so approvals have halted . in a 2018 congressional briefing , the army's acquisition , logistics , and technology command estimated maintaining a relatively even mix of both vehicles — 54,810 humvees from existing inventory and 49,099 new jltvs — to sustain operations for the foreseeable future .