gao - 03-18 . washington , d.c.: october 24 , 2002 . ( see fig . ate is used by the services at all maintenance levels ( from flight lines for routine maintenance to depots for major overhauls and factories for production and acceptance testing ) to test electronic systems and components that are difficult or impossible to test manually , to isolate system malfunctions , and to verify that systems are operating properly . these testers can be made to examine a single aircraft system , various components of an aircraft , or multiple components of different aircraft . because of your concerns regarding dod's continued reporting of spare parts shortages and the potential impact that ate obsolescence could have on the readiness of military aircraft , you asked us to determine whether dod and the services are giving adequate attention to ate modernization efforts . specifically , our objectives were to identify ( 1 ) what problems the air force and navy are facing with their ate and ( 2 ) how successful dod , the air force , and the navy have been in addressing the proliferation of unique testers . our review included ate for aircraft managed by the air force and the navy and included information on ate acquisition for two fighter aircraft currently under development: the multiservice joint strike fighter ( jsf ) and the air force's f / a - 22 . our scope and methodology are described in more detail in appendix i . we performed our review from january 2002 through march 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . it is estimated that dod employs more than 400 different tester types . this equipment is used to diagnose problems in aircraft avionics and weapon system components so that the component can be repaired and replaced on the aircraft or put into the supply system for future use . for example , testers may be used to diagnose problems with aircraft radars , guidance and control systems , or weapon systems . according to dod , the department spent over $50 billion in its acquisition and support of ate from 1980 through 1992 , and the procurement was characterized by the proliferation of testers designed to support a specific weapon system or component . these testers are quickly becoming obsolete and more difficult and costly to maintain because they may no longer be in production and parts may not be readily available . over the years , various studies have criticized the continued proliferation of unique ate and highlighted the need for the development and acquisition of testers that can be used to test more than one system or component . in september 1993 , the house appropriations committee recommended that the secretary of defense develop a dod - wide policy requiring ate commonality among the services , along with a formal implementation mechanism with sufficient authority , staffing , and funding to ensure compliance . in 1994 , dod established a policy stating that managers of dod programs should select families of testers or commercial off - the - shelf components to meet all ate acquisition needs and that the introduction of unique testers should be minimized .