postal service ( the service ) . to begin , i want to acknowledge congress's efforts in passing comprehensive postal reform legislation . the postal accountability and enhancement act ( the act ) provides tools and mechanisms that can be used to establish an efficient , flexible , fair , transparent , and financially sound postal service — a service that can more effectively operate in an increasingly competitive environment not anticipated under the postal reorganization act of 1970 . how will customer behavior change as prices change under the new system ? to what extent will customers desire for mail be affected by privacy concerns , environmental concerns , preference for electronic alternatives , or efforts to establish do not mail lists ? how will the service be able to enhance the value of its market - dominant and competitive products ( eg , predictable and consistent service , tracking and tracing capabilities , etc. ) what will the service do with any retained earnings ( eg , improve its capital program , save to weather downturns in the economy ) ? the service faces multiple cost pressures in the near - and long - term associated with the required multi - billion dollar payments into the psrhbf , dealing with key cost categories experiencing above - inflation growth while operating under an inflationary - based price cap , and other costs associated with providing universal postal services to a growing network — one now expanding by about 2 million new addresses each year . while the reform act takes actions that increase current costs by improving the balance of retiree health benefit cost burdens between current and future ratepayers , it also eliminates other payments and provides opportunities to offset some of these costs pressures through efficiency gains that could restrain future rate increases . it will be crucial for the service , however , to take advantage of this opportunity and achieve sustainable , realizable cost reductions and productivity improvements throughout its networks . personnel expenses ( which include wages , employee and retiree benefits , and workers' compensation ) have consistently accounted for nearly 80 percent of annual operating expenses , even though the service has downsized its workforce by over 95,000 employees since fiscal year 2001 . the service's personnel expenses have grown at rates exceeding inflation since fiscal year 2003 and are expected to continue dominating the service's financial condition . in particular , growth in retiree health benefit costs have , on average over the last 5 years , exceeded inflation by almost 13 percent each year . this growth is expected to continue due to ( 1 ) rising premiums , growth in the number of covered retirees and survivors , and increases in the service's share of the premiums ; and ( 2 ) the service will continue paying the employer's share of the health insurance premiums of its retirees along with the required payments ranging from $5.4 billion to $5.8 billion into the psrhbf in each of the following 9 years .