monitoring . a program has been instituted to monitor and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of corrective measures . demonstrated progress . the agency has demonstrated progress in implementing corrective measures and in resolving the high - risk area . these five criteria form a road map for efforts to improve , and ultimately address , high - risk issues . addressing some of the criteria leads to progress , while satisfying all of the criteria is central to removal from the list . as we reported in the march 2019 high - risk report , the bureau's efforts to address the risks and challenges for the 2020 census had fully met one of the five criteria for removal from the high - risk list — leadership commitment — and partially met the other four , as shown in figure 3 . additional details about the status of the bureau's efforts to address this high - risk area are discussed later in this statement . the 2020 census is on our list of high - risk programs because , among other things , ( 1 ) innovations never before used in prior enumerations are not expected to be fully tested , ( 2 ) the bureau continues to face challenges in implementing it systems , ( 3 ) the bureau faces significant cybersecurity risks to its systems and data , and ( 4 ) the bureau's cost estimate for the 2020 census was unreliable . if not sufficiently addressed , these risks could adversely impact the cost and quality of the enumeration . moreover , the risks are compounded by other factors that contribute to the challenge of conducting a successful census , such as the nation's increasingly diverse population and concerns over personal privacy . the basic design of the enumeration — mail out and mail back of the census questionnaire with in - person follow - up for non - respondents — has been in use since 1970 . however , a lesson learned from the 2010 census and earlier enumerations is that this traditional design is no longer capable of cost - effectively counting the population . in response to its own assessments , our recommendations , and studies by other organizations , the bureau has fundamentally re - examined its approach for conducting the 2020 census . specifically , its plan for 2020 includes four broad innovation areas: re - engineering field operations , using administrative records , verifying addresses in - office , and developing an internet self - response option ( see table 2 ) . if they function as planned , the bureau initially estimated that these innovations could result in savings of over $5 billion ( in 2020 constant dollars ) when compared to its estimates of the cost for conducting the census with traditional methods . however , in june 2016 , we reported that the bureau's initial life - cycle cost estimate developed in october 2015 was not reliable and did not adequately account for risk .