your involvement is critical to assuring progress . our testimony today discusses ( 1 ) the major issues relating to the consolidated financial statements for fiscal years 2009 and 2008 , including continued major impediments to an opinion on the consolidated financial statements other than the statement of social insurance ; ( 2 ) the impacts of the economic recession and the federal government's unprecedented actions intended to stabilize the financial markets and to promote economic recovery on the federal government's financial condition ; and ( 3 ) challenges posed by the federal government's current long - term fiscal outlook . our audit was conducted in accordance with u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . both the consolidated financial statements and our related audit report are included in the fiscal year 2009 financial report of the united states government ( financial report ) . our audit report would not be possible without the commitment and professionalism of inspectors general throughout the federal government who are responsible for annually auditing the financial statements of individual federal agencies . the financial report was issued by the department of the treasury ( treasury ) on february 26 , 2010 . this report is available through gao's internet site , at http: / / www.gao.gov / financial / fy2009financialreport.html and treasury's internet site , at http: / / www.fms.treas.gov / fr / index.html . since the enactment of key financial management reforms in the 1990s , the federal government has made significant progress in improving financial management activities and practices . as shown in appendix i , 20 of 24 chief financial officers ( cfo ) act agencies were able to attain unqualified audit opinions on their fiscal year 2009 financial statements . in contrast , only 6 cfo act agencies received unqualified audit opinions for fiscal year 1996 . also , accounting and financial reporting standards have continued to evolve to provide greater transparency and accountability over the federal government's operations , financial condition , and fiscal outlook . further , we were able to render unqualified opinions on the 2009 , 2008 , and 2007 statements of social insurance . given the importance of social insurance programs like medicare and social security to the federal government's long - term fiscal outlook , the statement of social insurance is critical to understanding the federal government's financial condition and fiscal sustainability . although this progress is commendable , the federal government did not maintain adequate systems or have sufficient , reliable evidence to support certain significant information reported in the u.s. government's accrual - based consolidated financial statements . underlying material weaknesses in internal control , which generally have existed for years , contributed to our disclaimer of opinion on the u.s. government's accrual - based consolidated financial statements for the fiscal years ended 2009 and 2008 .