increased access for veterans . dialysis workgroup officials told us that patient satisfaction information could be used to assess pilot locations . this potential metric could help determine if the pilot locations increased veterans' access to dialysis care . additional dialysis research opportunities . in its business analysis of the dialysis pilot , the dialysis workgroup recommended that va fund a 4-year research study to evaluate the quality of care at all pilot locations and identify best practices in veteran dialysis care . according to this business analysis , the findings of this study would enable va to develop an evidence - based strategy for veteran dialysis care that ensures veterans receive the highest quality of care . cost savings for va - funded dialysis treatments . in its business analysis of the dialysis pilot , the dialysis workgroup suggested that pilot locations could use the cost estimation model to calculate cost savings generated by the pilot locations by comparing the cost of providing dialysis at each pilot location to the cost of providing this treatment through fee basis providers . pilot location capacity changes . specifically , a member of the vha dialysis steering committee told us that the committee has already developed a limited plan for expansion of the dialysis pilot . however , this plan does not incorporate the results of a performance assessment for the existing four pilot locations . because va has not yet developed an evaluation plan or formally defined performance measures for pilot locations , it does not have access to consistent and reliable information on the performance of the pilot locations and may not have this information accessible when it is time to either make midcourse corrections for the dialysis pilot or decide whether and how to open additional va - operated outpatient dialysis clinics . step 3 — using performance as a basis for decision making . despite not having fully developed performance measures for assessing the pilot locations , va has already begun planning for the expansion of the dialysis pilot , which should not occur until after va has defined clear performance measures for the existing pilot locations and evaluated their success . in addition , va systems redesign engineers have begun developing three additional cost estimation models despite not having fully evaluated the effectiveness of the cost estimation model used in the dialysis pilot . taken together , these two actions indicate that va is beginning to make decisions about the future of the dialysis pilot and the cost estimation model , even though va decision makers currently lack critical performance information on the existing four pilot locations . to its credit , va developed the dialysis pilot as a potential way of addressing the rising cost and utilization of fee basis dialysis treatments among veterans . through the dialysis pilot , va intends to test the viability of increasing its capacity to provide dialysis treatments in va - operated outpatient dialysis clinics . va set four goals for its dialysis pilot: ( 1 ) improve quality of care , ( 2 ) increase access for veterans , ( 3 ) provide additional dialysis research opportunities , and ( 4 ) achieve cost savings for va - funded dialysis treatments .