wear and tear . age alone does not degrade the ballistic - resistant properties of body armor , but wear and tear from normal use can contribute to the deterioration of body armor's performance over time . there is little conclusive data on the extent to which normal wear and tear affects the useful lifespan of body armor . according to nij , many manufacturers offer 5-year warranties on their body armor , including the six we met with , but this is not necessarily a reflection of the service life of the armor . doj does have several activities under way , however , that address wear and tear factors . to assess the reliability of the bvp data , we talked with bja officials about data quality control procedures and reviewed relevant documentation . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we also examined preliminary information from a gao survey of the more than 3,900 jag grantees that had received awards from fiscal years 2005 through 2010 to determine the extent to which they had procured ballistic and stab - resistant body armor in fiscal year 2010 . the survey data included in this report reflect a 42 percent response rate and are not generalizable to all jag grantees . to evaluate the extent to which doj designed controls over and coordinated its body armor efforts , we assessed doj's body armor program policies , procedures , processes , and coordination efforts using standards for internal control in the federal government and leading practices for grant management and stakeholder coordination.discussed body armor efforts and coordination issues with federal officials inside and outside of doj . in particular , we interviewed officials from doj's law enforcement components , including the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ; the bureau of prisons ; the drug enforcement administration ; the federal bureau of investigation ; and the u.s . ( 2 ) to what extent has doj designed controls over these efforts and coordinated them with stakeholders within and outside of the department ? ( 3 ) what factors affect body armor's use and effectiveness and what steps has doj taken to address these factors ? to address all three questions we obtained and assessed body armor - related documents from bja and nij , such as program requirements and budget information for fiscal years 1999 through 2011 , and interviewed bja and nij officials . in addition , we attended nij workshops in 2011 on its body armor standards and observed body armor testing firsthand . further , for the first question , we examined program data on bja's bulletproof vest partnership ( bvp ) program for fiscal years 1999 through 2011 as well as its edward byrne memorial justice assistance grant ( jag ) program for fiscal years 2006 through 2011 . these two grant programs support state and local law enforcement's purchases of body armor . based on discussions with bja officials concerning the reliability of the bvp data , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .