5 , apr . assessing the new federalism . washington , d.c.: the urban institute , nov. 1999 . national governors' association , employment and social services policy studies division , “serving welfare recipients with learning disabilities in a work first environment,” nga reports on line , july 28 , 1998 . ” or “has your doctor placed any limits on your activities ? ” relying on this method may not uncover all impairments — for example , hidden disabilities that may be unknown to recipients but could still interfere with their ability to work . furthermore , sometimes recipients are reluctant to identify impairments because they are uncertain about potential consequences or do not feel comfortable in doing so . the willingness of recipients to share information about impairments can largely depend on the tanf staff's ability to establish rapport with recipients . if recipients do not feel comfortable with tanf staff , they may be reluctant to share information . of the 12 percent of counties that rely on a screening exam as their primary method , most use a screening tool or instrument , which is a more formal , standardized approach to screening recipients . some tools are designed to screen for multiple barriers , including impairments , while others are designed to screen for a single barrier , such as mental health problems or learning disabilities . if these tools are improperly administered , they may not be a reliable predictor of a recipient's impairment . for example , some tools must be administered by staff with specialized training to produce reliable results , while others can be administered by caseworkers with little or no training . furthermore , many tools are validated only for specific populations and may not produce reliable and valid results for tanf recipients . a study the urban institute conducted for hhs identified a number of tools that tanf agencies use to screen recipients , but reported that little is known about their ability to accurately identify barriers or impairments among tanf recipients . furthermore , it found that few studies or evaluations had been conducted to assess these tools' effectiveness . about 11 percent of counties rely on caseworkers' observations to identify “red flags” ( verbal or behavioral cues ) that may indicate an impairment . for example , a caseworker could observe a recipient while he or she is filling out an application or might observe symptoms of mental illness , such as anxiety , depression , and behavioral problems . experts reported that caseworkers' observations could be a useful part of the screening process when used in conjunction with other screening methods , especially when caseworkers are trained to be alert to red flags . however , many caseworkers are former afdc eligibility workers who may not have been trained in how to identify red flags . according to one tanf official we interviewed , learning disabilities and mental impairments are harder to identify than physical impairments because of all the subtleties involved in identifying them . of the counties that conduct screening , over 90 percent do an initial one at the intake / eligibility determination phase , but many counties also screen recipients during the employment planning process if it appears the recipient is having problems .