we provided a draft of this report to dod for review and comment . in its written comments , reproduced in appendix ii , dod concurred with our recommendation . travel distances for reservists to their drilling site may have increased over time . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 213 ) 830-1011 or vonaha@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . the regulations authorize the reimbursement of different types of expenses depending on the nature and duration of the assignment . eligible reimbursements include: per diem , which includes reimbursement for food , temporary lodging , transportation expenses , ranging from reimbursement for mileage traveled in reservists' private vehicles to reimbursement for commercial flights ; permanent change of station reimbursements related to reservists changing their home of record to the location of the assignment , such as reimbursement for the movement of household goods ; and basic allowance for housing , which is based on the costs of adequate rental properties for civilians with comparable income levels in the same location as the permanent duty station , which in the case of reservists is generally the location of their home ; is received when reservists are in an active duty status , which includes active duty for training and active duty other than training ; and is determined based on the duration of reservists' active duty assignments . reservists also receive cash compensation for the various types of training and other duties they perform ; non - cash compensation , such as access to tricare reserve select and education benefits ; and deferred compensation , such as participation in the military retirement system . in addition , reservists may be able to take advantage of a federal tax deduction for out - of - pocket travel expenses associated with their service . reservists may incur expenses under certain conditions in connection with their service that are not reimbursable under dod's travel regulations . officials responsible for travel regulations and reserve policy issues told us that this can occur because: ( 1 ) the cost to attend inactive duty training is a reservist's responsibility , except in limited circumstances ; and ( 2 ) dod designates longer duration training or assignments as a permanent change of station — a change in a reservist's home of record — and not as temporary travel . under most circumstances , travel expenses to and from the 1 weekend a month training commitment are reservists' responsibility with no reimbursement provided , and as a result reservists may incur unreimbursed travel expenses to attend this training . specifically , the joint travel regulations states that a reserve component member performing inactive duty training ordinarily receives no travel or transportation allowances , particularly when the training duty is performed at the reservist's assigned unit location .