( recommendation 58 ) . we received responses from all 23 agencies . we analyzed the responses to identify those challenges that were identified by a majority of the agencies . to address the third objective , we reviewed eo 13800 and implementation guidance issued by omb , as well as relevant reports and other documentation , including omb's federal cybersecurity risk determination report and action plan , omb memos , and supporting documentation for dhs initiatives . we also interviewed omb and dhs officials to gain an understanding of these and other relevant initiatives under way to help agencies implement their cybersecurity risk management programs . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9342 or marinosn@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix xxiv . the objectives of our review were to examine ( 1 ) the extent to which agencies established key elements of a cybersecurity risk management program ; ( 2 ) what challenges , if any , agencies identified in developing and implementing cybersecurity risk management programs ; and ( 3 ) what steps the office of management and budget ( omb ) and department of homeland security ( dhs ) have taken to meet their risk management responsibilities under executive order ( eo ) 13800 and to address any challenges agencies face in implementing cybersecurity risk management practices . in conducting this engagement , we focused on 23 of the 24 agencies covered by the chief financial officers act of 1990 . to address our first objective , we collected agency policies , procedures , and other documentation and compared them to selected key practices from omb and national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) guidance for cybersecurity risk management . to identify the key practices , we reviewed omb guidance pertaining to cybersecurity risk management , including omb circular a - 130: managing information as a strategic resource , as well as circular a - 123: management's responsibility for enterprise risk management and internal control , which outlines agency responsibilities for enterprise risk management . we also reviewed nist guidance , including the framework for improving critical infrastructure cybersecurity ; special publication 800-30: guide for conducting risk assessments ; special publication 800-37: guide for applying the risk management framework to federal information systems , and special publication 800-39: managing information security risk: organization , mission , and information system view . in selecting the key practices for our assessment , we focused on those practices identified by omb and nist as foundational for providing an organization - wide approach to cybersecurity risk management . we collected and analyzed documentation and other information from each agency related to cybersecurity risk management and compared it to the identified key practices . we supplemented our analyses with interviews with relevant agency officials to discuss the development of their policies . we discussed the results of our initial analysis of agency documentation with agency officials to validate our findings , collect additional evidence , and identify causes for any gaps .