we have added this information to the report . we commend hhs's efforts to improve tanf expenditure reporting , and maintain that a detailed plan with timelines for revising the reporting categories will facilitate monitoring of its progress and help ensure that the revisions are implemented in a timely fashion . we also agree with hhs that as it works to improve financial reporting , it will be helpful to develop more refined categories of spending than the current categories in existing federal reporting , and to look at overall usage of funds , including transfers and moe spending . in addition , hhs said that it lacks the authority to require states to provide certain types of information in their state plans , such as plans for using tanf funds or meeting moe requirements as well as strategic goals or performance targets or measures . hhs noted that absent a statutory change , it cannot add additional categories of required information to the state plan , and any decision to establish such new requirements is one for congress to consider . hhs also noted that the report underscores that a large share of tanf spending now goes to categories of spending other than cash assistance , and that improved information can assist in considering both appropriate allowable expenditure categories and the potential for performance measurements for these other categories of tanf and moe spending . in addition to these general comments , hhs also provided us with technical comments that we incorporated , as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of health and human services , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or brownke@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . appendix i: hhs categories of expenditures for cash assistance and non - cash services on the form acf - 196 expenditures on non - recurrent short - term benefits or subsidized employment . it also includes tanf contingency funds provided to states when certain triggers indicate increased needs . hhs's tanf expenditure reporting form , the form acf - 196 , includes 13 categories for states to report spending for non - cash services . we combined hhs tanf expenditure reporting categories under the following “spending areas” for the purposes of our report .