what are the priorities of the embassy ? does each agency's mission reinforce embassy priorities ? are workload requirements validated and prioritized and is the embassy able to balance them with core functions ? iii ) . we have documented the total cost for all agencies operating in france in fiscal year 2001 to be about $100 million . however , the actual cost is likely higher because some agencies did not report costs associated with staff salaries and benefits and discrepancies exist in the reporting of some operating costs . with comprehensive data , the paris embassy could make cost - based decisions when conducting a rightsizing analysis . analyses of security , mission , and costs may suggest the assignment of more or fewer staff at an embassy or an adjustment to the overall staff mix . if decision makers decide that it is necessary to reduce staff , rightsizing experts have recommended that embassies consider alternative means of fulfilling mission requirements . moreover , president bush has told u.s. ambassadors that “functions that can be performed by personnel in the u.s. or at regional offices overseas should not be performed at a post.” in considering options , embassy officials will also have to weigh the security , mission effectiveness , and cost trade - offs . these may include the strategic importance of an embassy or the costs of adopting different management practices . our analysis highlights five possible options , but this list is not exhaustive . these options include: relocating functions to the united states ; relocating functions to regional centers ; relocating functions to other locations under chief of mission authority where relocation back to the united states or to regional centers is not practical ; purchasing services from the private sector ; and streamlining outmoded or inefficient business practices . each option has the potential to reduce staff in paris and the associated security vulnerability . specifically: some functions at the paris embassy could be relocated to the united states . state is planning to relocate more than 100 budget and finance positions from the financial services center in paris to state's financial center in charleston , south carolina , by september 2003 . in addition , we identified other agencies that perform similar financial functions and could probably be relocated . for example , four voice of america staff pay correspondent bureaus and freelance reporters around the world and benefit from collocation with state's financial services center . the voice of america should consider whether this function should also be relocated to charleston in 2003 . the paris embassy could potentially relocate some functions to the regional logistics center in antwerp , belgium , and the planned 23-acre secure regional facility in frankfurt , germany , which has the capacity for approximately 1,000 people . for example , the antwerp facility could handle part of the embassy's extensive warehouse operation , which is currently supported by about 25 people . in addition , some administrative operations at the embassy such as procurement could potentially be handled out of the frankfurt facility . furthermore , staff at agencies with regional missions could also be moved to frankfurt .