communication . we have made a number of recommendations for improving communication with stakeholders , including the public , about tarp . these recommendations are designed to help ensure that treasury develops a comprehensive communication strategy and clearly articulated vision for tarp that goes beyond simply providing information . treasury continues to take steps to address these recommendations , including hiring a communications officer , integrating communications into tarp operations , maintaining regular contact with congressional committees and members , and attempting to leverage technology . in the second year of tarp , we continued to identify opportunities for better communication . for instance , we recommended that treasury more clearly inform borrowers that they could use the hope hotline if they were having difficulty with their hamp application or servicers , among other things , and that treasury report to congress on its plans to assess and monitor the auto companies' performance and ability to repay their loans . treasury has managed tarp programs at every stage of development , from implementation to termination . in the last 2 years treasury disbursed about $387 billion under the various tarp programs , and about $179 billion remained outstanding as of september 30 , 2010 ( see table 1 ) . some tarp programs have repaid their balances and have been terminated , while others that closed in the last year have outstanding balances that expose treasury to risk . furthermore , these outstanding balances require ongoing attention and monitoring to help ensure that participating institutions comply with the terms of the agreements and that treasury stays abreast of any issues that would impact participants' ability to repurchase their assets or repay their debts . specifically: cpp , which closed in december 2009 , had $49.8 billion outstanding as of september 30 , 2010 . aifp had an outstanding balance of just more than $67.2 billion as of september 30 , 2010 . aig has continued to receive assistance over the last year via an equity capital line established in 2009 and as of september 30 , 2010 , treasury's assistance to aig had a balance of $47.6 billion . while hamp remains treasury's primary program to assist homeowners facing foreclosure , treasury announced several new programs in 2010 . as of september 30 , 2010 , $543 million had been disbursed for tarp housing programs , which is not recoverable . ppip continues to be an active program with $14.1 billion disbursed as of september 30 , 2010 , and $13.7 billion outstanding . small business programs like cdci and the sba 7 ( a ) securities purchase program account for a small portion of tarp funding and treasury has shifted the focus of its small business efforts outside of tarp . funding of talf loans by frbny closed in june 2010 , and no tarp funds had been expended as of september 30 , 2010 to purchase collateral from the frbny because no collateral had been surrendered to talf llc . talf will continue to pose potential risks to treasury until all loans are repaid to frbny and the program is terminated . three programs were terminated — cap , agp , and tip . treasury sold the citigroup trust preferred securities it received as a guarantee fee for agp .