pt . on january 13 , 2012 , an italian - flagged cruise vessel , the costa concordia , ran aground with over 4,000 passengers and crew onboard off the coast of giglio island , italy . the vessel was so badly damaged that five contiguous watertight compartments — which housed machinery and equipment vital for the propulsion and steering of the vessel — rapidly flooded . the vessel then lost propulsion and suffered intermittent power outages , as the emergency backup systems could not handle an emergency on such a scale . the accident resulted in 32 deaths , including 2 u.s. citizens . the costa concordia accident triggered an investigation led by the italian government to ascertain the reasons that the vessel went aground . this report examines the following questions: to what extent have the cruise industry and federal agencies taken actions to implement the requirements of the cvssa ? what actions , if any , have federal agencies and the cruise industry taken to enhance the safety of cruise vessels visiting u.s. ports as a result of the costa concordia accident ? to address both objectives , we conducted visits to four cruise vessel ports , which we selected in large part because of their high cruise traffic and passenger embarkation volume , among other things — los angeles , california ; miami , florida ; fort lauderdale , florida ; and seattle , washington . to understand how the coast guard checks for cvssa compliance and other safety issues on cruise vessels , we accompanied coast guard officials on cruise vessel exams in the port of los angeles and port everglades , the port for fort lauderdale . during these visits , we interviewed security and safety officials from five cruise lines to understand how they implemented the provisions of the cvssa and what safety changes they have implemented as a result of the costa concordia accident . additionally , we interviewed coast guard officials in the field and in headquarters on their role in implementing the cvssa , any challenges encountered during implementation , and any actions taken following the costa concordia accident . we also interviewed officials from the cruise lines international association ( clia ) — which currently represents over 98 percent of the cruise industry operating in the united states — for their perspective on the impact of the cvssa and to discuss the safety changes they have implemented among their members as a result of the costa concordia accident . finally , during our visits to cruise vessel ports , we also interviewed fbi and local law enforcement agency officials to discuss their role in handling crime aboard cruise vessels . the information we obtained from personnel at the ports and the cruise lines cannot be generalized across all u.s. ports and the cruise industry — although clia does represent a substantial portion of the industry — but the information provided us with a perspective on the implementation of the cvssa as well as any changes resulting from the costa concordia accident . to address the first objective , we reviewed relevant documents , guidance , and policy from federal agencies , such as the coast guard's policy letter on cvssa implementation procedures .