implemented . as of october 2016 , about 1,000 of our information security – related recommendations had not been implemented . risks to cyber assets can originate from unintentional and intentional threats . these include insider threats from disaffected or careless employees and business partners , escalating and emerging threats from around the globe , the steady advances in the sophistication of attack technology , and the emergence of new and more destructive attacks . ineffectively protecting cyber assets can facilitate security incidents and cyberattacks that disrupt critical operations ; lead to inappropriate access to and disclosure , modification , or destruction of sensitive information ; and threaten national security , economic well - being , and public health and safety . regarding pii , advancements in technology , such as new search technology and data analytics software for searching and collecting information , have made it easier for individuals and organizations to correlate data and track it across large and numerous databases . in addition , lower data storage costs have made it less expensive to store vast amounts of data . also , ubiquitous internet and cellular connectivity makes it easier to track individuals by allowing easy access to information pinpointing their locations . these advances — combined with the increasing sophistication of hackers and others with malicious intent , and the extent to which both federal agencies and private companies collect sensitive information about individuals — have increased the risk of pii being exposed and compromised . leadership at the white house and department of homeland security ( dhs ) demonstrated commitment to improving cybersecurity . for example , the president issued strategy documents for improving aspects of cybersecurity and an executive order ( e.o. ) and policy directive for improving security and resilience of critical cyber infrastructure . however , challenges remain , such as shortages in qualified cybersecurity personnel and continued weaknesses in agencies' information security programs . these challenges need to be addressed as initial steps toward removal from the high - risk list . furthermore , progress will need to be demonstrated by agencies fully implementing their information security programs and by critical infrastructure sectors improving their cybersecurity . in addition , congress enacted legislation intended to strengthen information security across the federal government and to improve the protection of critical cyber assets . the cybersecurity act of 2015 established a voluntary framework for sharing cybersecurity threat information between and among the federal government , state governments , and private entities , and protects private sector entities from liability when sharing and receiving cyber threat information . the act also makes dhs's national cybersecurity and communications integration center responsible for implementing these mechanisms , requires dhs to offer its intrusion and detection capabilities to any federal agency , and calls for agencies to assess their cyber - related workforce . dhs needs to expand capabilities , improve planning , and support wider adoption of its government - wide intrusion detection and prevention system . agencies need to develop and implement complete policies , plans , and procedures for responding to cyber incidents and effectively oversee response activities . agencies need to consistently implement policies and procedures for responding to breaches of pii .