the house of representatives passed h.r . 2420 , the mutual funds integrity and fee transparency act of 2003 . 2420's purpose is to ( 1 ) improve transparency of mutual fund fees and costs and ( 2 ) improve corporate governance and management integrity of mutual funds . also in november 2003 , three bills addressing mutual fund concerns were introduced in the senate . the mutual fund transparency act of 2003 , s. 1822 , would require disclosure of financial relationships between brokers and mutual fund companies and of certain brokerage commissions paid by mutual fund companies . s. 1958 , the mutual fund investor protection act of 2003 , was introduced to prevent the practice of late trading by mutual funds , and for other purposes . s. 1971 , the mutual fund investor confidence restoration act of 2003 seeks to improve transparency relating to the fees and costs that mutual fund investors incur and to improve corporate governance of mutual funds . although mutual funds already disclose considerable information about the fees they charge , our report recommends that sec consider requiring that mutual funds make additional disclosures to investors about fees in the account statements that investors receive . mutual funds currently provide information about the fees they charge investors as an operating expense ratio that shows as a percentage of fund assets all the fees and other expenses that the fund adviser deducts from the assets of the fund . mutual funds also are required to present a hypothetical example that shows in dollar terms what investors could expect to pay in fees if they invested $10,000 in a fund and held it for various periods . it is important to understand the fees charged by a mutual fund because fees can significantly affect investment returns of the fund over the long term . for example , over a 20-year period a $10,000 investment in a fund earning 8 percent annually , with a 1-percent expense ratio , would be worth $38,122 ; but with a 2-percent expense ratio it would be worth $31,117 — over $7,000 less . unlike many other financial products , mutual funds do not provide investors with information about the specific dollar amounts of the fees that have been deducted from the value of their shares . table 1 shows that many other financial products do present their costs in specific dollar amounts . although mutual funds do not disclose their costs to each individual investor in specific dollars , the disclosures that they make do exceed those of many products . for example , purchasers of fixed annuities are not told of the expenses associated with investing in such products . some industry participants and others including sec also cite the example of bank savings accounts , which pay stated interest rates to their holders but do not explain how much profit or expenses the bank incurs to offer such products . while this is true , we do not believe this is an analogous comparison to mutual fund fees because the operating expenses of the bank are not paid using the funds of the savings account holder and are therefore not explicit costs to the investor like the fees on a mutual fund .