cms concurred with these recommendations . medicare expenditures were concentrated in a small number of the 551 part b drugs that were paid based on asp in 2014 . ( see fig . over 9 million medicare beneficiaries received at least one part b asp drug during 2014 , which accounted for approximately 43 percent of all beneficiaries who received a part b drug that year . these 9 million beneficiaries were responsible for 20 percent of medicare's payment for these drugs via cost - sharing requirements , or about $4 billion in 2014 . according to statute , drug manufacturers that participate in the medicaid drug rebate program are required to submit data to cms on sales of part b drugs to most u.s. purchasers , including physicians , hospitals , and wholesale distributors within 30 days of the end of every calendar quarter . sales must be reported net of rebates , discounts , and other price concessions . cms officials have stated that most manufacturers participate in the medicaid drug rebate program . other manufacturers may voluntarily submit sales price data to cms . cms reviews these data , which are typically reported at the ndc level , and calculates payment rates at the hcpcs level . according to cms officials , the agency then publicly releases the revised quarterly payment rates so that stakeholders can comment on the new rates before they take effect . these officials noted that due to the time it takes for manufacturers to submit the data to cms , cms to review the data and then update the payment rates , and the public to review and comment on the revised rates , there is a two - quarter ( 6-month ) lag between the sale and when the payment rate takes effect . cms produces a web page titled “medicare part b drug average sales price” that provides guidance for drug manufacturers on submitting asp data . manufacturers submit two forms to cms: the asp data collection form — an excel document in which manufacturers insert all relevant sales data — and the asp certification form signed by the manufacturer's ceo or cfo to affirm the accuracy of the submitted data . where there is no specific guidance in federal statute or regulations regarding how to calculate asp , cms has indicated that it allows manufacturers to make reasonable assumptions in their calculations of asp and to submit these assumptions with the required data . cms's web page also includes a common e - mail address for manufacturers to send asp - related questions to the agency . the oig has conducted two studies related to manufacturer reporting and cms oversight of asp data . the first report , published in 2010 , found that cms lacks complete asp data for certain drugs because not all manufacturers of part b drugs are required to report asps . oig recommended that cms consider seeking a legislative change to require all manufacturers of part b drugs to submit asps . cms did not concur with this recommendation , stating that the president's budget for the upcoming fiscal year did not include any proposals to require manufacturers of part b drugs to submit asps .