we incorporated these clarifications as appropriate . doe's comments are presented in appendix ii . we will send copies of this report to the secretary of energy , and we also will make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you , or your staff , have any questions about this report or need additional information , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or cosgrovej@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs can be found on the last page of this report . other staff contributing to this report can be found in appendix iii . to conduct our work , we visited buried waste landfills and stored waste facilities , and we met with local department of energy ( doe ) officials at each of doe's five largest transuranic waste burial sites – – the hanford site , the idaho national laboratory , the los alamos national laboratory , the savannah river site , and the oak ridge national laboratory . we also reviewed studies and scientific reports by doe and other federal agencies and the national academy of sciences on the storage and disposition of transuranic wastes , and interviewed experts in the field . to determine the extent to which legal requirements and policies govern doe's efforts to address buried transuranic wastes , we reviewed the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act of 1980 , as amended ( cercla ) , the resource conservation and recovery act of 1976 , as amended ( rcra ) , the atomic energy act of 1954 , as amended , and environmental protection agency ( epa ) and doe regulations and guidance concerning radioactive and hazardous wastes . we also reviewed the federal facility agreements and orders between doe , epa , and each state with a site where doe has buried transuranic wastes , as well as a may 2006 federal district court decision interpreting an agreement between doe and the state of idaho concerning doe's obligation to remove buried transuranic wastes from the idaho national laboratory site . to better understand the implementation of these laws , regulations , policies , and agreements at doe sites , we interviewed state environmental regulatory officials and epa officials that oversee each of the buried waste locations . we did not interview epa officials in new mexico because epa has authorized the state of new mexico to carry out a state rcra program under state law in lieu of the federal program . to determine how doe plans to address buried waste at each of its sites , we reviewed the planning documents doe has prepared to comply with cercla or rcra requirements , feasibility studies describing remediation alternatives , records of decision for sites that have selected a remedy for buried waste , and internal doe reports regarding buried transuranic wastes , and interviewed the project managers and engineers responsible for overseeing the remediation of each buried waste site .