gao - 20-116 . washington , d.c.: january 30 , 2020 . air force materiel command . we provided a draft of this report to dod for review and comment . in written comments on a draft of this report , dod concurred with all three of our recommendations . dod's comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix iii . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , and the secretaries of the navy and air force . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions about this report , please contact diana maurer at ( 202 ) 512-9627 or maurerd@gao.gov or asif a. khan , at ( 202 ) 512-9869 , or khana@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff that made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . senate report 115-262 accompanying a bill for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 included provisions for us to examine the department of defense's ( dod ) aviation depots and maintenance operations . our report examines the extent to which 1 ) the air force and navy aviation depots completed selected fixed - wing aircraft maintenance on time from fiscal years 2014 through 2019 , and 2 ) the air force and navy accurately planned for depot maintenance requirements for selected fixed - wing aircraft from fiscal years 2014 through 2019 and addressed any associated challenges . we have separate ongoing reviews to examine maintenance timeliness and related issues at the army and marine corps key weapons systems depots and navy shipyards . for objective one , we selected a non - generalizable sample of 18 air force and 18 navy fixed - wing aircraft types , including fighters , bombers , and aerial refuelers , based on information from navy and air force maintenance data and our prior work . these aircraft had maintenance completed in fiscal years 2014 through 2019 , at the navy's three fleet readiness centers and the air force's three air logistics complexes . we selected this time period so we could identify and obtain insight on historical data trends regarding maintenance timeliness for the selected aircraft . for each aircraft , we collected data on the date maintenance began and was completed for individual aircraft , as well as the original estimate of time ( in days ) needed to complete maintenance . we also collected updated estimates if available . we used this information to calculate the difference between the number of days planned for maintenance ( using the updated estimate if available ) and the number of days used for maintenance in order to determine whether the services completed aircraft maintenance on time , early , or late . additionally , we used the total number of aircraft completed in each fiscal year to calculate a measure of average maintenance timeliness by aircraft type . see figure 3 for more information .