gao - 10-940t . washington , d.c.: july 21 , 2010 . one of these inspections must be unannounced . the coast guard reported conducting between approximately 700 and 850 ferry facility inspections each calendar year for the period 2006 through 2009 . to track its performance in completing inspections , coast guard officials stated they have the ability to create a daily report to inform the captain of the port when each facility in his or her area of responsibility is due for an inspection . the report lists all mtsa - regulated facilities , shows the dates on which the coast guard performed its last two required inspections , and highlights any facilities that are coming due or are overdue for an inspection . in addition , a quarterly reporting tool was developed for coast guard district and headquarters officials to determine if facility inspection requirements were being met . the coast guard also reported that it conducts operational activities to secure ferries , including conducting boat escorts of ferries , implementing positive control measures — that is , stationing armed coast guard personnel in key locations aboard a vessel to ensure that the operator maintains control — and providing a security presence through various actions . specifically , this report responds to the following questions: to what extent has the u.s. coast guard assessed risk related to high capacity passenger ferries and their facilities in accordance with dhs's guidance , and what are the identified risks ? to what extent have maritime security stakeholders taken actions to mitigate the potential risks to high capacity passenger ferries and their facilities , and to implement applicable federal laws , regulations , and guidance ; and what additional actions , if any , could enhance ferry security ? this is the public version of the report we issued in october 2010 that contained information related to risks to high capacity passenger ferries and efforts made to secure these ferries from terrorist attacks . dhs deemed specific details of ferries , the risks to ferries , and methods used by the coast guard and others to secure ferries to be sensitive security information , which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits those details . although information provided in this report is more limited in scope , it addresses the same questions as the previously issued report . also , the overall methodology used for both reports is the same . the conclusions and recommendations contained in our october 2010 version of this report remain generally unchanged . to determine the extent to which the coast guard assessed the risks to ferries and their facilities in accordance with dhs's guidance , and to identify the risks associated with ferries and their facilities , we reviewed relevant federal guidance on the use of risk management , including dhs's national infrastructure protection plan . we also reviewed documents describing the methodology and use of the coast guard's primary risk assessment tool — the maritime security risk analysis model .