this shift affected the npoess deployment schedule . to plan for this shift , the program office developed a new program cost and schedule baseline . the program office has increased the npoess life cycle cost estimate by $1.2 billion , from $6.9 to $8.1 billion , and delayed key milestones — including the expected availability of the first npoess satellite , which was delayed by 20 months . the cost increases reflect changes to the npoess contract as well as increased program management funds . the contract changes include extension of the development schedule , increased sensor costs , and additional funds needed for mitigating risks . increased program management funds were added for non - contract costs and management reserves . the schedule delays were the result of stretching out the development schedule to accommodate the change in the npoess funding stream . in addition , the delayed launch dates of the npoess satellites have extended the maintenance and operation of the satellite system from 2018 to 2020 . when we testified on the npoess program in july 2003 , we reported that the program office was working to develop a new cost and schedule baseline due to a change in the npoess funding stream . the program office completed its efforts to revise the npoess cost and schedule baseline in december 2003 . as a result of the revised baseline , the program office increased the npoess cost estimate by $638 million , from $6.9 to $7.5 billion . the program office attributed the $638 million cost increase to extending the development schedule to accommodate the changing funding stream , increased sensor costs , and additional funds needed for mitigating risks . the program office has since increased funds for non - contract costs and management reserves , which raised its estimate by an additional $562 million to bring the npoess life cycle cost estimate to $8.1 billion . according to program officials , non - contract costs included oversight expenses for the prime contract and sensor subcontracts . management reserves , which are a part of the total program budget and should be used to fund undefined but anticipated work , are expected to last through 2020 . each satellite makes about 14 orbits a day . recently , program officials reported that a new life cycle cost estimate would be developed by the contractor and program office . as the earth rotates beneath it , each satellite views the entire earth's surface twice a day . today , there are two operational poes satellites and two operational dmsp satellites that are positioned so that they can observe the earth in early morning , mid morning , and early afternoon polar orbits . together , they ensure that for any region of the earth , the data provided to users are generally no more than 6 hours old . figure 1 illustrates the current operational polar satellite configuration .