gao - 03-1176t . washington , d.c.: september 24 , 2003 . ( see apps . ii and iii. ) dod highlighted that lessons learned from its support of the public health response could aid in the development of expanded capabilities within the civilian sector to improve the nation's public health preparedness . dod emphasized its capabilities that were vital to the success of the public health response , including environmental assessment , transportation of contaminated articles , laboratory testing , and cleanup of contaminated locations . the environmental cleanup was beyond the scope of this report . hhs found the report to be informative and provided additional examples of actions taken to enhance national preparedness for bioterrorism and other public health emergencies . these examples included the establishment of the office of public health emergency preparedness ; the accelerated acquisition of antimicrobial drugs for the strategic national stockpile ; and the expansion of basic and targeted research and upgrading of research facilities focused on the pathogens most likely to be used as bioterrorism agents . dod and hhs also made technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of dod , the secretary of hhs , and other interested officials . we will also provide copies to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7119 . another contact and key contributors are listed in appendix iv . events occurring on that date events determined retrospectively to have occurred on that date ( in italics ) terrorist attack on world trade center and pentagon prompts heightened epidemiologic surveillance activities in some areas . in new york ( ny ) , two nbc employees , a new york post employee , and the child of an abc employee and in new jersey ( nj ) , two u.s . postal service ( usps ) employees , one from the west trenton postal facility and one from hamilton postal facility , seek medical attention for skin conditions . in florida , an american media inc. ( ami ) employee is admitted to the hospital with a respiratory condition . the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) issues a health alert network ( han ) alert regarding preparedness for bioterrorism , acknowledging the public's concern about smallpox and anthrax and providing information about preventive measures . in florida , a second ami employee is admitted to the hospital , with a diagnosis of meningitis . cdc and the florida department of health announce confirmation of a case of inhalational anthrax . the infected person is an ami employee , and the cause of the infection is unknown . in florida , an ami employee becomes the first anthrax victim to die . in florida , the ami building is closed after anthrax spores are found . in florida , prophylaxis of ami employees begins .