each is discussed below . most notably , despite increases in station staffing levels over the past 2 years and other actions , average station workweek hours continue to exceed , by significant levels , the 68-hour standard established by the coast guard in 1988 to limit fatigue and stress among station personnel . according to the coast guard's boat forces strategic plan , excessive workweek hours is symptomatic of “the adverse operational trends , identified lack of resources , and general reduction in …readiness” experienced by stations in recent years . moreover , the plan also notes that the high number of stations working in excess of 68 hours shows that “staffing continues to be a significant problem at stations.” according to estimates from coast guard surveys of station personnel , although the average work week at stations decreased somewhat between 1998 and 2003 , since 1994 it has not dropped below 81 hours per week . it should be noted that these survey data , although the best source of information available on station workweek hours , may have limitations . that is , the survey is administered every august — during both the peak search and rescue season and the coast guard's period for rotating personnel — and it may be that a year - round average , which would include off - peak , winter hours , would be lower . in addition , although response rates for every year were not readily available , the 2003 response rate was relatively low , with only a little over half of the personnel surveyed responding . an explanation of how workweek hours are measured may be helpful in interpreting this workweek information . the way in which the workweek is measured at stations is similar to the way it is measured in professions such as firefighting , in that personnel are on duty for an extended amount of time — such as 24 hours — to respond to emergencies but may spend part of it in recreation , sleep , exercise , training , or other activities . personnel can thus be on duty or off duty for consecutive periods of time during a week . workweek hours are calculated by totaling the amount of hours spent on duty or at a station , over a 1-week period , or averaging the amount of time spent on duty over a 2-week period . the coast guard's 2003 survey of stations indicated that slightly less than half of all respondents reported working either an average 77- or 84-hour workweek . approximately 6 percent of respondents reported working a 68-hour workweek . ( see app . ii for more information regarding these results. ) according to the coast guard , working excessively long hours leads to injury and illness . officials told us that station personnel can exceed the 68-hour work week standard in one of two ways . first , they can be assigned to a work schedule that averages to more than 68 hours a week , such as an 84-hour schedule .