in most cases , they were unable to do so . # 14436 – nuclear material detectors for border guards t2-0244-ru – development of an explosives detection system . t2-2002-ru – discovery of bioactive compounds from selected environments in russia for products such as watershed protection and carbon sequestration . luch task order 1 – blend - down heu to leu pbz c2 – security upgrades to russian navy site cbc b2 – security upgrades to russian navy site tvz01 – minatom guard railcar procurement comp2br – comprehensive physical protection systems upgrades aquila – enhanced nuclear materials monitoring systems fraec – technical and administrative assistance in planning , establishing , and operating international development centers . in addition , nancy crothers , greg marchand , judy pagano , daren sweeney , and kevin tarmann made significant contributions to this report . luch - task order 1 – blend - down heu to leu pbz - c2 comprehensive physical protection upgrades to russian navy site cbc - b2 comprehensive physical protection upgrades to russian navy site comp2br - comprehensive physical protection system upgrades aquila – purchase of equipment to enhance the monitoring of nuclear materials fraec – technical and administrative assistance in planning , establishing , and operating the international development centers . pipe coating facility ( #63544 ) – establish a production facility within the city of snezhinsk for the production of insulated pipes . t2-0192-ru – development of a 3-d neutronics optimization algorithm for application to cancer treatment facilities . nuclear non - proliferation center – the analytical center for nuclear non - proliferation will carry out research on several projects , including a quarterly information bulletin and internet analysis and creation of an internet page . t2-0186-ru – development of a tank retrieval and closure demonstration center in the mining and chemical combine ( mcc ) to help in retrieval and processing of radioactive wastes generated during production of plutonium for nuclear weapons . t2-0194-ru – the use of new technologies to process important ti alloys for medical applications and aerospace industries . t2-0204-ua – welding and reactive diffusion joining ( rdj ) repair technologies for use in aircraft and land - based turbine engines . saic / p.o . nnsa's written comments are presented as appendix iii . a more detailed description of our methodology is included at the end of this letter . we conducted our work from may 2004 to july 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . two nnsa offices , na - 23 and na - 25 , documented management controls for almost all of their contracts that we reviewed ; but the third office , na - 24 , could not provide us with the complete records necessary to document these controls . similarly , na - 23 and na - 25 provide their technical reviewers and contract managers with procedural guidance that assists in maintaining these controls , while na - 24 did not provide this type of guidance .