dhs's u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) is responsible for adjudicating applications and petitions for immigration benefits , including naturalization applications from u.s. military service members and veterans seeking u.s. citizenship . dod establishes policies governing noncitizens' eligibility to join the military and assists noncitizen service members who wish to naturalize . the department of veterans affairs ( va ) administers benefits and services , such as health care and disability benefits , to veterans of the u.s. military . you asked us to review issues related to the removal of noncitizen veterans . this report addresses ( 1 ) the extent to which ice has developed and implemented policies for handling and tracking cases of potentially removable veterans , and what is known about the number and characteristics of veterans who have been placed in removal proceedings or removed ; ( 2 ) how , if at all , federal agencies facilitate the naturalization of noncitizen service members and veterans , and what is known about the number of those individuals who have applied for naturalization ; and ( 3 ) how , if at all , removal affects veterans' eligibility for and access to va benefits and services . to evaluate the extent to which ice has developed and implemented policies for handling and tracking cases of potentially removable veterans , and what is known about the number and characteristics of veterans placed in removal proceedings or removed , we reviewed ice's policies and procedures related to veterans and compared them to criteria in standards for internal control in the federal government . we interviewed officials from ice's enforcement and removal operations ( ero ) , office of the principal legal advisor ( opla ) , and homeland security investigations ( hsi ) to discuss the extent to which ice agents and officers apply these policies when encountering potentially removable veterans . we analyzed record - level data from opla's principal legal advisor network ( planet ) and ero's enforce alien removal module ( earm ) databases to identify veterans who were placed in removal proceedings or removed from fiscal years 2013 through 2018 . we selected this timeframe because 2013 is the first year for which data from planet are available , according to ice officials , and 2018 was the most recent full year of data at the time of our review . for the approximately 250 veterans opla data indicated were placed in removal proceedings and the 92 veterans ero data indicated had been removed from that population , we reviewed ice documents about the content and structure of planet and earm , and completed data entry and duplicate record checks . we also discussed the possible limitations of these data with ice officials to determine the data's reliability . we determined that the opla and ero data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of describing what is known about the approximate number of veterans placed in removal proceedings or removed . in addition , uscis provides dod with a checklist of required documents for military naturalization applications and communication guidelines for naturalization application inquiries , according to uscis officials .