recommendations . we recommended that the secretary of homeland security work with the director of dndo to analyze the benefits and costs of deploying asps before any of the new equipment is purchased to determine whether any additional detection capability is worth the additional cost . we also recommended that the total program cost estimate for the radiation portal monitor project be revised after completion of the cost - benefit analysis . combating nuclear smuggling: dhs's cost - benefit analysis to support the purchase of new radiation detection portal monitors was not based on available performance data and did not fully evaluate all the monitors' costs and benefits . gao - 07-133r . washington , d.c.: october 17 , 2006 . key findings . prototypes of advanced spectroscopic portals ( asp ) were expected to be significantly more expensive than current - generation portal monitors but had not been shown to be more effective . for example , domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) officials' preliminary analysis of 10 asps tested at the nevada test site found that the new portal monitors outperformed current - generation equipment in detecting numerous small , medium - size , and threatlike radioactive objects and were able to identify and dismiss most naturally occurring radioactive material . however , the detection capabilities of both types of portal monitors converged as the amount of source material decreased . combating nuclear smuggling: dhs's decision to procure and deploy the next generation of radiation detection equipment is not supported by its cost - benefit analysis . gao - 07-581t . washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2007 . in addition , the analysis focused on identifying highly enriched uranium ( heu ) and did not consider how well the new portal monitors can correctly detect or identify other dangerous radiological or nuclear materials . with regard to costs , dndo did not follow the dhs guidelines for performing cost - benefit analyses and used questionable assumptions about the procurement costs of portal monitor technology . recommendations . we recommended that dhs and dndo conduct a new cost - benefit analysis using sound analytical methods , including actual performance data and a complete accounting of all major costs and benefits as required by dhs guidelines , and that dndo conduct realistic testing for both asps and current - generation portal monitors . combating nuclear smuggling: dndo has not yet collected most of the national laboratories' test results on radiation portal monitors in support of dndo's testing and development program . gao - 07-347r . washington , d.c.: march 9 , 2007 . ( app . i presents a summary of our key findings and recommendations related to asps. ) as i will discuss today , dndo has improved the rigor of testing but has not yet updated the cost - benefit analysis that is critical to a decision on whether to replace radiation detection equipment already deployed at ports of entry with the significantly more expensive asps . specifically , my testimony discusses ( 1 ) our key findings on the most recent round of asp testing and ( 2 ) lessons from asp testing that can be applied to other dhs technology investments .