iv ) . planning and review process . nato established the planning and review process in 1994 , and modeled it on nato's own force planning system . the planning and review process allows pfp countries to work more closely with nato to enhance their interoperability with nato forces and strengthen their defense institutions . the 18 countries participating in the planning and review process work with nato to assess their defense capabilities , identify potential contributions to nato exercises and operations , and select specific goals for developing their defense capabilities and building interoperability ( see app . individual partnership programme . since nato established the pfp program in 1994 , all participating countries prepare , at a minimum , individual partnership programme documents . individual partnership programmes identify each country's national policy for participating in the pfp , the forces and assets they are willing to make available for pfp activities , and the areas in which they would like to pursue cooperation with nato . in developing individual partnership programmes , countries select partnership activities and events in which they would like to participate . in 2004 , nato introduced the current version of the operational capabilities concept to assist pfp countries in improving their ability to work effectively with nato forces during military operations . thirteen countries participate in the operational capabilities concept . through this process , countries identify specific military units that they want to develop to nato standards . nato then evaluates and certifies these units as ready to participate in nato operations . individual partnership action plan . nato created the individual partnership action plan mechanism in 2002 to allow pfp countries to develop deeper and more individualized cooperation with nato than the individual partnership programme , without having to commit to pursuing nato membership . the individual partnership action plan process is a 2- year cycle in which participating partners identify specific goals for cooperation with nato related to political , economic , and other reforms in addition to their defense and military goals . as part of the individual partnership action plan process , nato also conducts assessments of the progress participating partners are making toward meeting these goals . of the five countries currently with individual partnership action plans , only bosnia - herzegovina aspires to become a nato member . annual national programme and map . annual national programmes are associated with countries aspiring to become nato members . the annual national programme process is similar to that for the individual partnership action plan and they address similar types of issues ; however , annual national programmes are updated every year and nato expects participating countries to establish more ambitious reform objectives that will bring their institutions in line with nato standards . additionally , nato assesses participating countries' progress in achieving reform objectives annually instead of biennially and places greater scrutiny on the extent and pace of progress . in the past , only countries in the map process completed annual national programmes .