improper payments . incentives and penalties can be helpful to create management reform and to ensure adherence to performance standards . chairman mica , ranking member connolly , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for more information regarding this testimony , please contact beryl h. davis , director , financial management and assurance , at ( 202 ) 512-2623 or by e - mail at davisbh@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . pub . detect improper payments and training providers or beneficiaries on program requirements . for example , in its fiscal year 2013 afr , hhs reported that it has offered training through its medicaid integrity institute to over 4,000 state employees and officials from fiscal years 2008 through 2013 . program design review and refinement . to the extent that provider enrollment and eligibility verification problems are identified as a significant root cause in a specific program , agencies may look to establish enhanced controls in this area . for example , cms has taken steps to strengthen standards and procedures for medicare provider enrollment to help reduce the risk of providers intent on defrauding or abusing the program . further , exploring whether certain complex or inconsistent program requirements — such as eligibility criteria and requirements for provider enrollment — contribute to improper payments may lend insight to developing effective strategies for enhancing compliance and may identify opportunities for streamlining or changing eligibility or other program requirements . although strong preventive controls remain the frontline defense against improper payments , effective detection techniques can help to quickly identify and recover those overpayments that do occur . detection activities play a significant role not only in identifying improper payments but also in providing data on why these payments were made and , in turn , highlighting areas that need strengthened prevention controls . the following are examples of key detection techniques . data mining . data mining is a computer - based control activity that analyzes diverse data for relationships that have not previously been discovered . the central repository of data commonly used to perform data mining is called a data warehouse . data warehouses store tables of historical and current information that are logically grouped . as a tool in managing improper payments , applying data mining to a data warehouse allows an organization to efficiently query the system to identify potential improper payments , such as multiple payments for an individual invoice to an individual recipient on a certain date , or to the same address . for example , cms has established one program integrity , a web - based portal intended to provide cms staff and contractors with a single source of access to medicare and other data needed to help detect improper payments as well as tools for analyzing those data . recovery auditing . while internal control should be maintained to help prevent improper payments , recovery auditing is used to identify and recover overpayments .