nebulizers . these devices allow a patient to receive a drug via inhalation . nebulizers change liquid medicine into fine droplets ( in aerosol or mist form ) that are inhaled through a mouthpiece or mask and used to treat conditions , such as asthma . disposable nebulizers are generally smaller than the dme versions and may last for a year . ( see fig . over half of the 21 stakeholders we spoke with — including representatives from device manufacturers discussing their specific devices , medicare beneficiary advocate groups , providers , and insurers — commented on the multiple benefits of substituting dme with disposable devices . the benefits can be categorized into three areas: ( 1 ) patient preference and / or improved quality of life , ( 2 ) better health outcomes , and ( 3 ) potential cost - savings . specifically , 12 of the 21 stakeholders mentioned patient preference and / or improved quality of life as a benefit of using disposable substitutes . they said that disposable devices are , for example , often lighter and quieter than durable devices . thus , in some cases , the substitutes may allow patients more freedom of movement and be more discreet . for example , the disposable insulin pumps do not require users to take additional supplies if they leave the house . further , several stakeholders said that disposable devices are easier to use , such as the elastomeric pump , which one stakeholder explained had fewer opportunities for error . additionally , 9 of the 21 stakeholders we spoke with said these devices can result in better health outcomes due , in part , to better compliance . for example , one stakeholder for a company that manufactures a disposable dme substitute to treat sleep apnea said the company specifically targeted its device to non - compliant users of the durable cpap machine . this stakeholder said that while the durable cpap machine is still considered the “gold standard” for treating obstructive sleep apnea , a significant proportion of patients do not comply with treatment over time . in addition , a representative for a company that manufactures a disposable insulin pump said that some patients are able to reduce the amount of insulin they need after using this device because of increased compliance . this representative explained that because the insulin is being delivered at a more continuous , consistent rate due to better compliance , users are making more efficient use of their insulin injections . twelve of the 21 stakeholders we spoke with noted different ways that disposable devices may result in potential cost - savings for the medicare program and beneficiaries than their dme counterparts in some cases . for example , for patients that have acute conditions , such as those needing a course of antibiotics , it could be more financially prudent for medicare and the beneficiary to use multiple elastomeric pumps for several days to administer the medication rather than pay for a durable pump , which is usually paid for on a monthly basis under medicare .