employee dissatisfaction . officials from one medical center and its union reported high levels of nurse dissatisfaction with medical center leadership as a result of recent investigations , including by va's oig , examining access to care issues in the facility . this dissatisfaction has negatively affected the medical center's ability to retain nurses , according to officials from this medical center . in fy 2014 , for example , this medical center had a 12 percent turnover rate for nps and close to a 30 percent turnover rate for nas . with some nurses on administrative leave and high nurse turnover , officials stated that nurses are stepping into positions temporarily and are being asked to work additional or longer shifts . officials stated that the medical center's units are inadequately staffed to care for the medical center's current patient load , which they believe is affecting access and the quality of care provided to veterans . in addition to challenges identified by the medical centers in our review , vha also identified a challenge specific to the rn transition to practice initiative . officials from the office of nursing services told us that , when vha began to require medical centers to offer the rn transition to practice initiative in november 2011 , vha did not provide specific funding to medical centers to do so and relied on medical centers to determine how to fund the initiative , which is financially and staff - resource intensive . according to vha officials , there have been two unintended consequences of requiring medical centers to offer this initiative without vha funding . first , some medical centers are deciding to hire experienced rns only , who would not be eligible for the initiative , rather than hiring new rns because of the financial burden associated with the initiative . second , some medical centers in rural locations have found it difficult to offer the initiative because of a lack of available instructors qualified to provide the required training . vha conducts limited monitoring of va medical centers to ensure they are in compliance with its key nurse recruitment and retention initiatives . consistent with federal internal control standards , monitoring should be ongoing in the course of normal program operations and provide reasonable assurance of compliance with applicable laws and regulations . vha's office of academic affiliations has a system in place for conducting site visits to the medical centers that offer the va nursing academic partnerships initiative . office of academic affiliations officials reported that the site visits occur at least once per year to gauge a medical center's adherence to the residency's policies and contractual requirements . in addition to providing consulting services during these site visits to all medical centers that offer this initiative , these officials also told us that site visit reports are specifically generated for medical centers that are offering the initiative for the first time , and these reports are provided to the nursing school and medical center leadership . officials told us that they have stopped three medical centers from offering the va nursing academic partnerships initiative when it was in the pilot phase due to non - compliance with program policies .