monitoring . during the monitoring phase ( performed between october and august ) , program and grant officers generally are to implement the monitoring activities described in the plan , but can either add or omit an activity with supervisory approval for a number of reasons . for example , program and grant officers may consider adding a monitoring activity for a grant after the initial monitoring plan is set based on issues such as that the oig has identified findings with the grantee suggesting that the grantee might be spending grant funds inappropriately . also , cncs officials told us there are instances when a compliance visit is canceled , which creates an opportunity to add a grant to the site visit schedule . to illustrate , our analysis of cncs grant data for fiscal year 2015 indicates that the initial monitoring plan called for 358 grants to receive a compliance visit ; by the end of the fiscal year , 385 had been conducted ( see table 2 ) . most compliance visits were conducted with senior corps and vista grants ( programs with the highest number of grants ) . when conducting a compliance visit , cncs personnel — typically the program officer — are to use a standard protocol to interview grantee staff regarding compliance with program regulations and policy , including financial accounting for grant funds . during these interviews , cncs personnel also are to review grantee documentation indicated by the protocol to verify compliance . for example , program officers may ask grantee staff how they are complying with the criminal history background checks required by the serve america act , and may ask for documentation such as reports received from law enforcement agencies . close - out . finally , the close - out phase is to take place at the end of a grant's performance period . during this phase , cncs officials are to close out the grant by reviewing the recipient's transactions and expenditures reports , and reconciling them with records on the amounts disbursed under the grant . grantees may also submit a final programmatic report of activities under the grant . the ocro is also responsible for developing and for delivering select training and providing technical guidance and support to cncs staff regarding the implementation of the annual assessment . in addition , according to cncs officials , further changes to the grant monitoring process are anticipated as the agency implements enterprise risk management ( erm ) . in 2014 , omb recommended that agencies consider adopting erm , which is an approach for addressing the full spectrum of risks and challenges related to achieving the agencies' missions . in 2016 , omb issued the revised circular no . a - 123 , which required that agencies begin to implement erm in fiscal year 2017 . cncs's grant monitoring process includes efforts to identify and mitigate risks but does not fully align with relevant internal control principles for risk assessment , control activities , and monitoring ( see fig . specifically , the agency's annual assessment process may not result in the riskiest grants receiving a high - priority for monitoring because of limitations in its scoring model .