postal service . moreover , the workload and schedule of nonresponse follow - up — the need to collect data from about 42 million nonresponding households within a 10-week time frame — made the conduct of this operation extraordinarily difficult and complex . in our prior work we noted that the success of nonresponse follow - up would depend in large part on the bureau's ability to maintain data quality while completing the operation on schedule , before error rates increased as people moved or had trouble recalling who was living at their homes on census day — april 1 . timeliness was also important for keeping subsequent census operations on - track . in particular , this included the accuracy and coverage evaluation ( a.c.e .

 ) , which was a separate sample survey designed to assess the quality of the population data collected in the 2000 census . for methodological reasons , the bureau needed to complete its field data collection workload for nonresponse follow - up before a.c.e . field data collection could begin . to its credit , the bureau generally completed nonresponse follow - up consistent with its operational plan . nationwide , according to bureau data , the 511 local census offices located in the 50 states generally completed nonresponse follow - up in slightly less time than the bureau's planned 10- week schedule . this was a noteworthy accomplishment given the operational uncertainties the bureau faced , and stands in sharp contrast to the bureau's 1990 experience when nonresponse follow - up was hampered by unanticipated workload and staffing problems and was completed 6 weeks behind schedule . this report is the latest in our series of reviews that examine the results of key census - taking operations and highlight opportunities for reform ( see the last page of this report for a list of products issued to date ) . our objectives were to identify ( 1 ) practices that contributed to the timely completion of nonresponse follow - up and ( 2 ) lessons learned in implementing these practices that the bureau may want to consider as it plans for nonresponse follow - up during the next census in 2010 . in conducting nonresponse follow - up , the bureau has historically faced the twin challenge of ( 1 ) collecting quality data ( by obtaining complete and accurate information directly from household members ) while ( 2 ) finishing the operation on schedule , before error rates can increase as people move or have trouble recalling who was living at their homes on census day ( april 1 ) , as well as keeping subsequent operations on - track . nonresponse follow - up was scheduled to begin on april 27 , 2000 , and end 10 weeks later , on july 7 , 2000 . local census offices generally finished their nonresponse follow - up workloads ahead of the bureau's 10-week schedule . as shown in figure 1 , of the bureau's 511 local offices in the 50 states , 463 ( 91 percent ) finished nonresponse follow - up by the end of the eighth week of the operation , consistent with the bureau's internal stretch goals .