order no . 11348 , section 303 ( e ) requires agency heads to establish priorities for needed training , and provide for the use of funds and man - hours in accordance with these priorities . § 410.201 ( c ) , in implementing the e.o. , requires agency heads ( or designee ( s ) ) to establish priorities for training employees and allocate resources according to those priorities . there are no statutory , regulatory , or executive order requirements directly related to this practice . there are no statutory , regulatory , or executive order requirements directly related to this practice . exec . there are no statutory , regulatory , or executive order requirements directly related to this practice . there are no statutory , regulatory , or executive order requirements directly related to this practice . agencies should track the cost and delivery of its 5 u.s.c . 4118 authorizes opm to prescribe regulations — and in doing so — to specifically provide for the maintenance of necessary information concerning the general conduct of the training activities of each agency , and such other information as is necessary “to enable the president and congress to discharge effectively their respective duties for supervision , control and review of these training programs.” the submission of reports by agencies on results and effects of training programs and plans and economies resulting therefrom , including estimates of costs of training . § 410.601 ( a ) requires agencies to maintain records of training plans , expenditures , and activities in such form and manner as necessary to submit to opm . subsection ( b ) provides that beginning december 31 , 2006 , agencies are to report training data at such times and in such form as required for opm's government - wide electronic data collection system . agencies should evaluate the benefits achieved through training and development programs , including improvements in individual and agency performance 5 u.s.c . § 4103 ( c ) requires the head of an agency to evaluate , on a regular basis , each program or plan established , operated , or maintained under subsection ( a ) there are no statutory , regulatory , or executive order requirements directly related to this practice . these key training investment practices are part of the framework outlined in the gao's guide gao , human capital: a guide for assessing strategic training and development efforts for the federal government , gao - 04-546g ( washington , d.c.: march 2004 ) . this guide summarizes attributes of effective training and development programs and it is based on the gao analysis of prior work , other related expert studies , and federal training requirements . 5 usc 4103 ( a ) requires agency head to establish , operate , maintain , and evaluate a program or programs , and a plan or plans there under , for the training of employees . in addition to the contact named above , william doherty ( assistant director ) , latesha love , angela leventis , and karin fangman made key contributions to this report . also contributing to this report were benjamin crawford , eric gorman , and natalie maddox . doe and dhs had no comments .