the estimate was not accurate . specifically , while accurate estimates are to be based on an assessment of most likely costs and historical data for similar programs , the internet response option cost estimate was based on subject matter expert opinion and analogous data from the acs , which is similar in function to the decennial census but not in scale . the scale of the decennial census is significantly larger than acs , and will require it systems and infrastructure to be sized accordingly . is there value in asking households to pre - register online for the 2020 census ? is it necessary to provide households with an identification code to respond via the internet ? while the bureau has documented in relevant project plans its methods for answering the questions related to communication strategies , online pre - registration , and processing household responses without identification codes , it has not yet established how it will determine answers to the questions related to self - response rate and it infrastructure for the preliminary design decision . as stated in 2020 census program management guidance , detailed project plans and specific research questions , as well as study plans describing the management and technical approach should be established for research and testing projects . according to bureau officials in november 2014 , they began to establish a new project team that was intended to be responsible for estimating the internet self - response rate . however , bureau officials did not have a time frame for when a project plan or study plan would be developed that would document the methodology for how the internet self - response rate will be estimated to inform the preliminary design decision . additionally , bureau officials told us that they had established a new project — the 2020 census architecture and it roadmap — in june 2014 that is intended to help determine the it infrastructure needed to support the internet response option . this project is to deliver initial 2020 census architecture and it roadmap documents by preliminary design . however , the bureau had not yet established a project plan or study plan , and had not developed the methodology — as part of this project or another — for determining scalability and security infrastructure needs for the internet response by september 2015 . as previously stated , the bureau is committed to producing the preliminary design decision and developing the life - cycle cost estimate for the 2020 census by september 2015 . with about 8 months remaining until the preliminary design decision is to be made , and major tests already designed or completed ( i.e. , the 2014 census test and the april 2015 optimizing self - response test ) , the bureau has limited time to determine how these critical questions will be answered . accordingly , until the bureau establishes and implements clear plans for answering the internet response rate and it infrastructure questions , the bureau will have limited information for beginning its development and implementation of systems and infrastructure . also , as previously discussed , it is uncertain how complete or reliable the bureau's internet response option and it infrastructure cost estimates will be to inform key design decisions by this time .