each federal agency that has procurement authority is required to have an osdbu . the osdbu is responsible for helping to oversee the agency's functions and duties related to the awarding of contracts and subcontracts to small and disadvantaged businesses . for example , the office must report annually on the extent to which small businesses are receiving their fair share of federal procurements , including contract opportunities under programs administered under the small business act . the small business act requires that osdbu directors be responsible to and report only to agency heads or their deputy . by providing immediate access to top decision - makers , congress intended to enhance the directors' ability to advocate effectively for small and disadvantaged businesses . however , in 2003 we reported that 11 of the 24 federal agencies we reviewed were not in compliance with this provision . as of our most recent follow - up work , nine of the agencies reviewed were out of compliance ( the departments of agriculture , commerce , education , health and human services , justice , state , the interior , and the treasury ; and the social security administration ) . the environmental protection agency has complied , and the federal emergency management agency has been subsumed into the department of homeland security , which has an osdbu with a director reporting to the highest agency levels . most of the agencies that provided comments on this work disagreed with our conclusion that the reporting relationships did not comply with this provision of the small business act . however , none of the legal arguments that the agencies raised caused us to revise our conclusions or recommendations . for example , the departments of agriculture and treasury had delegated osdbu responsibilities to lower level officials and argued in their comments to us that because the small business act does not explicitly prohibit such a delegation , their reporting relationships complied with this provision . agencies are required to document their reasons for these determinations . however , information on the four agencies' reasons for not requiring these plans , which should have been readily available , was incomplete . overall , procurement officials from the four agencies were able to explain some of the missing or incomplete information on subcontracting plans by , for example , identifying data entry errors or providing evidence of the agencies' reasons for not requiring the plans . for example , dhs officials determined that $545 million of the dhs contracting funds the procurement data system showed as not requiring a plan had been miscoded and should have been entered in the procurement system under a different category that listed the contracts as having “no subcontracting possibilities.” in another instance , gsa officials did not require a subcontracting plan for a $26 million contract for ice because they believed that the urgency of the situation required buying and shipping the ice faster than normal procedures would allow . nonetheless , at the time we issued our report contracting dollars remained for each agency with incomplete subcontracting plan information that agency officials had not been able to explain . these amounts ranged from $3.3 million for dod ( excluding the corps ) to $861 million for dhs .