( see fig . as of july 2019 , inl reported continued efforts to improve data quality and reliability , including ensuring that current and future transactions would maintain coding integrity . however , officials stated that , because of missing codes or miscoded items , they were unable to provide reliable data on obligations for inl awards for democracy assistance projects in north macedonia for fiscal years 2012 through 2017 . although we determined that data for specific inl democracy awards were unreliable , inl reported providing bilateral assistance of approximately $14.2 million in north macedonia in fiscal years 2012 through 2017 , including $6.9 million for democracy assistance . six of the 13 awards in our sample were two - phased awards , for which the mission required potential applicants to first submit an executive summary or concept paper for their proposed activity . for these awards , the mission published separate merit review criteria for concept papers and full applications , and selection committees assessed each type of submission against the relevant set of criteria . the selection committee memorandums for three awards showed that these merit review criteria were consistent with the criteria outlined in the public notices for each award . specifically , in the first phase of the award process , staff at the usaid mission in north macedonia applied the published criteria for concept papers in reviewing the submitted papers and selected those that best met the criteria . in the second phase for three awards , usaid solicited applications from the selected applicants and applied the published criteria for full applications in reviewing the submitted applications . in the case of three awards that originated from the same public notice , the notice lacked merit review criteria for the full application phase . the public notice for these three awards did not include the merit review criteria the selection committee would use to evaluate full applications . for the remaining seven one - phased awards in our sample , the selection committee memorandums showed that usaid applied the criteria published in the award solicitations in reviewing the applications that were submitted , consistent with usaid's operational policies . 1991: the “republic of macedonia” declared its independence from the former yugoslavia . greece objected to this name , viewing “macedonia” as representing territorial claims against greece , which has a northern province by the same name . because greece has veto power in nato , it was able to prevent the republic of macedonia from joining the organization . 1995: greece and the republic of macedonia reached an interim accord in which greece agreed not to block applications by the republic of macedonia to international organizations if made under the name “former yugoslav republic of macedonia.” 2008: at a nato summit in bucharest , greece blocked the republic of macedonia's bid to join nato . dec. 2011: the international court of justice ruled that greece had been wrong to block the republic of macedonia's bid to enter nato in 2008 , but the decision did not affect nato's consensus - based decision - making process .