the directive did not establish a date by which this was to be accomplished . as of march 2015 , omb had not finalized its revisions to circular a - 130 to require agencies to incorporate records management requirements when moving to cloud - based services or storage solutions , as specified in the directive . officials in omb's office of information and regulatory affairs stated , however , that the requirement is expected to be included in the circular when it is finalized . in explaining the status of this initiative , an official stated that revisions to the circular began in 2012 and were distributed for interagency comments . additional revisions to the circular continued in 2013 and , in 2014 the agency waited for the approval of legislation , such as the federal information security modernization act of 2014 , which requires omb to amend or revise circular a - 130 to eliminate inefficient or wasteful according to omb officials , the agency expects reporting within 1 year.to finalize and issue the revised omb circular a - 130 in december 2015 . if consistent with the directive , this planned action of revising circular a - 130 by omb should help agencies incorporate records management requirements when moving to cloud - based services or storage solutions . the directive included nine specific actions that nara was to implement by the end of december 2012 , december 2013 , and december 2014 . in this regard , nara provided us with evidence supporting its identification of tools , and in response we updated our report to reflect the actions taken . as an additional comment , the archivist expressed concern that the report did not include a recommendation for nara to revisit its guidance for the senior agency official's roles , responsibilities , and overall designation , especially as it pertains to independent agencies . table 2 describes the required actions and their due dates . the 24 federal agencies took actions toward implementing each of the seven requirements due in november 2012 , december 2013 , and december 2014 . these actions included designating and reaffirming senior agency officials at the appropriate level to oversee agencies' records management programs , developing and implementing plans to manage permanent electronic records , reporting progress in managing permanent and temporary e - mail in an electronic format , identifying 30- year or older permanent records for transfer , identifying unscheduled records , obtaining the nara federal records management training certificate , and developing records management training . however , certain requirements were not fully met by 5 of the agencies because these agencies were either still working on addressing the requirement , or did not view the requirement as being mandatory . until agencies fully implement the directive's requirements , the federal government may be hindered in its efforts to improve performance and promote openness and accountability through the reform of records management . according to the directive , by november 15 , 2012 , and every year thereafter , each agency is required to name or reaffirm the senior agency official who is responsible for coordinating with the agency records officer and other appropriate officials to ensure the agency's compliance with records management statutes and regulations .