physicians . all of the services had difficulties meeting their accession needs for physicians ( see table 5 ) in at least 2 of the 3 fiscal years that we examined . the army and the navy achieved 91 or more percent of their goals in each year studied , while the air force achieved 47 to 65 percent of its goal during the same 3 years . for each year , the air force had a higher goal than the other two services but accessed fewer physicians . our review of the numbers of medical students participating in the services' health professions scholarship program showed that additional physician - accession problems may appear in future years ( see table 6 ) . the services set their goals for awarding the scholarships based on their needs for fully trained medical professionals in the future . a medical student who accepts a scholarship will be commissioned into a military service upon completion of graduate school . while each service awarded scholarships to a sufficient number of the medical students who began their 4-year training in fy 2003 and will be ready for an officer commission upon graduation in fy 2007 , the army and navy did not achieve their goals for awarding scholarships in fy 2005 , and they may not access enough physicians in fy 2009 . dentists . similar to the situation with physicians , the services have been challenged to access enough dentists in recent years ( see table 7 ) . no service met its goals for recruiting dentists in fys 2001 , 2003 , or 2005 . both the army and the air force , however , accessed more dentists in fy 2005 than they had 2 years before , and the air force showed improvement in fy 2005 over their fy 2003 accessions . nurses . all of the services have struggled to access enough nurses ( see table 8 ) . although the navy exceeded its goal for accessing nurses in 2001 , no service achieved its goal for any other period . in fy 2005 , the services accessed a total of 738 of the 975 nurses ( about 76 percent ) that they needed . while some service officials have stated that medical professional recruiting is challenging because of concerns over overseas deployments , other service officials told us that it is also affected by the lack of income parity compared to the civilian sector . as part of the john warner national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 , congress approved an increase in the recruiting bonus for fully trained physicians and dentists , allowed the services to detail commissioned officers to attend medical school , extended the authority for undergraduate student loan repayment for medical professionals , increased the financial benefits student may receive as part of the health professions scholarship program , and required the services to report to congress on this program and their success in meeting the scholarship program's goals . another step that dod has taken to reduce the medical professional shortfalls is to convert uniformed medical positions to positions occupied by civilian medical professionals .