gao - 19-242 . washington , d.c.: april 29 , 2019 . increasing hiring for the public shipyards . the navy hired over 20,600 workers during fiscal years 2013 through 2018 . after accounting for attrition , these hires increased total end strength from 29,400 to 36,700 . accelerating training for new employees . the effect of significant attrition and hiring resulted in approximately 56 percent of the shipyard production workforce having fewer than 5 years' experience . the public shipyards implemented new approaches for accelerating training to develop skills in a relatively inexperienced workforce . accounting for new employees' lower proficiency and productivity . shipyard officials have noted that employees with less than 5 years' experience are generally not as skilled or productive as more experienced personnel . the navy has established more realistic maintenance planning parameters to account for the lower proficiency and productivity of recently hired , less experienced workers . improving the definition of workload requirements . naval sea systems command ( navsea ) evaluated technical and program maintenance requirements with stakeholders in the maintenance community to identify and address barriers to on - time completion . among the areas evaluated were time and condition - based maintenance strategies ; logistic strategies ; work estimating processes ; shipyard overtime levels ; and technology strategies . improving material reliability and availability . the navy is taking actions such as updating class maintenance plans ; identifying and tracking frequently needed parts to determine appropriate acquisition strategies ; creating an improved material forecasting tool ; and moving material closer to the user . balancing the submarine maintenance workload across the public and private shipyards . the navy identified two submarines for which maintenance could be outsourced to electric boat or huntington ingalls over the next 5 years , in addition to the four submarines for which maintenance is currently outsourced . the workload plan contains some optimistic assumptions which may jeopardize achieving the intended benefits . according to the navy's workload plan , the navy's efforts identified above are intended to eliminate all submarine idle time and fully address the submarine maintenance backlog by fiscal year 2023 . however , success of the plan depends on the public and private shipyards and the navy realizing improvements in their performance that they have not yet demonstrated . for example: on - time completion of submarine maintenance , at both the public and private shipyards . the workload plan states that on - time completion of submarine maintenance , at both the public and private shipyards , is critical to eliminating submarine idle time and the submarine maintenance backlog . however , this assumption may not be realistic in light of recent performance at public and private shipyards . ( recommendation 4 ) . we provided a draft of this report to dod for review and comment . in written comments provided by the navy ( reproduced in appendix iii ) , dod concurred with our recommendations . the navy also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the secretary of the navy , and other interested parties .