ii ) . services that closely support inherently governmental functions include professional and management support services , such as those that involve or relate to supporting budget preparation ; program planning ; acquisition planning ; technical evaluation for contract proposals or source selections ; and development of statements of work . the decision to turn to contractors can , in some cases , create risks that the government needs to consider and manage . of key concern is the loss of government control over and accountability for mission - related policy and program decisions when contractors provide services that closely support inherently governmental functions . the closer contractor services come to supporting inherently governmental functions , the greater the risk of their influencing the government's control over and accountability for decisions that may be based , in part , on contractor work . this may result in decisions that are not in the best interest of the government and may increase vulnerability to waste , fraud , and abuse . given this risk , the far and office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) guidance state that a greater scrutiny and an enhanced degree of management oversight is required when contracting for functions that closely support the performance of inherently governmental functions . additionally , the ronald w. reagan national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2005 required , among other things , that prior to entering into a contract for performance of acquisition functions that closely support inherently governmental functions , dod must ensure that its personnel cannot reasonably be made available to perform these activities , that appropriate dod personnel supervise contractor performance and perform all inherently governmental functions , and that dod address any potential organizational conflict of interest of the contractor when performing these tasks . table 2 provides examples of contracted services and their relative risk of influencing government decision making . our previous work has identified that the use of contractors for services that closely support inherently governmental functions introduces other risks due to a potential loss of government control over program decisions . such concerns include an increased potential for conflicts of interest , both organizational and personal ; the potential for improper use of personal services contracts , which the far generally prohibits because of the employer - employee relationship they create between the government and contractor personnel ; and the potential additional cost to the government of hiring contractors rather than government personnel . the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2002 required the secretary of defense to establish a review process for the approval of dod services acquisitions . usd ( at&l ) issued guidance in may 2002 establishing its management reviews , intending to ensure that dod's services acquisitions are based on clear , performance - based requirements with measurable outcomes and that acquisitions are planned and administered to achieve intended results . under this initial guidance usd ( at&l ) was to review all proposed services acquisitions with an estimated value of $2 billion or more , and military department and other defense component officials were to review those below that threshold . the military departments each subsequently developed their own management review processes for acquisitions that contained several of the same elements .