biennial exercises . each nuclear power plant and its relevant local and state authorities must conduct an exercise every 2 years that demonstrates their abilities to implement their respective emergency plans . local and state authorities that participate in the biennial exercises submit their emergency plans to fema staff before the exercises , and fema evaluators review the plans and assess off - site performance based on the activities identified in those plans . annual letter of certification . to help fema determine whether local and state authorities' plans and implementation activities provide reasonable assurance about off - site radiological preparedness , states that participate in the rep program annually submit a letter of certification to fema providing assurance that all required activities have been undertaken as appropriate by local and state authorities . fema may also review off - site emergency preparedness following events such as electric grid blackouts , intentional harm , or natural disasters in the vicinity of commercial nuclear power plants , which can result in infrastructure damage that can degrade the capabilities of local and state authorities to respond to a radiological incident . for example , natural disasters that destroy roads or bridges around a plant could affect the ability of local and state authorities to effectively conduct evacuations . according to the memorandum of understanding between nrc and fema , fema is to ( 1 ) inform nrc promptly if fema questions the continued adequacy of off - site emergency preparedness , ( 2 ) review off - site radiological emergency preparedness if it believes that a review is necessary to determine whether off - site preparedness remains adequate , and ( 3 ) inform nrc in writing about the results of its review . nrc is to consider the information fema provides , in addition to its assessment of the licensee's facility , in deciding to allow the restart or continued operation of an affected operating nuclear power plant . for example , after hurricane katrina in 2005 , the waterford nuclear generating station in killona , louisiana , was shut down for about 2 weeks . fema conducted a review of local and state authorities' ability to respond to a radiological incident and concluded that off - site radiological preparedness was adequate to justify restarting the plant . nrc and fema also oversee radiological emergency preparedness by reviewing the biennial exercises conducted by licensees and local and state authorities . according to nrc and fema guidance , these exercises simulate incidents at nuclear power plants that require coordination between licensees , local and state authorities , and federal entities , and provide the opportunity for nrc and fema officials to evaluate the emergency plans in action . according to nrc guidance , nrc's inspectors are to observe these biennial exercises to evaluate the adequacy of the licensee's performance , including the operation of the alert and notification system and the individual performance of the emergency response staff.the licensee's ability to assess and critique its own performance to identify and correct weaknesses observed during the exercise . for example , one nrc inspector told us that he observes how the licensee responds to an escalation of events , prepares and issues protective action recommendations , and makes assessments of radiological doses during an exercise .