students are therefore responsible for all interest costs . plus loans — loans made to parents of dependent undergraduate students enrolled at least half - time in an eligible program of study . borrowers are responsible for paying all interest on the loan . campus - based aid — allocated to participating institutions by the u.s. department of education . the institutions then award the following aid to students: supplemental educational opportunity grant ( seog ) — grants for undergraduate students with financial need . priority for this aid is given to pell grant recipients . perkins loans — low - interest ( 5 percent ) loans to undergraduate and graduate students . interest does not accrue while the student is enrolled at least half - time in an eligible program . priority is given to students who have exceptional financial need . work - study — students are provided on - or off - campus jobs in which they earn at least the current federal minimum wage . as shown in figure 1 , most of these funds are subsidized and unsubsidized stafford loans . in addition to the title iv programs , there are tax provisions that students and their families may be eligible to use for postsecondary education . the taxpayer relief act of 1997 ( p.l . 105-34 ) created several provisions to help families pay for postsecondary education , such as the hope tax credit , lifetime learning tax credit , and the student loan interest deduction . the act also created tax - exempt savings accounts , called education individual retirement accounts ( ira ) , to help families save for college . for independent students , the efc is based on the student's and , if married , spouse's income and assets and whether the student has any dependents other than a spouse . by law , veteran students are automatically classified as independent students , and gi benefits are not included as veterans' income for purposes of calculating efc . once efc is established , this information is compared to the cost of the institution at which the student will attend to determine a student's financial need . in the federal financial aid process , an institution's cost of attendance includes tuition and fees , room and board , books , supplies , transportation , and miscellaneous personal expenses . the type of institution that a student attends will affect the cost of attendance . typically , public 2-year institutions cost significantly less than public 4- year institutions or private 4-year institutions . for example , on average , the annual cost to attend a public 2-year college as a commuter student was $7,024 compared with $11,338 for resident students at public 4-year institutions and $24,946 for resident students at private 4-year institutions . if the efc is equal to or greater than the cost of attendance , then the student is not considered to have financial need for federal aid programs . if the efc is less than cost of attendance , then the student is considered to have financial need . financial aid administrators at the school the student is attending then create a federal financial aid package that could include grants , loans , and work - study .