mr . brand has served as undersecretary of the massachusetts department of transportation , associate professor of city planning at harvard university , and senior lecturer in the massachusetts institute of technology's civil engineering department . mr . brand edited urban transportation innovation , coedited urban travel demand forecasting , and is the author of numerous monographs and articles on transportation . what are some key strategies for addressing the challenges ? in addressing the first two questions , we analyzed databases and other information obtained from the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) and the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps of engineers ) . we did not verify the accuracy of these data . in addressing the third and fourth questions , we relied upon the results of two panels of surface and maritime transportation experts that we convened in april 2002 . the 22 experts were selected by the national academy of sciences ( nas ) and its transportation research board with input from us ; they included a cross - section of representatives from all surface and maritime modes and from various occupations involved in transportation planning . we also reviewed reports prepared by federal agencies , academics , and industry groups to address the third and fourth questions . appendix vi provides further information on our scope and methodology . in this report we discuss three types of travel that have important distinctions: local passenger travel , intercity passenger travel , and freight travel . local travel includes commuting trips to and from work , shopping trips , and other personal trips such as for school , social , or recreational purposes . the main types of vehicles and modes of transportation used for local trips include automobiles and mass transit , including city buses , commuter rail , subways , and ferries . intercity passenger travel is different from local travel because it represents longer distances traveled , and it occurs on some different modes of transportation , primarily automobile , air service , intercity bus , and intercity rail . freight generally moves by trucks on public roads ; by barges and various cargo ships on the inland , intra - coastal , coastal , and great lakes waterways ; by trains on rail on private right - of - way ; and by airplane . the choice of mode is influenced by the type , weight , and value of goods being shipped ; available modes of transportation in the region ; and cost , speed , and other service requirements . the u.s. surface and maritime transportation systems facilitate mobility through an extensive network of infrastructure and operators , as well as through the vehicles and vessels that permit passengers and freight to move within the systems . the systems include 3.9 million miles of public roads , 121,000 miles of major private railroad networks , and 25,000 miles of commercially navigable waterways . they also include over 500 major urban public transit operators in addition to numerous private transit operators , and more than 300 ports on the coasts , great lakes , and inland waterways . maintaining the transportation system is critical to sustaining america's economic growth .