as a consequence of this growth , we identified several challenges . first , state is maintaining missions in increasingly dangerous locations , necessitating the use of more resources and making it more difficult to provide security in these locations . second , although diplomatic security has grown considerably in staff over the last 10 years , staffing shortages in domestic offices , as well as other operational challenges further tax diplomatic security's ability to implement all of its missions . finally , state has expanded diplomatic security without the benefit of solid strategic planning . diplomatic security officials stated that maintaining missions in dangerous environments such as iraq and afghanistan requires more resources and increases the difficulty for diplomatic security to provide a secure environment . keeping staff secure , yet productive , in iraq has been one of diplomatic security's greatest challenges since 2004 , when security for the u.s. embassy in baghdad transferred from the u.s. department of defense to diplomatic security . the u.s. mission in baghdad — with 1,300 authorized u.s. civilian personnel — is one of the largest in the world . maintaining diplomatic security operations in iraq has required approximately 36 percent of its entire budget each fiscal year since 2004 and , as of september 2008 , required 81 special agents to manage security operations . although some planning initiatives have been undertaken , neither state's departmental strategic plan nor diplomatic security's bureau strategic plan specifically addresses its resource needs or its management challenges . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in brief , mr. chairman , we found that , since 1998 , diplomatic security's mission and activities — and , subsequently , its resources — have grown considerably in reaction to a number of security incidents . in particular ( 1 ) state is maintaining a presence in an increasing number of dangerous posts , which requires additional resources ; ( 2 ) staffing shortages in domestic offices and other operational challenges — such as inadequate facilities , language deficiencies , experience gaps , and the difficulty of balancing security needs with state's diplomatic mission — further tax diplomatic security's ability to implement all of its missions ; and ( 3 ) diplomatic security's considerable growth has not benefited from adequate strategic guidance . in our report , we recommend that the secretary of state — as part of the agency's quadrennial diplomatic and development review ( qddr ) or separately — conduct a strategic review of diplomatic security to ensure that its missions and activities address its priority needs . because of a number of security incidents , diplomatic security's missions and resources have grown tremendously in the past decade . the growth in diplomatic security's mission includes key areas such as enhanced physical security and investigations .