this was the case in all the deployments we reviewed . in all cases , the stevedores or longshoremen were in the same labor pool as the one used for commercial port operations . while dod officials have not identified port workers as a particular threat , they are concerned that lack of information on the background of individuals handling military equipment increases potential risk . organizations at some of the ports we visited are now implementing or reviewing efforts to increase screening of port workers . and the maritime security legislation currently before the congress includes provisions for background checks and access control for port workers . these measures , if approved and properly implemented , may help address this issue . in commenting on a draft of this report , transportation security administration officials acknowledged the problems posed by the lack of screening for port workers and indicated that they plan to study and eventually issue nationwide standards for credentialing port workers . dod also transfers custody of its equipment when the equipment is placed aboard a commercial ship for transport overseas . we reviewed four major overseas deployments from three military installations during calendar year 2001 that involved about 6,550 tons of military equipment and supplies . although these four deployments are not representative of all dod deployments conducted in 2001 , they do illustrate the use of foreign - owned commercial vessels by dod . in commenting on a draft of this report , dod officials stated that about 43 percent of cargo shipped overseas in 2001 as part of deployments involving major equipment in support of overseas operations was carried on foreign - flagged ships . as indicated in table 1 , most of the ships for the deployments we reviewed were both foreign - owned and foreign - crewed . in addition to transferring custody over its assets to non - dod personnel , dod did not generally provide security forces aboard these vessels . several of the ships used in the deployments we reviewed did have dod maintenance personnel aboard , but the ship manifests did not indicate that armed dod personnel were aboard as a security force . the military sealift command reviews charter vessel crew lists to determine whether any crewmembers are known security threats . some of the materiel transported by these vessels included sensitive and mission essential items . table 2 provides examples of equipment carried aboard foreign - owned and foreign - crewed ships for the deployments we reviewed . when dod relinquishes control over its equipment , it relies on nongovernment third parties to protect its assets . placing military equipment outside dod's control also complicates the steps needed to mitigate the higher risk and could disrupt military units from performing their intended missions . an example of the dangers of such loss of control occurred in summer 2000 . while in the north atlantic , the captain of a commercial vessel carrying canadian military equipment and three canadian forces personnel from the balkans refused to proceed to the ship's destination port in canada after a dispute over payment to the vessel's owner .