( see app . i for a detailed description of our scope and methodology. ) after making these adjustments , the total number of all other work centers was 5,189 and the sample size for this group was 551 . we received 443 responses for this group , a response rate of 80 percent . for the work centers for the blind , the adjusted total was 75 work centers . we sent out surveys to all of these work centers and received 63 responses , a response rate of 84 percent . for the businesses , the adjusted total was 690 and the sample size was 403.we received 284 responses from the businesses , a response rate of 71 percent . in the survey , we asked work center and business managers for information about their facility and the workers they employed under their 14 ( c ) certificates . we asked them to fill out the survey only for the certificate selected ( the certificate number shown on the mailing label ) , not for any other facilities they managed , if any . we mailed the survey to each work center and business selected to the address listed in labor's databases . in some cases , the work center or business gave the survey to another organization , such as a parent organization or work center responsible for completing the employer's 14 ( c ) certificate application package . see appendix ii for a copy of the survey sent to the work centers . one of the objectives of our survey was to obtain a variety of information on the characteristics of 14 ( c ) workers . during our pre - tests of the survey , however , we found that some work center managers had difficulty providing the specific information we requested , such as the number of 14 ( c ) workers they employed at various wage levels . work center managers told us that , while this information was available in each individual worker's record , extracting and summarizing it specifically for 14 ( c ) workers would be very time - consuming and would discourage them from responding to the survey . as a result , rather than asking work center managers to provide the precise number of 14 ( c ) workers with a specific characteristic , we asked them to estimate the percentage of their 14 ( c ) workers with the characteristic . we asked them to provide their estimates by checking one of six boxes with the following labels: “none ( 0% ) ,” “few ( 1-19% ) ,” “some ( 20-39% ) ,” “about half ( 40-59% ) ,” “most ( 60-79% ) ,” or “all or nearly all ( 80-100% ) .” to provide an estimate of the total number of 14 ( c ) workers at each work center with a specific characteristic , it was necessary for us to convert each percentage range estimate provided by the work center manager into a single percentage . to do so , we began by assigning a value to each estimate in the midpoint of the range . for example , for an estimate of “some ( 20-39% ) ,” we assigned a value of 30 percent .