this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have at the appropriate time . for further information about this testimony , please contact orice m. williams on ( 202 ) 512-8678 or at williamso@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include barbara keller , assistant director ; nancy barry , emily chalmers , clayton clark , nancy eibeck , kate bittinger eikel , paul thompson , and john treanor . each regulator had a process to assess risk management systems . while each included certain core components , such as developing a supervisory plan and monitoring , the approach used and level of detail varied . the federal reserve's guidance consisted of a detailed risk assessment program that included an analytic framework for developing a risk management rating for holding companies . unlike most bank regulatory examination guidance , this guidance is not yet publicly available . under the consolidated supervised entity program , sec's trading and markets relied on discussions with management to effect change . for example , trading and market staff told us that they had discussions with senior management that led to changes in personnel . in the years leading up the financial crisis , some regulators identified weaknesses in the risk management systems of large , complex financial institutions . regulators told us that despite these identified weaknesses , they did not take forceful action — such as changing their assessments — until the crisis occurred because the institutions reported a strong financial position and senior management had presented the regulators with plans for change . moreover , regulators acknowledged that in some cases they had not fully appreciated the extent of these weaknesses until the financial crisis occurred and risk management systems were tested by events . regulators also acknowledged they had relied heavily on management representations of risks . in several instances , regulators identified shortcomings in institutions' oversight of risk management at the limited number of large , complex institutions we reviewed but did not change their overall assessments of the institutions until the crisis began in the summer of 2007 . for example , before the crisis one regulator found significant weaknesses in an institution's enterprisewide risk management system stemming from a lack of oversight by senior management . in 2006 , the regulator notified the institution's board of directors that the 2005 examination had concluded that the board and senior management had failed to adequately oversee financial reporting , risk appetite , and internal audit functions . the regulator made several recommendations to the board to address these weaknesses . we found that the regulator continued to find some of the same weaknesses in subsequent examination reports , yet examiners did not take forceful action to require the institution to address these shortcomings until the liquidity crisis occurred and the severity of the risk management weaknesses became apparent .