we continue to believe these actions must be addressed . specifically: nnsa and dod will need to establish clear , long - term requirements for the stockpile by determining the types and quantities of nuclear weapons needed ; after stockpile requirements are developed , nnsa will need to provide accurate estimates of the costs of transformation ; nnsa will need to develop and implement a plan with clear milestones for nnsa's office of transformation must have the authority to make and enforce its decisions on transformation and be held accountable by the congress for achieving timely and cost - effective results . on the basis of our review of recent and ongoing gao work on nnsa's management of the nuclear weapons complex , we remain concerned about nnsa's and dod's ability to carefully and fully implement these four actions . for this reason , we believe that the congress must remain vigilant in its oversight of complex transformation . the united states' nuclear weapons stockpile comprises nine nuclear weapons types , all of which were designed during the cold war . two of these systems — the b61 and the w76 — are currently being refurbished to extend their useful lives for up to 30 years through nnsa's life extension program . in may 2008 , we reported that , over the past few years , nnsa and dod have considered a variety of scenarios for the future composition of the nuclear stockpile that would be based on different stockpile sizes and the degree to which the stockpile would incorporate new rrw designs . for example , nnsa and dod have considered how large the stockpile needs to be in order to maintain a sufficiently robust and responsive manufacturing infrastructure to respond to future global geopolitical events . in addition , nnsa and dod have considered the number of warheads that will need to be either refurbished or replaced in the coming decades . however , nnsa and dod have not issued requirements defining the size and composition of the future stockpile . we discussed one effect of this lack of clear stockpile requirements in our may 2008 report on plutonium pit manufacturing . specifically , we found that in october 2006 , nnsa proposed building a new , consolidated plutonium center at an existing doe site that would be able to manufacture pits at a production capacity of 125 pits per year . however , by december 2007 , nnsa stated that instead of building a new , consolidated plutonium center , its preferred action was to upgrade the existing pit production building at lanl to produce up to 80 pits per year . nnsa does not expect to issue a record of decision on complex transformation until later this year . as a result , we do not know the ultimate decision that nnsa will make — whether to modernize existing sites in the weapons complex or consolidate operations at new facilities . we expect that once nnsa makes this decision , nnsa will put forward a transformation plan with specific milestones to implement its decision . without such a plan , nnsa will have no way to evaluate its progress , and the congress will have no way to hold nnsa accountable .