we proceeded to phone the marketplaces . however , as shown in figure 2 , the california marketplace did not continue to process one of our medicaid applications . in this case , our fictitious phone applicant declined to provide what was a valid social security number , citing privacy concerns . a marketplace representative told us that , to apply , the applicant must provide a social security number . the representative suggested that as an alternative , we could apply for medicaid in person with the local county office or a certified enrollment counselor . after we discussed the results of our undercover testing with california officials in 2015 , they told us their system requires applicants to provide either a social security number or an individual taxpayer - identification number to process an application . as a result , because our fictitious applicant declined to provide a social security number , our application could not be processed . for the four fictitious medicaid applications submitted to the federal marketplace for 2015 , we were told that we may be eligible for medicaid but that the respective medicaid state offices might require more information . the other two applicants were accepted by phone . for each of the 10 fictitious applications where we obtained qualified health - plan coverage , the respective marketplace directed that our applicants submit supplementary documentation . the marketplaces are required to seek postapproval documentation in the case of certain application “inconsistencies” — instances in which information an applicant has provided does not match information contained in data sources that the marketplace uses for eligibility verification at the time of application , or such information is not available . for the two new jersey medicaid applications , we periodically called the state medicaid offices over approximately 4 months in 2015 , attempting to determine the status of our applications . in these calls , new jersey representatives generally told us they had not yet received medicaid information from the federal marketplace and , on several occasions , said they expected to receive it shortly . after our calls to new jersey medicaid offices , we phoned the federal marketplace to determine the status of our medicaid applications . in one case , the federal marketplace representative told us new jersey determined that our applicant did not qualify for medicaid . as a result , the phone representative stated that we were then eligible for qualified health - plan coverage . we subsequently paid premiums to put these policies into force . as figure 1 shows , for these 10 applications , we were approved for subsidized coverage — the premium tax credit , paid in advance , and cost - sharing reduction subsidies — for all cases . the monthly amount of the advance premium tax credit for these 10 applicants totaled approximately $2,300 per month , or about $28,000 annually , equal to about 70 percent of total premiums . for 4 of these applications , we used social security numbers that could not have been issued by the social security administration . based on this claim , the representative said we were eligible for qualified health - plan coverage .