ift program . our analyses found that the dhs acquisition decision authority approved four of the six documents required at acquisition decision event 2b / 3 — the acquisition plan , acquisition program baseline , integrated logistics support plan , and operational requirements document — but did not approve two others — the life - cycle cost estimate and test and evaluation master plan . at the time of the acquisition decision event , cbp had a life - cycle cost estimate for the ift , but the cost estimate had not yet been approved by dhs . according to otia officials , the life - cycle cost estimate for the ift was discussed at the acquisition decision event 3 meeting and approved by the dhs under secretary for management and dhs's office of program accountability and risk management . however , cbp did not provide documentation showing that the estimate was approved by dhs . the dhs director of operational test and evaluation approved the revised ift test and evaluation master plan on november 27 , 2013 , over dhs and cbp officials 18 months after it was required to be approved.attributed the delay in approving the test and evaluation master plan , in part , to discussions within cbp about the type and level of testing to be conducted on the ifts . specifically , cbp officials stated that a june 2012 version of the draft test and evaluation master plan did not include robust operational test and evaluation because of the ift program's strategy to acquire a nondevelopmental system ( sometimes referred to as a commercial - off - the - shelf system ) . as a result , border patrol requested that rigorous , disciplined testing be included in the test and evaluation master plan to obtain familiarization with , and confidence in , the system and establish baseline performance information . according to dhs's acquisition guidance , the test and evaluation master plan is important because it describes the strategy for conducting developmental and operational testing to evaluate a system's technical performance , including its operational effectiveness and suitability . however , the ift test and evaluation master plan approved by dhs in november 2013 does not describe testing to evaluate the operational effectiveness and suitability of the system . rather , the test and evaluation master plan describes cbp's plans to conduct a limited user test of the ift . according to the test and evaluation master plan , the limited user test will be designed to determine the ift's mission contribution . according to otia and the test and evaluation master plan , this testing is planned to occur during 30 days in environmental conditions present at one site — the nogales station . cbp plans to conduct limited user testing for the ift under the same process that is typically performed in any operational test and evaluation , according to the test and evaluation master plan .