state . state's bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs ( inl ) advises the president , secretary of state , and government agencies on policies and programs to combat international narcotics and crime . inl programs support state's strategic goals to reduce the entry of illegal drugs into the united states and to minimize the impact of international crime on the united states and its citizens . inl oversees funding provided to build the capacity of mexico to fight organized crime under the mérida initiative , including funds to support efforts to combat firearms trafficking . ondcp . ondcp is a white house component whose principal purpose is to establish policies , priorities , and objectives for the nation's drug control program . data from atf on firearms seized in mexico and traced from calendar year 2009 to 2014 indicate that the majority originated in the united states . because of the illicit nature of the trafficking , the exact number of firearms trafficked from the united states into mexico is unknown . similarly , atf officials noted that since firearms seized in mexico are not always submitted for tracing the same year they were seized , or are not submitted at all , it is not possible to develop data to track trends on firearms seized . however , atf uses the number of firearms seized and traced as an indicator to estimate extent of illicit firearms trafficking . while the government of mexico collects data on the number of firearms its law enforcement entities seize each year , our analysis and findings refer exclusively to the universe of firearms seized in mexico that were submitted for tracing using etrace . according to atf data , of the 104,850 firearms seized by mexican authorities and submitted for tracing from 2009 to 2014 , there were 73,684 , or 70 percent , found to have originated in the united states . about 17 percent of the total , 17,544 firearms , were traced to a country other than the united states . atf could not determine the origin of 13,622 ( 13 percent ) of these firearms because of incomplete information . see figure 1 . from 2009 to 2011 , numbers of firearms seized by mexican authorities and submitted for tracing fluctuated significantly , followed by a steady decline after 2011 . according to atf officials , shifts in the number of guns seized and traced do not necessarily reflect fluctuations in the volume of firearms trafficked from the united states to mexico from one year to the next . atf staff explained that there are several factors that have influenced the year - to - year variance in the number of firearms traced since 2009 . for example , they explained that the high number of firearms traced in 2009 reflects a single submission by the mexican military to atf for tracing of a backlog of thousands of firearms . conversely , atf officials noted there was a lower number of firearms submitted for tracing in 2010 because that is the year etrace in spanish was initially deployed in mexico , and mexican law enforcement officials at the local , state , and federal level had to be trained on using the system .