ii ) . in the department's response , the secretary of commerce agreed with our recommendations to use a program level risk list and to add selected risks to its list . the department reported that noaa has established a consolidated programwide risk list that is to be used to evaluate risks during monthly internal and external reviews . and intensity of these storms once they develop . noaa , with the aid of the national aeronautics and space administration noaa , with the aid of the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , is planning to procure the next generation of geostationary ( nasa ) , is planning to procure the next generation of geostationary satellites , called the geostationary operational environmental satellites - r satellites , called the geostationary operational environmental satellites - r series ( goes - r ) . the goes - r series is to replace the current series of series ( goes - r ) . the goes - r series is to replace the current series of satellites which will likely begin to reach the end of their useful lives in satellites which will likely begin to reach the end of their useful lives in approximately 2014 . this new series is expected to mark the first major approximately 2014 . this new series is expected to mark the first major technological advance in goes instrumentation since 1994 . it is also technological advance in goes instrumentation since 1994 . it is also considered critical to the united states' ability to maintain the continuity considered critical to the united states' ability to maintain the continuity of data required for weather forecasting through the year 2028. of data required for weather forecasting through the year 2028 . this report responds to your request that we review noaa's management this report responds to your request that we review noaa's management of the goes - r program . specifically , we were asked to ( 1 ) assess the of the goes - r program . specifically , we were asked to ( 1 ) assess the status and revised plans for the goes - r procurement , and ( 2 ) evaluate status and revised plans for the goes - r procurement , and ( 2 ) evaluate whether noaa is adequately mitigating key technical and programmatic whether noaa is adequately mitigating key technical and programmatic risks facing the goes - r program . risks facing the goes - r program . to assess goes - r status and revised plans , we reviewed program documents on the revised acquisition strategy , system requirements , and cost estimates , and interviewed officials from noaa , nasa , and the contractor for a critical goes - r instrument . to evaluate whether noaa is adequately mitigating key technical and programmatic risks , we analyzed risk management plans and also met with internal technical experts to determine the key risks that could negatively affect the program's ability to acquire the goes - r system . we also interviewed agency officials to evaluate the adequacy of noaa's mitigation efforts . we conducted our work at noaa and nasa offices in the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area and at itt corporation in fort wayne , indiana .