operational capability . the air force is currently undertaking a reorganization of its wrm program . in the past , each air force major command had its own wrm program . air force officials stated that leadership decided to centralize and streamline the program to be more transparent and have “one voice” for wrm . in january 2015 , the air force issued revised wrm guidance that details changes to the program and its management , including the development of a wrm global strategy and the appointment of a global manager of wrm . the revised guidance designates the air force materiel command as the global manager for wrm , which in turn assigned its subordinate air force sustainment center as global manager . within the air force sustainment center , the 635th supply chain operations wing at scott air force base will execute centralized wrm global management . offices that manage unique wrm items , such as ammunition and medical items , must coordinate with the global manager . functional managers of items such as fuel and subsistence must coordinate with dla for items it manages ; however , the global manager coordinates with dla for other items . in addition to the individual named above , key contributors to this report were thomas gosling ( assistant director ) , charlene calhoon , timothy carr , martin de alteriis , suzanne m. perkins , amie steele , sabrina c. streagle , and erik wilkins - mckee . ( app . i provides an overview of the services' wrm programs. ) mres are a type of individual combat , or operational , food ration that is designed to sustain servicemembers engaged in heavy activity . it is considered a primary food ration for the military as it sustains troops in the early stages of a military operation , especially before supply lines are well established . these rations consist of a full meal packed in a flexible meal bag , which is lightweight yet durable for use in difficult environments . while the entree may be eaten cold , it can be heated in various ways and comes with a flameless heater inside the bag . figure 1 shows an mre and the contents of an mre pouch . once field feeding can begin during a military operation , the military services seek to transition from mres to other types of rations , such as group rations that can be used to heat and serve meals for 50 individuals per pack , and then later to dining facility - prepared meals , once those capabilities exist . as a result , mres may be crucial for the early stages of a military operation . we found in april 2005 that u.s. forces in iraq experienced temporary shortages of mres during the deployment and major combat phases in early 2003 before dining facilities were established , and data showed that both the army and marine corps were we at risk of running out of food if supply distribution was hindered.found that these shortages resulted from both ineffective distribution , specifically a lack of sufficient logistics resources that hindered dod's efforts to move mres promptly from ports to the units that had ordered them , as well as from inadequate supply forecasts .