conform to nasa safety provisions . even though the top - level requirements provided a framework to guide propulsion module development , nasa's reviews of the module's detailed technical requirements identified major concerns . for example , an april 1999 systems requirements review found that nasa did not have detailed analyses to quantify the amount of propulsion capability that would be required . nasa space station program personnel later determined the definition of what propulsive capability was required ; however , this definition was not available until a few months before the initial design review and could not , therefore , be used to judge the design's suitability . subsequent reviews found deficiencies with the design elements of the module itself . russia became a partner in 1993 . as a partner , russia agreed to provide hardware , such as the service module to provide station propulsion , supply vehicles , and related launch services throughout the station's life . however , russia's funding problems delayed the launch of the service module by more than 2 years and raised questions about russia's ability to support the station during and after assembly . shortly after russia came into the program , nasa began studying ways to provide the required propulsion using existing designs and hardware . later , in response to continuing problems in the russian space program , such as declining launch rates and funding shortages , nasa initiated additional studies at the marshall space flight center in alabama . in the spring of 1995 , it focused on satisfying the space station's command and control and propulsion requirements . in 1996 , marshall proposed building a propulsion module in - house , and in 1997 , nasa considered using existing russian hardware to provide the needed propulsion . in 1997 , in response to continuing concerns over russia's ability to fulfill its station commitments , nasa developed a contingency plan , which included a strategy to mitigate the risk of both further delay on the service module propulsion capabilities and russia not being able to meet station propulsion needs . key elements of the plan involved developing an interim control module for near - term needs and a propulsion module to provide a permanent u.s. capability . in 1998 , boeing reusable space systems proposed a propulsion module concept that was to rely heavily on existing shuttle hardware , provide for on - orbit refueling , and cost about $330 million . this proposal coincided with renewed concern that russia would not be able to fulfil its commitment to provide station propulsion capability . nasa decided to move ahead with the proposal based on a strategy that included refining the design during subsequent requirements and design reviews . it adopted this strategy based on its assumption that a propulsion module would be required by early 2002 if russia failed to launch the service module . in july 2000 , russia successfully launched the service module , thus mitigating nasa's immediate concern that the space station would not have adequate propulsion capability . however , the agency still proceeded with the propulsion module project because of long - term concerns with russia's ability to fulfil its commitments .