vol . february 1998 . council on accreditation standards and self - study manual . the network for excellence in human services . workforce analysis for riverside county department of public social services . october 2001 . the network for excellence in human services . workforce analysis for imperial county department of social services . march 2001 . new york state office of children and family services , bureau of training . 2001 caseworker turnover survey . may 2002 . pasztor , eileen mayers , et al . demand for social workers in california . california state university , long beach . april 2002 . robin , s. and c.d . hollister . “career paths and contributions of four cohorts of iv - e funded msw child welfare graduates.” journal of health and social policy , vol . scannapieco , maria and kelli connell - carrick . “do collaborations with schools of social work make a difference for the field of child welfare ? practice , retention , and curriculum.” journal of human behavior in the social environment . south carolina association of children's homes and family services . comparative study of salaries and benefits of direct care workers in member agencies and selected south carolina state government positions . lexington , s.c.: january 2000 . u.s. department of health and human services , administration for children and families , administration for children , youth , and families , children's bureau . changing paradigms of child welfare practice: responding to opportunities and challenges . 1999 child welfare training symposium . june 1999 . u.s. department of health and human services , administration for children and families , administration for children , youth , and families , commission's office of research and evaluation , and the children's bureau . national survey of child and adolescent well being ( nscaw ) . state child welfare agency survey: report . june 2001 . u.s. department of health and human services , office of inspector general , office of evaluation and investigations . accreditation of public child welfare agencies . march 1994 . oei - o4-94-00010 . u.s. department of labor , bureau of labor statistics . 2000 national occupational employment and wage estimates . zlotnik , joan levy . “enhancing child welfare service delivery: promoting agency - social work education partnerships.” policy and practice , vol . zlotnik , joan levy . “selected resources on the efficacy of social work for public child welfare practice.” council on social work education , june 11 , 1999 . foster care: recent legislation helps states focus on finding permanent homes for children , but long - standing barriers remain . gao - 02-585 . washington , d.c.: june 28 , 2002 . district of columbia child welfare: long - term challenges to ensuring children's well - being . gao - 01-191 . washington , d.c.: december 29 , 2000 . child welfare: new financing and service strategies hold promise , but effects unknown . gao / t - hehs - 00-158 . washington , d.c.: july 20 , 2000 . foster care: states' early experiences implementing the adoption and safe families act . gao / hehs - 00-1 . washington , d.c.: december 22 , 1999 . foster care: hhs could better facilitate the interjurisdictional adoption process .