bus . orgs . code ann . § 10.254 ( b ) . see ford bacon & davis , l.l.c . ( 2 ) how well are fmcsa's investigative programs designed to identify suspected chameleon carriers ? ( 3 ) what constraints , if any , does fmcsa face in pursuing enforcement actions against suspected chameleon carriers ? gao , motor carrier safety: reincarnating commercial vehicle companies pose safety threat to motoring public ; federal safety agency has initiated efforts to prevent future occurrences , gao - 09-924 ( washington , d.c.: july 28 , 2009 ) . management information system , enforcement actions taken against carriers in its enforcement management information system , and insurance information from its licensing and insurance databases . we used these databases to match registration data in key fields , such as company names , addresses , and phone numbers , between new applicant carriers and carriers with history in the industry . we analyzed data for new applicants from january 1 , 2005 , through december 31 , 2010 , against data for all carriers that had registered with fmcsa since june 1 , 1974 . to assess the reliability of these databases , we reviewed documentation on data collection efforts and quality assurance processes , talked with knowledgeable fmcsa officials about these data , and checked the data for completeness and reasonableness . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for describing this population of motor carriers and performing our data - matching analysis . to determine how well fmcsa's investigative programs are designed to identify chameleon carriers , we reviewed federal motor carrier laws and safety regulations ; federal internal control standards ; related reports and statements published by gao , ntsb , and the u.s. department of transportation's office of inspector general ; documentation about fmcsa's applicant review processes and procedures , which fmcsa refers to as the vetting program ; fmcsa policy memorandums on the new entrant safety assurance program and the monitoring of potential chameleon new entrant motor carriers ; and fmcsa's field operations training manual . we also observed two new entrant safety audits — one in california of a new passenger carrier and the other in virginia of a new freight carrier . finally , to identify constraints fmcsa faces in pursuing enforcement actions against chameleon carriers , we reviewed federal motor carrier laws and regulations ; gao and other reports ; fmcsa's summary and analysis of 50 states' corporate successor liability laws , which identified relevant case law and explained the legal standards currently used to determine corporate successor liability ; and fmcsa decisions affecting fmcsa's enforcement authority , among other things . in addition , to address all of our objectives , we interviewed officials at fmcsa headquarters in washington , d.c. ; 4 regional service centers ; and 10 selected division offices . we also interviewed law enforcement agencies in the 10 states whose division offices we had selected to understand how the agencies are involved in identifying or taking enforcement actions against chameleon carriers . we selected the 10 division offices and states primarily because they were the ones with the most registered interstate carriers . in addition , we interviewed ntsb officials , industry associations , and safety advocacy groups .