australia . australia's statistical agency uses consumption data from their national accounts to update the cpi expenditure weights more frequently than officials said was previously possible . using this data has helped reduce substitution bias , meaning that the data better reflect changes in consumer purchases in response to price changes . what is a chained price index ? a chained price index uses a formula that is believed by some economists to better approximate a cost - of - living index by more accurately accounting for changes in consumption patterns in response to relative price changes . they contend that such a formula reduces the potential for overstating inflation relative to the other indexes bls produces , which assume consumers keep buying goods and services in the same proportions no matter their price . like the other three indexes bls produces , the chained cpi - u reflects consumers' ability to adapt to changing prices by choosing among closely related goods and services as prices change , for example purchasing a different type of apple because it is on sale . however , unlike the other three indexes , the chained cpi - u further reflects consumers' ability to choose among all available goods and services as prices change , such as taking a train to work instead of driving when the price of gasoline rises , and purchasing headphones to listen to music during the commute . we previously reported that , were federal retirement benefits to be indexed to the chained cpi - u , ssa and other agencies would need to determine whether to base retirement colas on final data that may be outdated or preliminary data that may be inaccurate . this is because the data needed to use a superlative index formula only become available after a significant time lag . this lag delays issuance of final monthly estimates for the chained cpi - u by up to 1 year . additionally , the chair of a panel convened at the request of bls to examine issues in measuring the cost of living cautioned that chained indexes may not accurately reflect the way people with varying incomes substitute goods and services . for example , retirees with lower incomes might not have the same ability as retirees with higher incomes to substitute other goods and services when the prices of needed medical care or prescription drugs rise . bls receives input on its processes from several sources . for example , bls receives advice and recommendations from several advisory committees that variously focus on technical issues and the needs of users of bls statistics . bls also periodically receives input on its price indexes through external commissions and panels . for example , in may 1995 , the u.s. senate created the advisory commission to study the consumer price index , commonly referred to as the “boskin commission,” after its chairman , michael j. boskin . in december 1996 , the boskin commission released its final report identifying sources of bias in the production of cpis that the commission concluded were causing the indexes to overstate inflation . bls also receives input on its price indexes through public comment .