the future of the cbm program . within each broad theme , we labeled and organized sub - themes . we established the sub - themes by identifying natural clusters of stakeholder responses . we analyzed the categorized themes and sub - themes to draw inferences about the effectiveness of the cbm program by taking the following steps: we first examined the amount and nature of agreement and disagreement between responses within each theme and sub - theme . should the cbm program be allowed to expire in september 2020 or should it be renewed ? for each question , we used a consistent set of follow - up prompts to ensure that we fully covered all aspects of each topic with the stakeholders , that we received complete answers , and that we were able to accurately record the responses . while we asked every stakeholder each of the three questions , we did so keeping in mind the particular background and experience of each stakeholder because experience and expertise differed across our wide range of stakeholders . as such , during each interview , we focused on the topics where the stakeholder had the most experience , expertise , or knowledge . to systematically analyze the information we collected during our semi - structured interviews , we used qualitative analysis software to group the responses into categories and themes . all information was individually coded by two analysts . we classified individual responses according to these broad themes , which generally corresponded to our main questions: the effect of the cbm program on patent assertion and litigation . the effect of the cbm program on innovation and investment in business methods . we then assessed the strength of the arguments supporting each categorized response , and considered factors including the number of stakeholders who discussed a topic , including the strength of the rationale for each viewpoint and other supporting evidence provided . we also considered the way in which stakeholders' interests could influence their perspectives . in this report , we present the themes with the strongest and most consistent support based on rationale including the prevalence of each argument , the presence of credible evidence in support of statements , and the amount of consistency and corroboration of themes across stakeholders . because stakeholders do not make up a defined population that we could sample from , and because the stakeholders we interviewed had a wide range of experience and expertise , we did not tally up similar responses and do not present stakeholder responses based solely on how many stakeholders agreed or disagreed with a given statement . we conducted this performance audit from november 2016 to march 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .