( see fig . standard infant formula includes milk - based and soy - based infant formulas that meet the nutritional needs of most full - term healthy infants less than one year old . the food and drug administration strictly regulates the content and quality of standard infant formula for all brands . what is the estimated dollar effect of using noncontract standard formula ? in conducting our work , we also obtained data on the use of nonstandard infant formula and have included that data in this report . to what extent do infants in the wic program receive noncontract standard formula ? fns establishes regulations for the program , including the cost containment aspects , and provides guidance to the agencies . to measure overall compliance with program requirements , fns regional offices conduct management evaluations at state - level wic and local agencies . each wic agency is responsible for developing guidelines to ensure that wic benefits are effectively delivered to eligible participants . wic grants cover the costs of food grants , nutrition services , and administration . food grants are allocated to the wic agencies through a formula that is based on the number of individuals in each state who are potentially eligible for wic benefits . nutrition services and administration grants are allocated to the agencies through a formula that considers factors such as an agency's number of projected program participants and a salary differential for local government employees . in fiscal year 2001 , fns provided $4.1 billion in grants to wic agencies to fund all benefits and services , of which about $3.0 billion was for supplemental food , including formula . on average , the program had about 7.3 million participants each month , including 1.9 million infants . wic is a discretionary grant program for which the congress authorizes a specific amount of funds each year , not an entitlement program . therefore , eligible individuals can enroll in the program only to the extent that funds are available . fns estimated that about 47 percent of all babies born in the united states were served by wic in fiscal year 2001 . fns also estimated that about 19 percent of all potentially eligible women , infants , and children were not participating in the program . at the state level , the program is administered through 88 state - level wic agencies and a network of over 2,000 local agencies . eligible participants include pregnant or postpartum and breastfeeding women , infants , and children up to age five who meet income guidelines , a state residency requirement , and are individually determined to be at “nutritional risk” by a health professional . the two major types of nutritional risk are ( 1 ) medical - based risks such as anemic or underweight infants , maternal age , history of pregnancy complications , or poor pregnancy outcomes and ( 2 ) diet - based risks such as an inadequate diet pattern . infants are among those given highest priority for receiving wic benefits of those who have medical - based nutritional risk conditions . infants with dietary risk are lower priority than medically at risk infants .