marshals service . these included data - matching policies and standards , operational and security procedures , and technical infrastructure descriptions associated with the fugitive felon program . we also analyzed data - matching agreements and laws regulating data - matching activities with state and local law enforcement agencies . we conducted site visits and telephone conferences with 17 state and local law enforcement agencies to determine their involvement in the fugitive felon program , identify any technological barriers prohibiting their ability to effectively and efficiently share data with ssa and other federal agencies , and assess issues and concerns affecting their efforts to negotiate data - matching agreements with ssa . in addition , we interviewed officials at ssa's headquarters , office of inspector general , and national computer center ; at the fbi's criminal justice information services division in clarksburg , west virginia , and its information technology center in fort monmouth , new jersey ; and at the bureau of prisons and u.s . marshals service . our review focused on the ways in which information technology is being used to achieve fugitive felon program efficiencies , but did not assess the program's effectiveness . we plan to issue a report later this year that will in part address the program's effectiveness . we performed our review from august 2001 through may 2002 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . additional details concerning the objectives , scope , and methodology of our review are contained in appendix i . under the ssi program , ssa pays monthly benefits to individuals who have limited assets and income and are aged , blind , or disabled . these benefits are funded by general tax revenues and based on financial need . ssa has estimated that , during fiscal year 2002 , it will make ssi benefits payments totaling approximately $31.5 billion to about 6.4 million individuals . since 1997 , we have designated ssi a high - risk program because of its susceptibility to fraud , waste , and abuse and ssa's insufficient management oversight . in addition , regarding our statement that no program official could explain the overall data sharing and matching process , ssa disagreed , stating that oig and ssa officials are able to explain the process in its entirety . ssa also stated that , to ensure all involved offices are aware of the overall process and individual office responsibilities , it had released a detailed process description and provided a copy to us . further , ssa added that because its officials had chosen not to answer questions pertaining to other components' work during our review , we had mistakenly inferred that no one within the agency could explain the overall process . we recognize that the fugitive felon program is a joint effort and that there are responsible and knowledgeable managers within each of the participating components involved in administering the program . our recommendation is intended to ensure a unified management oversight capability for the fugitive felon program that does not currently exist . it is not intended to prescribe the exact nature or form of that management oversight capability .