gao - 05-771r . washington , d.c.: june 14 , 2005 . establishing an overall communications strategy . a significant challenge for dod is to ensure an effective and ongoing two - way communications strategy , given its size , geographically and culturally diverse audiences , and different command structures across dod organizations . we have reported that a communications strategy that creates shared expectations about , and reports related progress on , the implementation of the new system is a key practice of a change management initiative . the communications strategy must include the active and visible involvement of a number of key players , including the secretary of defense , and a variety of communication means and mediums for successful implementation of the system . dod acknowledges that a comprehensive outreach and communications strategy is essential for designing and implementing its new personnel management system , but the proposed regulations do not identify a process for continuing involvement of employees in the planning , development , and implementation of nsps . providing adequate resources for implementing the new system . experience has shown that additional resources are necessary to ensure sufficient planning , implementation , training , and evaluation for human capital reform . according to dod , the implementation of nsps will result in costs for , among other things , developing and delivering training , modifying automated personnel information systems , and starting up and sustaining the national security labor relations board . major cost drivers in implementing pay - for - performance systems are the direct costs associated with salaries and training . dod estimates that the overall cost associated with implementing nsps will be approximately $158 million through fiscal year 2008 . however , it has not completed an implementation plan for nsps , including an information technology plan and a training plan ; thus , the full extent of the resources needed to implement nsps may not be well understood at this time . involving employees and other stakeholders in implementing the system . dod faces a significant challenge in involvingand continuing to involveits employees , employee representatives , and other stakeholders in implementing nsps . dod's proposed nsps regulations , while providing for continuing collaboration with employee representatives , do not identify a process for the continuing involvement of employees and other stakeholders in the planning , development , and implementation of nsps . the active involvement of all stakeholders will be critical to the success of nsps . the involvement of employees and their representatives both directly and indirectly is crucial to the success of new initiatives , including implementing a pay - for - performance system . high - performing organizations have found that actively involving employees and stakeholders , such as unions or other employee associations , when developing results - oriented performance management systems helps improve employees' confidence and belief in the fairness of the system and increases their understanding and ownership of organizational goals and objectives . this involvement must be early , active , and continuing if employees are to gain a sense of understanding and ownership of the changes that are being made . ensuring sustained and committed leadership .