nipc efforts in this area have met with mixed success . however , i want to emphasize a more fundamental impediment . in january 2001 , nipc officials announced that 518 organizations had enrolled in the program , which nipc officials view as an important element in building trust relationships with the private sector . strategic analysis to determine the potential broader implications of individual incidents has been limited . such analysis looks beyond one specific incident to consider a broader set of incidents or implications that may indicate a potential threat of national importance . identifying such threats assists in proactively managing risk , including evaluating the risks associated with possible future incidents and effectively mitigating the impact of such incidents . three factors have hindered the nipc's ability to develop strategic analytical capabilities . first , there is no generally accepted methodology for analyzing strategic cyber - based threats . for example , there is no standard terminology , no standard set of factors to consider , and no established thresholds for determining the sophistication of attack techniques . according to officials in the intelligence and national security community , developing such a methodology would require an intense interagency effort and dedication of resources . second , the nipc has sustained prolonged leadership vacancies and does not have adequate staff expertise , in part because other federal agencies had not provided the originally anticipated number of detailees . for example , as of the close of our review in february , the position of chief of the analysis and warning section , which was to be filled by the central intelligence agency , had been vacant for about half of the nipc's 3-year existence . in addition , the nipc had been operating with only 13 of the 24 analysts that nipc officials estimate are needed to develop analytical capabilities . third , the nipc did not have industry - specific data on factors such as critical system components , known vulnerabilities , and interdependencies . under pdd 63 , such information is to be developed for each of eight industry segments by industry representatives and the designated federal lead agencies . however , at the close of our work in february , only three industry assessments had been partially completed , and none had been provided to the nipc . to provide a warning capability , the nipc established a watch and warning unit that monitors the internet and other media 24 hours a day to identify reports of computer - based attacks . as of february , the unit had issued 81 warnings and related products since 1998 , many of which were posted on the nipc's internet web site . while some warnings were issued in time to avert damage , most of the warnings , especially those related to viruses , pertained to attacks underway .