broadcast hours . bbg officials told us that overlapping language services generally coordinate with one another to broadcast at different hours of the day to ensure that audiences are able to access programs from both services . for example , voa officials from the farsi language service told us that voa and rfe / rl collaborate to avoid overlap and do not broadcast on the radio simultaneously . bbg officials also said that overlapping services coordinate regarding their broadcast hours even if using different platforms . purpose and content . bbg officials said that voa and the grantee broadcasters have different purposes and that flexibility in their governing laws allows some overlapping content . the officials noted that according to those laws , voa must represent the united states , presenting and explaining the country's policies in addition to providing accurate news . in contrast , the grantee broadcasters , in their surrogate role , generally act as regional or local news providers , with less emphasis on international news and limited discussion of u.s. policies or interests . however , bbg officials noted that the entities' mandates and missions allows for some flexibility related to programming content . including a more in - depth and systematic assessment of overlapping language services in its annual language service review will provide bbg with an opportunity to balance these considerations , improve its operational efficiency , and maximize the impact of u.s. international broadcasting . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees and to bbg , state , and usaid . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . should you or your staff have questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3665 or dinapolit@gao.gov . bbg officials told us that this can lead to overlapping content . for example , officials from deewa radio ( voa ) stated that they sometimes cover the same news stories , with similar content , as radio mashaal ( rfe / rl ) in the same region . this report examines the extent to which ( 1 ) broadcasting board of governors ( bbg ) language services overlap with one another , and ( 2 ) bbg broadcasts in the same languages as other international broadcasters . to examine bbg language service overlap , we reviewed laws , reports , and other documents related to u.s. international broadcasting , including bbg's strategic plan for 2012-2016 and its 2011 annual language service review briefing book . in particular , we reviewed the united states international broadcasting act of 1994 , as amended , and other laws relevant to the five bbg entities — federal entities the voice of america ( voa ) and office of cuba broadcasting ( ocb ) , and nonprofit grantees middle east broadcasting networks , inc. ( mbn ) , radio free asia ( rfa ) , and radio free europe / radio liberty ( rfe / rl ) . although bbg has identified the need to reduce overlap among its broadcast entities' language services , bbg has not systematically considered the cost or impact of such overlap as part of its annual language service review process .