any remaining balance is distributed to the treasury . essentially , the capital surplus account represents earnings retained from prior years , and the undistributed net income represents earnings retained from the current year . both the capital surplus account and the undistributed net income account provide a cushion against losses . any reserve bank losses first reduce the undistributed net income account . the capital surplus account is then reduced if the undistributed net income account is not sufficient to absorb the loss . transfers of the reserve banks' net earnings to the treasury are classified as federal receipts . federal receipts consist mostly of individual and corporate income taxes and social insurance taxes but also include excise taxes , compulsory user charges , customs duties , court fines , certain license fees , and the federal reserve system's deposit of earnings . the treasury securities held by reserve banks are considered part of the federal debt held by the public . federal debt consists of securities issued by the treasury and a relatively small amount issued by a limited number of federal agencies . federal debt is categorized into debt held by the public and debt held by government accounts . debt held by the public is that part of the gross federal debt held outside of federal budget accounts , and this includes any federal debt held by individuals , corporations , state or local governments , the federal reserve system , and foreign governments and central banks . the consolidated appropriations act of 2000 directed the reserve banks to transfer to the treasury additional surplus funds of $3.752 billion during fiscal year 2000 . the federal reserve system transferred the funds on may 10 , 2000 . under the act , the reserve banks were not permitted to replenish their accounts during fiscal year 2000 . once the reserve banks were legally permitted to replenish the accounts , they did . by december 31 , 2000 , the capital surplus account was replenished for 11 of the 12 reserve banks . the federal reserve system maintains a capital surplus account to provide additional capital to cushion against potential losses . however , federal reserve board officials have noted that it can be argued that a central bank , including the federal reserve system , may not need to hold capital to absorb losses , mainly because a central bank can create additional domestic currency to meet any obligation denominated in that currency . federal reserve board officials acknowledged that determining the appropriate level of a central bank's capital account is difficult . the federal reserve board's policy of maintaining the capital surplus account at the same level as that of the paid - in capital account has resulted in the capital surplus account growing from $4.5 billion in 1996 to $7.3 billion in 2001 . the federal reserve system maintains the capital surplus account primarily as a cushion against losses . the financial accounting manual for federal reserve banks states that the primary purpose of the federal reserve capital surplus account is to provide capital to supplement paid - in capital for use in the event of loss .