separations . this technical area focuses on developing new separations ( i.e. , reprocessing ) methods that enable the recycling and / or transmutation of key nuclear fuel constituents ( eg , actinides ) . these methods must be economical ( i.e. , involve minimal processing ) ; minimize waste streams and volumes ; and enable the effective safeguarding of fissile material . doe identified several challenges associated with this technical area , such as capturing off - gases resulting from reprocessing and developing separation processes that are more proliferation resistant for minor actinides . waste forms . this technical area focuses on developing new technologies for mixing high - level radioactive waste with different materials , such as ceramics , glass , glass - ceramics , and metals , to derive a waste form that can maintain stability and durability under long - term exposure to high levels of radiation , among other things , and to understand their performance in complex geologic settings . among the challenges doe identified are significantly reducing the volume of high - and low - level wastes and improving the durability of waste forms containing the most radiotoxic ( and nonradioactive toxic ) components to allow for a wide range of disposal options . storage and disposal . in this area , doe plans to conduct research to identify storage and disposal alternatives and develop technology to enable the storage , transportation , and disposal of spent nuclear fuel and wastes generated by existing and future nuclear fuel cycles . challenges doe identified in its r&d plan include providing a sound technical basis for absolute confidence in the safety and security of long - term storage , transportation , and permanent disposal of used nuclear fuel and wastes from the nuclear energy enterprise and integrating waste management with no or minimal radioactive releases from storage and disposal systems . transmutation technologies . this technical area focuses on developing systems including nuclear reactors that would transmute radioactive materials recovered from spent fuel to significantly reduce their radioactivity . according to doe's r&d plan , the challenges presented in this area include developing transmutation options that meet a broad range of fuel cycle strategies and developing transmutation options that efficiently generate electricity at a cost similar to that of light - water reactors . materials , protection , control , and accountability technology . this research area focuses on developing new processes and technologies to account for and protect nuclear materials from proliferation and terrorism risks . according to doe's r&d plan , challenges include developing online , real - time , continuous accountability instruments and techniques that significantly improve the ability to inventory fissile materials in domestic fuel cycle systems in order to detect diversion and prevent misuse . according to french government and nuclear energy officials and subject matter experts , france has decades of experience with reprocessing and recycling spent nuclear fuel . this appendix discusses ( 1 ) france's nuclear energy industry and the relevant oversight entities and ( 2 ) france's experiences with reprocessing and recycling facilities .