these three projects are described below . ready retirement is a project that automates the processing of retirement applications . it allows individuals to file for benefits using a web interface . this investment is expected to increase online claims filing , minimize the number of recontacts required to complete an application , and provide progress indicators to inform applicants of where they are in the application process . ready retirement is intended to prepare the agency for the growing retirement workload expected as baby boomers become eligible for retirement by enabling applicants to prepare their own applications . according to the agency , this project is estimated to require about 27 staff years for fiscal year 2008 , which corresponds to costs of about $3.1 million . ( see fig . 2 for the five itim stages of maturity. ) this framework is grounded in our research of it investment management practices of leading private and public sector organizations . the framework can be used to assess the maturity of an agency's investment management processes and as a tool for organizational improvement . the overriding purpose of the framework is to encourage investment processes that increase business value and mission performance , reduce risk , and increase accountability and transparency in the decision process . we have used the framework in many of our evaluations , and a number of agencies have adopted it . itim's five maturity stages represent steps toward achieving stable and mature processes for managing it investments . each stage builds on the lower stages and the successful attainment of each stage leads to improvement in the organization's ability to manage its investments . with the exception of stage 1 , each maturity stage is composed of “critical processes” that must be implemented and institutionalized in order for the organization to achieve that stage . these critical processes are further broken down into key practices that describe the types of activities that an organization should be performing to successfully implement each critical process . it is not unusual for an organization to perform key practices from more than one maturity stage at the same time . however , our research has shown that agency efforts to improve investment management capabilities should focus on implementing all lower stage practices before addressing the higher stage practices . figure 2 provides an overview of the five itim stages of maturity and the critical processes associated with each stage . in the itim framework , stage 2 critical processes lay the foundation for sound it investment management by helping the agency to attain successful , predictable , and repeatable investment management processes at the project level . specifically , stage 2 encompasses building a sound investment management foundation by establishing basic capabilities for selecting new it projects . this stage also involves developing the capability to control projects so that they finish predictably within established cost and schedule expectations and developing the capability to identify potential exposures to risk and put in place strategies to mitigate that risk . it also involves instituting an it investment board , which includes defining its membership , guidance policies , operations , roles , responsibilities , and authorities .