i for a description of these programs. ) some programs use offset provisions to ensure that the total benefits received from two programs do not exceed the total income received while working . for example , the social security disability insurance ( di ) program provides benefits to insured persons to replace the income lost when they are unable to work because of physical or mental impairments . in addition to di benefits , some individuals may also be eligible for workers' compensation ( wc ) if the illness or injury is work - related . wc benefits are designed to replace the loss of earnings resulting from work - related illnesses or injuries . www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 03-575t . to view the full report , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . for more information , contact cynthia a. bascetta at ( 202 ) 512-7101 . third , such increased demand would come at a time when the va disability program compensation , along with other federal disability programs , is facing the need for more fundamental reform . modifying the concurrent receipt provisions adds to the current patchwork of federal disability policies and programs at a time when transformation and modernization are needed . while we are not taking a position on whether military retirement should be modified , as the congress and other policymakers deliberate this issue , it would be appropriate to consider how modifying the offset would affect the pursuit of more fundamental reforms . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: thank you for inviting me to discuss issues involved with the concurrent receipt of military retirement pay from the department of defense ( dod ) and disability compensation from the department of veterans affairs ( va ) . pending legislation would modify current law , which requires that military retirement pay be reduced by the amount of va disability compensation benefit received . you asked us to discuss the treatment of concurrent benefit receipt in other programs as well as our broader work on federal disability programs . to help you in your deliberations on this matter , i will explain the use of offset provisions in other federal benefit programs as well as in state and private sector programs . i will also discuss some of the implications of modifying the concurrent receipt provisions for the va disability compensation program . in addition , i will address the more fundamental problems facing va's disability program . my statement is based on a review of gao reports on workers' compensation , social security , and va benefit programs and other literature relating to dod retirement and va disability compensation . i will also draw on our broader work on federal disability programs , which we recently designated as high - risk because they are not well positioned to provide meaningful and timely support to americans with disabilities ( see related gao products ) . our work for this testimony was conducted in march 2003 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary , three factors are important to weigh in your deliberations on the merits of modifying the military retirement offset provision .