preclearance . preclearance locations operate at foreign airports and serve as u.s. poes . preclearance operations began in 1952 in toronto to facilitate trade and travel between the united states and canada . as of april 2016 , cbp operates 15 air preclearance locations in six countries . through the preclearance program , uniformed cbp officers at a foreign airport exercise u.s. legal authorities to inspect travelers and luggage and make admissibility determinations prior to an individual boarding a plane to the united states . according to cbp officials , an inspection at a preclearance location is the same inspection an individual would undergo at a domestic poe , and officers conducting preclearance inspections exercise the same authority as officers at domestic poes to approve or deny admission into the united states . ( 3 ) how does cbp plan to expand its air predeparture programs ? this report is a public version of a sensitive report that we issued in september of 2016 . cbp deemed some of the information in that report as sensitive security information and law enforcement sensitive , both of which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits sensitive information about cbp's efforts to target and interdict high - risk passengers prior to departing for the united states . although the information provided in this report is more limited in scope , it addresses the same questions as the sensitive report . also , the overall methodology used for both reports is the same . to determine how cbp identifies high - risk travelers before they board u.s. - bound flights , we reviewed documentation related to cbp's efforts to identify high - risk travelers before they board u.s. - bound flights , such as cbp's 2015 predeparture targeting standard operating procedures and guidance on targeting effort development and implementation . this report addresses the following questions: ( 1 ) how does cbp identify high - risk travelers before they board u.s. - bound flights ? ( 2 ) what have been the results of cbp's air predeparture programs , and to what extent does cbp have measures to assess the programs' performance ? we also reviewed applicable federal statutes , regulations , and dhs privacy documents related to cbp's predeparture targeting efforts . in addition , we reviewed documentation on cbp's processes for developing , implementing , and reviewing its targeting efforts . we interviewed senior cbp officials responsible for leading cbp's targeting efforts at the national targeting center ( ntc ) to better understand the process by which ntc develops , implements , and oversees the targeting process and observed the predeparture targeting process . we also interviewed and received documentation from dhs's office of general counsel regarding its oversight of cbp's targeting and identification efforts . to determine the results of cbp's air predeparture programs , we reviewed cbp documents , policies , and procedures regarding the management and operations of cbp's predeparture programs , including standard operating procedures and strategic planning documents . we also interviewed cbp headquarters officials responsible for managing cbp's predeparture programs .