they did not identify any that described title i expenditures . we reviewed findings from education's fiscal year 2009 monitoring efforts , audits conducted by education's office of the inspector general from fiscal years 2003 to 2009 that included a review of fiscal controls over title i funds , and data on school district single audits for fiscal year 2009 to determine whether title i funds were used in accordance with relevant requirements . findings from each of these oversight tools provide useful information about types of noncompliance seen among local school districts , but it is important to note that they are not designed to provide estimates of the extent or severity of such noncompliance . school districts expending at least $500,000 in federal funds are required to obtain a single audit and file audit results with the federal audit clearinghouse , which has been designated as the central collection point , repository , and distribution center for single audit reports and maintains a database of single audit results . to describe the results of single audits , we analyzed selected data that were reported to the federal audit clearinghouse by school districts . we assessed the reliability of the federal audit clearinghouse data on single audits by ( 1 ) performing electronic testing of required data elements , ( 2 ) reviewing existing information about the data and system that produced them , and ( 3 ) interviewing u.s. census bureau officials knowledgeable about the database . overall title i budget ( showing discretionary and required reservations ) . geographic category: city ( midsize ) total schools in district: 47 number of schools receiving title i funds: 47 ( 100% ) . supplemental educational services ( 3 vendors ) . title i staff ( full - time equivalents ) . overall title i budget ( showing discretionary and required reservations ) . geographic category: suburb ( large ) number of schools receiving title i funds: 12 ( 35% ) schoolwide programs: 5 ( 42% ) targeted assistance programs: 7 ( 58% ) . title i staff ( full - time equivalents ) . overall title i budget ( showing discretionary and required reservations ) . geographic category: suburb ( midsize ) total schools in district: 19 number of schools receiving title i funds: 5 ( 26% ) schoolwide programs: 3 ( 60% ) targeted assistance programs: 2 ( 40% ) . title i staff ( full - time equivalents ) administrative positions ( < 1 clerical ) . overall title i budget ( showing discretionary and required reservations ) . geographic category: city ( large ) total schools in district: 99 number of schools receiving title i funds: 33 ( 33% ) schoolwide programs: 31 ( 94% ) targeted assistance programs: 2 ( 6% ) . supplemental educational services ( 4 vendors ) . title i staff ( full - time equivalents ) . overall title i budget ( showing discretionary and required reservations ) .