diversion . in total , we estimate that about 2 of every 3 of the hospitals in our survey universe went on diversion at least once during fiscal year 2001 . as part of our survey , we examined what percentage of emergency patients who boarded spent 2 hours or more in boarding status and the average number of hours patients boarded . as figure 3 shows , while many hospitals reported boarding less than 25 percent of boarded patients for 2 hours or more in the past 12 months , about one - third of them reported boarding 75 percent or more of their boarded patients for that long . about 1 in every 5 hospitals reported an average boarding time in their emergency departments of 8 hours or more . what factors contribute to emergency department crowding ? what actions have hospitals and communities taken to address crowding ? to conduct this work , we sent a mail questionnaire to all community hospitals located in msas that reported having emergency departments in 2000 — more than 2,000 hospitals in all , of which about 74 percent responded . the survey collected information related to three indicators of crowding: ( 1 ) the number of hours on diversion , ( 2 ) the percentage of patients who were boarding in the emergency department for 2 hours or more and the average number of hours boarded , and ( 3 ) the proportion of patients who left before a medical evaluation . in analyzing these responses , we weighted responses to adjust for a lower response rate from investor - owned ( for - profit ) hospitals to provide estimates for the universe of hospitals . to examine which factors contributed to crowding , we analyzed information provided by the surveyed hospitals and other data on hospital and msa characteristics . to provide information on actions taken by hospitals and communities to address crowding , as well as emergency medical services ( ems ) systems and diversion at the community level , we conducted site visits in six locations where problems had been reported regarding crowded emergency departments — atlanta , boston , cleveland , los angeles , miami , and phoenix . we selected these sites because they varied in geographic location , proportion of people without health insurance , population , and recent population growth . in these locations , we interviewed ems officials , professional associations , and hospital officials , and we observed emergency departments in 24 hospitals . we supplemented this work with analysis of existing national data and reviews of relevant studies . we also interviewed persons knowledgeable about the issues , including health services researchers ; representatives from hospital associations , provider associations , and emergency medical associations ; and federal , state , and local health officials . appendix i explains our methodology in more detail . we conducted our work from july 2001 through february 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in 2000 , about 3,900 nonfederal , general medical hospitals nationwide reported providing emergency care in emergency departments . of these , just over half were located in msas .