ceiling prices . ceiling prices restrict market negotiations by setting maximum prices purchasers can pay for drugs . ceiling prices allow purchasers to negotiate lower prices directly with drug manufacturers . one approach is for a government to set prices for drugs and prohibit sales at greater prices . in france and australia , for example , a government committee sets the prices at which drugs must be purchased and reimbursed . alternatively , a government may set a price ceiling and allow purchasers to negotiate more favorable prices with manufacturers directly . in canada , the patented medicines prices review board sets the maximum price a manufacturer can charge direct purchasers . it can impose fines on any manufacturer that attempts to sell a drug at a price greater than the established ceiling . an additional method used to control prices is for a government to set reimbursement rates for new drugs at low levels ; because any price above the set reimbursement rate would be an out - of - pocket expense to the consumer , the reimbursement rate effectively becomes the market price . reference prices . reference prices use local or international price comparisons of drugs classified in the same therapeutic group to determine a single or maximum price for all drugs in that group . the therapeutic group of drugs can encompass old and new drugs , including brand or generic drugs . the lowest priced drug may then establish the maximum price for the entire therapeutic group . germany , for example , sets such prices based on local price comparisons of drugs classified in the same therapeutic group . profit limits . profit limits control the amount of profit a drug manufacturer may earn on a product or within a specified period of time . if the established threshold is exceeded , the manufacturer is required to accept a price cut or pay rebates to the government . in the united kingdom , for example , there are limits on the profits that a drug manufacturer can earn on sales to the national health service . several other key factors can influence drug price negotiations in oecd countries . unlike the united states , many oecd countries , such as australia and france , have universal health care systems that allow a mandated , relatively more unified approach to drug pricing . while these countries vary in their government's respective share of drug spending , some set national , uniform maximum prices to be paid by all purchasers , including private payers . many countries also establish national formularies that define which drugs are to be covered by all purchasers . in the united states , private payers represent the largest source of prescription drug spending . these payers , including employer - based health plans and private health insurers , typically contract with pbms to help manage their prescription drug benefits . pbms employ several cost containment strategies for lowering drug prices for the health plans and enrollees they represent . pbms negotiate rebates or payments with manufacturers and prices with networks of retail and mail - order pharmacies , passing along at least some of the savings to health plans and enrollees .