what remains to be done housing . a november 2000 report by a consultant reported , among other things , that hud has an opportunity to strengthen and sustain the reform by addressing the concerns that remain among the employees . this service was not created . we have continued to find problems in hud's ability to effectively manage and monitor its contracts , which indicate that additional work needs to be done in this area . for example , hud has experienced problems with adequately monitoring the performance of its contractors who manage and market the single - family homes hud acquires following foreclosures and ensuring contract inspections of multifamily properties were done consistently with hud's requirements . hud has not been able to get all the section 8 contract administrators on board , although they were expected to have been awarded in fiscal year 2000 . in march 2000 , the hud oig stated that despite the contracting reforms , hud had not substantially improved its contracting attitudes and practices . not applicable reform 2: modernize and integrate hud's outdated financial management systems with an efficient , state of the art system . status of reform / accomplishments hud reported to us that it considers this goal to have been met . hud substantially rescoped its financial systems integration ( fsi ) project to focus on achieving a compliant general ledger and subsequently completed the project in november 2000 . as stated above , hud rescoped its systems integration project to focus on achieving a general ledger that is compliant with federal financial standards and completed the project in november 2000 . hud has developed a new vision to replace its systems integration strategy and has purchased commercial off - the - shelf software to address its financial systems needs and develop a systems architecture within which to manage future development . hud established an office of chief information officer ( cio ) , and centralized information technology development activity within that office . according to the cfo , this was not a single plan but a series of activities designed to improve hud's risk management and oversight of its programs . these activities included revision of hud's management control handbook and related training ; developing risk - based monitoring tools , guidance and training ; including risk management staff in hud's quality management reviews , and initiating a “control structure design project” to document the control structure of hud's programs . hud has also initiated a compliance and monitoring initiative to focus staff attention on monitoring training and initiated quality management reviews of field offices . what remains to be done both we and the oig report that hud faces significant systems limitations , such that substantial work remains for hud to have a common , consolidated financial management information system that supports program management decision - making and financial management . hud has continued to experience difficulties in trying to improve its systems . both we and the hud oig continue to report that hud's information and financial management systems are not yet complete and reliable . in our january 2001 report , we reported that hud needs to deploy a reliable financial management system that meets its program and financial management needs and complies with federal requirements .