of the systems . the navy has not yet decided which one of the two lcs seaframes it will buy for the remainder of the program , leading to uncertainty about the effects of this program decision on the operating and support cost estimates developed to date . also , the navy has not yet decided what it will do over the long term with the two ships of the design that is not chosen . the navy currently plans to deploy these two ships as they become available , according to navy officials . since the two designs will require separate training facilities and core crew , and since each design has unique equipment and therefore different maintenance requirements , continuing to support both designs may carry a cost premium . likewise , deciding which one of the two lcs seaframes to buy is likely to , in turn , affect decisions on issues such as infrastructure and training requirements , with accompanying cost implications . the navy's force structure analyses supporting the planned purchase quantities of mission packages are incomplete , adding to uncertainty about costs in future budget years . our prior work has shown that a knowledge - based decision - making process can help provide a comprehensive analytic basis for an acquisition program , including determining the optimum quantities of lcs seaframes and mission packages . this information in turn can help decision makers evaluate the affordability of the lcs program and establish funding priorities . navy officials from two divisions within the office of the chief of naval operations — the surface warfare division and the assessments division — said they were unaware of any analysis supporting the total planned quantities for either the surface warfare package or its maritime security module . also , navy officials said that the navy has not performed a force structure analysis on the antisubmarine package because the contents are under development . the navy has not performed a complete analysis of lcs seaframe and mission package quantities because certain information needed for the analyses was not yet available , including decisions on potential changes to program operating assumptions and requirements . further , an analysis of lcs seaframe and mission package quantities is not included in the assessments division's fiscal year 2010 agenda . the planned force structure of 55 lcs seaframes is based on a 2005 analysis of requirements for responding to possible overseas conflicts and meeting overseas presence requirements , which officials said they revalidated in 2007 and 2008 . figure 1 shows each of the seaframes . by the end of fiscal year 2015 , the navy plans to have bought up to 23 of the planned 55 ships . these ships represent a significant investment in the lcs program not only for procurement but also for long - term operating and support costs . a weapon system's life - cycle costs include research and development , procurement , military construction , operations and support , and disposal . since operating and support costs are historically the largest portion ( over 70 percent ) of a weapon system's lifetime costs , these costs were the focus of our analysis of the navy's lcs cost estimates .