( recommendation 3 ) . we provided a draft of our report to dhs for comment . dhs also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated , as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and to the acting secretary of homeland security . in addition , this report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / gao.gov . in written comments , which are included in appendix i , dhs concurred with our three recommendations and described steps they plan to take to address them . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or russellw@gao.gov . tsa i&a officials stated that they have plans to do so in fall 2019 . tsa i&a's standard operating procedures establish two situation - dependent processes for reviewing and approving rule changes , as shown in figure 2 . first , under standard circumstances , tsa i&a's standard operating procedures detail a four - part vetting process by which tsa i&a drafts support for the rule change and it is subsequently approved by tsa chief counsel , the tsa i&a assistant administrator , and ultimately tsa senior leadership . tsa procedures specify that in standard circumstances , all rule changes are to be supported and approved in writing prior to implementation . according to the officials , monitoring list size and the number of rules triggered by passengers' travel allowed them to identify and correct this error within 10 days of identifying the system error . tsa i&a has not identified a means to comprehensively measure rule effectiveness . tsa i&a officials explained that they would find it helpful to demonstrate the effectiveness of the program , but had not yet done so because it was difficult to measure . appendix ii: gao contacts and staff acknowledgments error ! no text of specified style in document . william russell , ( 202 ) 512-8777 or russellw@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above claudia becker , assistant director ; imoni hampton , analyst - in - charge ; melissa greenaway , john de ferrari , michele fejfar , eric hauswirth , tom lombardi , and kevin reeves made key contributions to this work . secure flight also randomly identifies passengers for enhanced screening . although subject to the same screening measures as high risk passengers , they have not been determined to be high risk . similarly , individuals included on the silent partner and quiet skies lists have not been determined to be of high risk , but rather have been identified using rules based on current intelligence and other factors that may indicate an elevated risk . tsa leverages cbp information and targeting capabilities to create the silent partner list . specifically , tsa leverages ( 1 ) data cbp collects regarding passengers traveling internationally ( such as citizenship , passport country of issuance , and address information ) , and ( 2 ) cbp's automated targeting system .