dod agreed with the recommendation . in an email , a dpc official stated that dcma and dcaa are collaborating to determine the best way to implement the recommendation . dod's comments are reprinted in appendix i . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the acting secretary of defense ; the under secretary of defense for acquisition and sustainment ; the under secretary of defense – comptroller ; the director , dcma ; the director , dcaa ; and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or by e - mail at dinapolit@gao.gov . the number of criteria varies by system . for example , the dfars clause for accounting systems includes 18 criteria used to evaluate system features such as proper segregation of direct and indirect costs , timekeeping , and exclusion of unallowable costs . for evm systems , a contractor's system must comply with private , institutional standards and includes procedures that generate timely , reliable , and verifiable reports . to test how dcaa - led audits were being implemented under these new criteria , dcaa began a pilot program in 2014 comprised of a team of dedicated auditors to conduct cbs reviews who , in turn , were to recommend changes in audit plans and other practices . such information could help inform more strategic oversight to determine whether the current cbs review process is achieving intended results , or whether additional changes to the timing of or criteria for conducting cbs reviews are needed . as the agency that is responsible for issuing the overarching policies that govern cbs reviews and is ultimately responsible for approving contractor business systems , dcma is in the best position to lead the effort to develop this mechanism . as each agency is responsible for executing its mission and managing its resources , however , this effort should be conducted in collaboration with dcaa . we recommend that the director , dcma , in collaboration with the director , dcaa , develop a mechanism to monitor and assess whether contractor business systems reviews are being completed in a timely manner . ( recommendation 1 ) . contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report were tatiana winger ( assistant director ) , emily bond , matthew t. crosby , suellen foth , sameena ismailjee , jean mcsween , ramzi nemo , miranda riemer , christy smith , roxanna sun , tom twambly , and jacqueline wade . eventually the contractor's accounting system was approved in june 2018 . in another case , a contractor's estimating system has been disapproved for over 5 years . in june 2013 , dcaa identified four significant deficiencies in the contractor's system , including inadequate support for commerciality determinations . as a result , following a final determination of inadequacy , dcma implemented a payment withhold of 5 percent .