explosive detection systems include eds and etd machines . eds machines , which cost approximately $1 million each , use computer - aided tomography x - rays adapted from the medical field to automatically recognize the characteristic signatures of threat explosives . by taking the equivalent of hundreds of x - ray pictures of a bag from different angles , the eds machine examines the objects inside of the baggage to identify characteristic signatures of threat explosives . tsa certified , procured , and deployed eds machines manufactured by two companies , and has recently certified a smaller , less costly eds machine , which is currently being operationally tested . etd machines , which cost approximately $40,000 each , work by detecting vapors and residues of explosives . because human operators collect samples by rubbing bags with swabs , which are then chemically analyzed in the etd machines to identify any traces of explosive materials , the use of etd is more labor - intensive and subject to more human error than the automated process of using eds machines . etd is used both for primary , or the initial , screening of checked baggage , as well as secondary screening , which resolves alarms from eds machines that indicate the possible presence of explosives inside a bag . tsa has certified , procured , and deployed etd machines from three manufacturers . as a result , it would take three to five etd machines to screen the same number of bags that one stand - alone eds machine could process . in addition , greater use of the stand - alone eds machines could reduce staffing requirements . for example , one stand - alone eds machine would potentially require 6 to 14 fewer screeners than would be required to screen the same number of bags at a screening station with three to five etd machines . this calculation is based on tsa estimates that 4.1 screeners are required to support each primary screening etd machine , while one stand - alone eds machine requires 6.75 screeners — including staff needed to operate etd machines required to provide secondary screening . without a plan for installing in - line eds baggage screening systems , and for using additional stand - alone eds systems in place of etd machines at the nation's airports , it is unclear how tsa will make use of new technologies for screening checked baggage for explosives , such as the smaller and faster eds machines that may become available through tsa's research and development programs . for example , tsa is working with private sector firms to enhance existing eds systems and develop new screening technologies through its research and development ( r&d ) efforts . as part of these efforts , in fiscal year 2003 , tsa spent almost $2.4 million to develop a new computer - aided tomography explosives detection system that is smaller and lighter than systems currently deployed in airport lobbies . the new system is intended to replace systems currently in use , including larger and heavier eds machines and etd equipment . the smaller size of the system creates opportunities for tsa to transfer screening operations to other locations such as airport check - in counters .