rather , they are requests for staffing levels or other services . however , when irs streamlined the menu in mid - february , it noted a decline in the hang - up rate , which may indicate that taxpayers were frustrated or confused by the menu . although irs assists many callers through automated services — almost 18.2 million calls were answered by automation on the three main assistance lines and the teletax line as of march 2 , 2002 — irs's measures only deal with the service provided by assistors . irs discontinued measuring the level of service provided through automation because this year's data are not comparable to 2001 . contrary to what its name implies , the csr level of service measure does not reflect only those calls handled by assistors . some calls handled through automation are counted as having been answered in computing this measure . because it includes calls answered through automation , the csr level of service measure may be overestimating the rate at which assistors are responding to taxpayers . because we recognize that it is important to limit the number of performance measures to the vital few , we are not recommending that irs take any action at this time with respect to the matters discussed above . at your request , mr. chairman , we are reviewing irs's filing season performance measures , including its telephone measures , and plan to issue a report later this year on our results . so far this filing season , taxpayers in the queue for telephone assistance are spending less time waiting to talk with an assistor and are getting accurate answers to their tax law questions more often than last year . at the same time , however , the overall rate at which callers are reaching an assistor is lower because many callers are unable to get into the queue for assistance . telephone assistance is a significant part of irs's work . irs also required assistors to be certified that they successfully completed necessary training and could accurately answer calls in their assigned topics and used its computer - based call routing system to help ensure that assistors answered calls only in those topics for which they had been certified . some officials opined that improvements in accessibility may be linked to irs's efforts to establish new performance measures and goals for the call sites this year . for example , each site has a goal for the total number of calls its assistors are to answer in a fiscal year . irs officials say the new measures have led to improved performance by giving the call sites a clearer understanding of what they are expected to achieve and how their performance helps irs achieve its goals . irs executives in the wage and investment and small business / self - employed divisions said that they believe that irs has been successful in getting employees at all levels of the telephone service organizations to understand and accept the measures and contribute to achieving the goals .