and analysis program . for example we found that tsa did not randomly select airports to participate in the study , so the results were not generalizeable across airports . in addition , we found that tsa collected the validation study data unevenly and experienced challenges in collecting an adequate sample size for the randomly selected passengers , facts that might have further affected the representativeness of the findings . according to established evaluation design practices , data collection should be sufficiently free of bias or other significant errors that could lead to inaccurate conclusions . in our december 2014 report we concluded that ensuring the planned effectiveness testing of the managed inclusion process adheres to established evaluation design practices would help tsa provide reasonable assurance that the effectiveness testing will yield reliable results . the specific design limitations we identified in tsa's previous studies of advanced imaging technology and behavior detection and analysis program may or may not be relevant design issues for an assessment of the effectiveness of the managed inclusion process , as evaluation design necessarily differs based on the scope and nature of the question being addressed . in general , evaluations are most likely to be successful when key steps are addressed during design , including defining research questions appropriate to the scope of the evaluation , and selecting appropriate measures and study approaches that will permit valid conclusions . as a result , we recommended that to ensure that tsa's planned testing yields reliable results , the tsa administrator take steps to ensure that tsa's planned effectiveness testing of the managed inclusion process adheres to established evaluation design practices . dhs concurred with our recommendations and began taking steps to ensure that its planned effectiveness testing of the managed inclusion process adheres to established evaluation practices . specifically , dhs stated that tsa plans to use a test and evaluation process — which calls for the preparation of test and evaluation framework documents including plans , analyses , and a final report describing the test results — for its planned effectiveness testing of managed inclusion . chairman katko , ranking member rice , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . for questions about this statement , please contact jennifer grover at ( 202 ) 512-7141 or groverj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this statement include glenn davis ( assistant director ) , brendan kretzschmar , ellen wolfe , david alexander , thomas lombardi , susan hsu , caroline neidhold , and serena epstein . key contributors for the previous work that this testimony is based on are listed in each product . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .