gao 10-123 . washington , d.c.: october 7 , 2009 . homeland defense: u.s. northern command has a strong exercise program , but involvement of interagency partners and states can be improved . gao - 09-849 . washington , d.c.: september 9 , 2009 . see figure 1 . dod is a supporting agency which provides assistance to the lead federal agency for a specific civil support mission . washington , d.c.: april 30 , 2009 . dod provides support to dhs and other federal agencies for the defense portion of the federal response to a major disaster or emergency or special event when ( 1 ) state , local , and other federal resources are overwhelmed or unique defense capabilities are required ; ( 2 ) assistance is requested by the lead federal agency ; or ( 3 ) u.s. northern command is directed to do so by the president or the secretary of defense . the federal government's response to major disasters and emergencies in the united states is guided by dhs's national response framework , which involves a tiered series of responses , beginning with local authorities , state authorities , and outside assistance from other states . in accordance with the national response framework and applicable laws including the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act ) , various federal agencies may play lead or supporting roles , based on their authorities and resources , and the nature of the threat or incident . for example , dhs manages the federal response to terrorist attacks and major disasters . in some instances , national defense assets may be needed to assist dhs or another agency in the national response to an incident . defense resources are committed after dod is directed to do so by the president or the secretary of defense . when deciding to commit defense resources to a request for assistance by a lead federal agency , dod officials evaluate the request against 6 criteria: legality , lethality , risk , cost , military readiness , and appropriateness of the circumstances . if it is determined that defense assistance is appropriate , typically u.s. northern command and u.s. pacific command are responsible for leading dod's response within their designated areas of responsibility . in most cases , support will be localized , limited , and specific . figure 2 illustrates relevant portions of the areas of responsibility for u.s. northern command and u.s. pacific command a number of dod organizations have key roles and responsibilities in the homeland defense and civil support missions . the office of the assistant secretary of defense for homeland defense and americas' security affairs serves as the principal civilian advisor to the secretary of defense and the office of the under secretary of defense for policy on homeland defense and civil support matters , among other things . the assistant secretary of defense for global strategic affairs is the principal advisor to the under secretary of defense for policy and the secretary of defense responsible for formulating and coordinating dod strategy and policy on issues such as countering weapons of mass destruction , nuclear deterrence and missile defense , cyber security and space policy .