, damages and benefits ) . , 3 percent ) used to calculate the central value of the social cost of carbon estimates is consistent with circular a - 4 guidance . some working group participants told us that they recognized the importance of using omb guidance , including circular a - 4 , in developing the technical support document . the technical support document states that the working group decided to calculate estimates for several discount rates ( 2.5 , 3 , and 5 percent ) because the academic literature shows that the social cost of carbon is highly sensitive to the discount rate chosen , and because no consensus exists on the appropriate rate . it further states that , in light of such uncertainties , the working group determined that these three discount rates reflect reasonable judgments about the appropriate rate to use . several participants stated that the working group chose this approach to capture varied concerns and interests , including participants' respective knowledge of the academic literature , on selecting the discount rate . once the working group agreed on these modeling inputs , epa officials supervised their use in running the models to calculate the social cost of carbon estimates . several participants said that a significant amount of the group's discussions focused on selecting discount rates that best reflect the most current academic literature , while also comporting with omb's guidance in circular a - 4 . the technical support document cites guidance from circular a - 4 in its discussion of many technical topics , including its selection of discount rates . it states that the discount rate ( i.e. all other model assumptions and features were unchanged by the working group , which weighted each model equally to calculate the final estimates . several participants stated that an important principle for the leaders of the working group was that the working group reach consensus on the modeling inputs before running the models and agree , in advance , to accept the results based on the inputs selected , whatever the outcome . over the years , there have been opportunities for public comment on the various individually developed and working group estimates of the social cost of carbon for regulatory impact analysis , and several participants stated that these estimates were developed with input from the public . since 2008 , agencies have published over three dozen regulatory actions for public comment in the federal register that use various social cost of carbon estimates in regulatory impact analyses . while some of them specifically sought comments on the development of the social cost of carbon estimates used , and others did not , these regulatory actions were open to public comment , in general , for approximately 60 days and , according to omb staff and other participants , agencies received many comments on the estimates through this process . several participants stated that , while they discussed such public comments during working group meetings , individual agencies typically do not coordinate formally with other agencies on their reviews of comments received . according to the technical support document , the working group convened , in part , to consider public comments on issues related to the social cost of carbon .