we disagree with this characterization . the seven rules we reviewed represent more than one - third of the 20 economically significant rules epa finalized from 2009 through 2011 , the period from which we sampled rules . in addition , four of the rules had economic effects of over $1 billion , a threshold beyond which omb guidance directs agencies to conduct additional analysis because of the significance of these effects . epa correctly stated that our findings cannot be generalized , which we acknowledged in our report . also in its comments on our findings concerning rias , epa stated that the report suggests that the agency's use of the discount rates in the interagency support document for the social cost of carbon raised questions about the agency's adherence to omb circular a - 4 and about the consistency of analysis in certain rias . we believe that our report includes a robust discussion of this issue and related context . specifically , our report describes the fact that epa relied on two different guidance documents — omb circular a - 4 and a technical support document that was developed by omb and the white house council of economic advisers — for estimating certain benefits and costs . in this context , we identified a challenge related to the clarity of the relationship between these two documents that can lead to confusion about whether epa adhered to omb circular a - 4 — the primary guidance document that agencies should use when conducting economic analysis . we therefore recommended that omb enhance the clarity of the relationship between the two documents . regarding the third recommendation to the epa administrator , in its comment letter , epa stated that the agency agreed with the importance of making continual improvements in valuing the benefits and costs of its regulatory actions and is constantly working to improve in these areas . the agency also stated that it will continue to invest in areas that will support improvements in its ability to quantify important benefits and costs , including areas we identified such as water quality benefits and hazardous chemical impacts . in its comments on our related findings concerning the monetization of benefits and costs , epa accurately characterized the flexibility agencies have to design analyses in ways that optimize the use of limited resources while providing appropriate information about policy options . furthermore , our report acknowledges this flexibility and identifies challenges epa faces in monetizing certain types of benefits . in some cases , however , epa was not able to monetize benefits and costs related to the primary purpose or key impacts of the regulatory action . in these cases , our report points out that this can limit the usefulness of rias in helping decision makers and the public understand the potential effects of epa rules .