subsequently , this same contractor defaulted under that contract . ofpp generally views the completion of contractor performance assessments as a contracting officer function . however , many contracting officials we talked with stated they often do not have the required information to complete an assessment and have to rely on program officials to provide the information . some contracting offices delegated responsibility for completing assessments to the program office but acknowledged program office officials have little incentive to complete assessments because they often did not see the value in them . we previously reported in 2005 that conducting contactor surveillance at dod , which includes documenting contractor performance , was not a high priority and that accountability for performing contractor surveillance was lacking . differing number and type of rating factors and rating scales agencies use to document contractor performance limit the usefulness of the information in ppirs . nasa's ppdb system has four rating factors , and the cps database , which is used by other civilian agencies , has five rating factors . in contrast , dod's cpars system has a total of 16 rating factors . subsequently , ofpp issued a draft contractor performance guide in 2006 designed to help agencies know their role in addressing and using contractor performance information . however , the guide was not intended to , nor does it , establish governmentwide roles and responsibilities for managing and overseeing ppirs data . since 2005 , several efforts have been initiated to improve ppirs and provide pertinent and timely performance information , but little progress has been made . several broad goals for system improvement , established in 2005 by an ofpp interagency group , have yet to be met . likewise , a short - term goal of revising the far to mandate the use of ppirs by all government agencies has yet to be achieved . ofpp acknowledges that ppirs falls short of its goal to provide useful information to contracting officials making contracting decisions . when ppirs was established in 2002 , ofpp officials envisioned it would simplify the task of collecting past performance information by eliminating redundancies among the various systems . in 2005 , the chief acquisition officers council , through an ofpp interagency work group , established several broad goals for documenting , sharing , and using past performance information , including the following: standardize different contracting ratings used by various agencies . provide more meaningful past performance information , including terminations for default . develop a centralized questionnaire system for sharing governmentwide . possibly eliminate multiple systems that feed performance information in ppirs . however , little progress has been made in addressing these goals . according to ofpp officials , funding needs to be dedicated to address these goals and realize long - term improvements to the current past performance system . gsa officials who oversee acquisition related systems , to include ppirs , told us that as of february 27 , 2009 , efforts remain unfunded and no further action had been taken to make needed improvements . the first step in securing funding , according to ofpp and gsa officials , is mandating the use of ppirs .