dod did not concur with this recommendation . in its comments , dod stated that the f - 35 program office has adequate knowledge to begin block 4 development . we maintain , however , that completing its business case before awarding its block 4 development contracts would put dod and the program in a better position to effectively and successfully develop block 4 capabilities . as we reported in april 2019 , the program has made slow , consistent progress in improving the f - 35's r&m metrics' performance but half of the metrics are not achieving targets . all f - 35 variants are generally performing near or above targets for four of the eight r&m metrics , while still falling short for the other four . each f - 35 aircraft variant is measured against eight r&m metrics , four of which are in part of the contract . all eight r&m metrics are described in the program's operational requirements document ( ord ) — the document that outlines the targeted performance levels for these metrics that dod and the military services agreed the f - 35 should meet in 2000 . based on our analysis , while the program is on track to meet half of the targets , the program office has not taken adequate steps to ensure the others will be met . additionally , in december 2018 , the director , operational test & evaluation reported that , although performance for the four under - performing metrics has shown slow growth over the years , none of these metrics are meeting interim goals needed to reach requirements at each variant's maturity . each f - 35 variants' r&m performance against these metrics is shown in table 1 . since the program began tracking r&m performance in 2009 , it has seen small , annual improvements . over the past year , all variants showed a slight improvement in targeted performance levels for one metric , the mean flight hours between failure — design controlled , but saw little or no discernable improvement for the four metrics not meeting targets . however , based on current performance , the program does not expect to meet those targets by full aircraft maturity . according to f - 35 program officials , the ord r&m metrics should be re - evaluated to determine more realistic r&m performance metrics , but the program has not yet taken actions to do so . until the program office does so , it remains accountable for ensuring those ord r&m metrics are achieved . in june 2018 , we recommended that the f - 35 program identify steps it needs to take to ensure the f - 35 aircraft meet r&m requirements before each variant reaches maturity and update its r&m improvement program ( rmip ) — dod's action plan for improving r&m — with these steps . dod concurred with our recommendation but has yet to take substantive actions to address it . dod did , however , complete 16 improvement projects since we last reported on this . despite completing these projects , there were not significant gains in the r&m metrics not meeting targets .