sba is in the process of taking steps to address these recommendations . we also found in 2013 that sba had not consistently complied with the requirement to report its analysis of the agencies' methodologies in its annual report to congress , as required by the small business act . over the 6 years covered in our review , sba reported to congress for 3 of those ; fiscal years 2006 , 2007 , and 2008 . we found that these reports contained limited analyses of the agencies' methodologies , and some of the analyses were inaccurate . for example , sba's analysis was limited to a table attached to the annual report to congress that often did not include information on particular agencies . in our 2013 report , we found that , without more comprehensive analysis and accurate information on participating agencies in sba's annual report , congress did not have information on the extent to which agencies are reporting what is required by law . in that report , we recommended that sba provide congress with a timely annual report that includes a comprehensive analysis of the methodology each agency used for calculating the sbir and sttr spending requirements , providing a clear basis for sba's conclusions about whether these calculations meet program requirements . sba is in the process of taking steps to address this recommendation . in 2013 , we also found that changing the methodology to calculate the sbir and sttr spending requirements based on each agency's total r&d budget instead of each agency's extramural r&d budget would increase the amount of each agency's spending requirement for the programs , some much more than others , depending on how the change was implemented . also , such a change would increase the number of agencies that would be required to participate in the programs if the threshold for participating in the programs remained the same . for example , two additional agencies — the departments of veterans affairs ( va ) and the interior — would have been required to participate in sbir in fiscal year 2011 if total r&d budgets had been the criteria because these agencies reported total r&d budgets in excess of $100 million . more detail on our scope and methodology is included in that issued product . the work on which this testimony is based was conducted from april 2012 to august 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we found in 2013 that the participating agencies' cost of administering the sbir and sttr programs could not be determined because the agencies neither collected that information nor had the systems to do so . neither the authorizing legislation for the programs nor sba policy directives require agencies to track and estimate all administrative costs , and neither the law nor the policy directives define these administrative costs .