respond to the requester . when responding to the requester , the foia processor is to make a determination to release a response in full , to apply an exemption and withhold information protected under an exemption and release certain parts of the response , or fully deny the request . these lawsuits are summarized below . a lawsuit was filed as a result of the wage and hour division not responding to an initial foia request sent to the department in july 2010 . the initial request was submitted for records related to complaints made by undocumented workers under the wage and hour division's “we can help” program . after 2 months ( by september 2010 ) , dol had not responded to the request and the requester filed a lawsuit . dol and the requester entered into a settlement agreement resulting in the department agreeing to pay $350 for attorney's fees and costs arising from the lawsuit . a lawsuit was filed after a requester had , in july 2010 , sent 2 requests for information related to the occupational safety and health administration's review of its whistleblower protection programs . dol denied one request due to the exemption to withhold interagency or intra - agency memorandums or letters . in addition , the department did not respond to the second request . in august 2010 , the requester submitted two administrative appeals to compel a response . after 2 months , the department had not responded to the administrative appeals and the requester filed a lawsuit in october 2010 . dol and the requester entered into a settlement agreement that dismissed the lawsuit and , according to a foia counsel official , resulted in the department releasing additional responsive records ( 6,000 pages in full or redacted ) . in addition , the department agreed to pay the requester $8,250 for attorney's fees , expenses , and costs arising from the lawsuit . as the basis for another lawsuit , a foia requester had sought information from the department's office of labor - management standards in december 2009 that related to a union's trusteeship . initially , in march 2010 , the office of labor - management standards informed the requester by e - mail that it had compiled 8,500 pages of responsive documents . however , after corresponding with the office until july 2010 , the requester filed an administrative appeal letter due to not receiving any information . subsequently , 10 months after the initial foia request ( in october 2010 ) , the requester filed a lawsuit as a result of not having received a response to the administrative appeal , any responsive documentation , or an explanation for the delay in providing the documentation . according to a dol foia counsel official , the department subsequently processed the request and the requester entered into a settlement agreement with dol resulting in the lawsuit being dismissed , and with the department paying $7,500 for the requester's attorney fees , expenses , and costs arising from the lawsuit . in february 2013 , a foia request was submitted for the wage and hour division's guidance documents regarding “hot goods objections” investigative files .