once a claim is developed ( i.e. , has all the necessary evidence ) , a rating vsr , also called a rating specialist , evaluates the claim , determines whether the claimant is eligible for benefits , and assigns a rating based on degree of disability . we support vba's continued efforts to emphasize accuracy and timeliness as critical components of quality . we will send copies of this report to the secretary of veterans affairs , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . we will also make copies of this report available to others on request . the report will also be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . veterans with multiple disabilities receive a single composite rating . for veterans claiming pension eligibility , the regional office determines if the veteran served in a period of war , is permanently and totally disabled for reasons not service - connected , and meets the income thresholds for eligibility . a veteran who disagrees with the regional office's decision for either program can appeal sequentially to va's board of veterans' appeals ( bva ) , the u.s. court of appeals for veterans claims , and the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit . in fiscal year 1999 , vba implemented a quality review system to improve the measurement of the accuracy of its claims decisions . under star , vba selects a random sample of completed claims decisions each month from each of its 57 regional offices . vba reported that accuracy improved from 78 percent in fiscal 2001 to 80 percent in fiscal 2002 . however , these rates were not comparable because the new “benefit entitlement accuracy” rate for fiscal year 2002 was based on fewer areas of the checklist that focused on whether and to what extent the claimant received a benefit . in its fiscal year 2002 performance report , va made note of this change but did not recalculate the fiscal 2001 rate to provide a correct comparison . when we recomputed the agency's accuracy rate for fiscal 2001 using its revised criteria , the result was 89 percent , not 78 percent as reported . as a result , the correct comparison showed a decline in accuracy from 89 percent to 81 percent . the agency corroborated our finding after performing its own computation at our request . vba officials we spoke with cited a number of factors that affected accuracy over the fiscal years 2001 to 2002 period . a key factor cited was vba's emphasis on production , such that accuracy became a lesser priority . in 2001 , the secretary of veterans affairs set an ambitious goal to reduce the agency's average time to complete a rating decision from 173 days ( in fiscal year 2000 ) to 100 days by the end of fiscal year 2003 . also , the secretary tasked vba with reducing the inventory of rating claims to 250,000 by the end of september 2003 . vba managers responded by emphasizing the completion of more rating cases each month . the result has been a significant increase in production and a significant reduction in the rating inventory since the end of fiscal year 2001 .