resident satisfaction . one example of an indicator of resident satisfaction is whether a project has met the target occupancy rates established in the business agreements . an osd official we spoke with and private partner officials told us they use occupancy as an indicator of satisfaction based on the assumption that residents would move if they were dissatisfied with their housing unit . however , based on our focus groups , this may not be a reliable assumption . although most residents are not required to live in military housing , residents in each of our 15 focus groups indicated a variety of reasons for choosing to live in privatized housing , many of which did not have to do with their satisfaction with the quality or condition of their homes . for example , residents cited factors influencing their decision to live in privatized housing , such as living in close proximity to military medical or educational services for children or other family members who receive benefits through the military's exceptional family member program , access to quality schools , and a lack of safe and affordable housing in the surrounding community . osd and military department officials we spoke with recognized that the current metrics do not consistently focus on or prioritize the private partners' performance with maintaining housing units and ensuring resident satisfaction . in october 2019 osd issued new guidance standardizing the performance incentive fee framework across the military departments . according to osd and the private partners with whom we spoke , this guidance was developed through a joint effort with the military departments and the private partners ; it provides a framework where the metrics for resident satisfaction and maintenance management will account for a majority of the fee , with project safety and financial performance weighted less heavily . however , according to officials from osd and officials we spoke with from each of the military departments , the specific indicators used to drive the metrics will need to be negotiated with each of the private partners for each project . performance indicators designed to more directly measure the quality of maintenance conducted on housing units and resident satisfaction will provide military departments more transparency into private partner performance with regard to these two important metrics — metrics that are often directly tied to the performance incentive fees provided to the private partners . the housing projects' business agreements typically include a requirement for the private partner to maintain a records management system to record , among other things , maintenance work requested and conducted on each housing unit . according to private partner officials , each company uses commercial property management software platforms that are used for activities such as initiating maintenance work orders and dispatching maintenance technicians . some private partner officials also stated that data from the work order tracking systems were intended to prioritize and triage maintenance work , not to monitor the overall condition of privatized housing units .