imposition of penalties . cbp has several administrative penalties available , based on the nature of the violation . cbp may levy administrative penalties locally at the port level without conducting an investigation . alternatively , cbp may refer a suspected violation for an investigation by bice . the outcome of the bice investigation may be a referral to ( 1 ) cbp for an administrative penalty or ( 2 ) a referral to the u.s. attorney for possible criminal prosecution of the importer and its principal officers and the imposition of criminal monetary penalties . how well does cbp's textile review process work to prevent illegal textile transshipment ? how effectively does cbp monitor foreign textiles transiting the united states in its in - bond system before entering u.s. commerce or being exported ? and what challenges , if any , has cbp experienced in using penalties and other means to deter illegal textile transshipment ? to answer these questions , we conducted fieldwork at seven ports of entry ( new york / newark , new york ; los angeles / long beach , california ; laredo , texas ; columbus and cleveland , ohio ; and seattle and blaine , washington ) to review how cbp reviews textile shipments at the major land , sea , and inland ports . together , these ports represent cbp service ports that processed 55 percent of textiles and apparel imported into the united states in 2002 . we also reviewed cbp's data analysis at its strategic trade center in new york , observed a textile production verification team conduct foreign factory visits in el salvador , and discussed cbp's efforts to coordinate textile enforcement activities with the customs authorities in el salvador , hong kong , macau , mexico , and canada . we conducted a survey of 29 cbp ports , including the 11 largest ports that process textiles and apparel imports . ( see app . i for details about our scope and methodology. ) the united states , like the european union and canada , maintains annual quotas on textile and apparel imports from various supplier countries . when a country's quota fills up on a certain category of merchandise , that country's exporters may try to find ways to transship its merchandise through another country whose quota is not yet filled or that does not have a quota . the actual illegal act of transshipment takes place when false information is provided regarding the country - of - origin to make it appear that the merchandise was made in the transited country . the effects of the illegal act of transshipment are felt in both the transited country ( potentially displacing its manufactured exports ) and the united states , increasing competition for the u.s. textile and apparel industry . these u.s. quotas , embodied in approximately 45 bilateral textile agreements , are scheduled for elimination on january 1 , 2005 , in accordance with the 1995 world trade organization ( wto ) agreement on textiles and clothing . however , u.s. quotas will remain for approximately five countries that are not members of the wto and for specific product categories when trade complaint actions , resulting in reinstated quotas , are approved .