taxpayers who did not report any rental activity . taxpayers who reported receiving rent for some properties but not for others . taxpayers who reported receiving rent for all of their properties but reported incorrect rent amounts . some examples of misreporting rent in this manner included taxpayers failing to count certain items as rent , such as expenses paid by tenants or kept security deposits , or having inadequate records . we could not estimate the frequency of these scenarios because we could not always determine the exact nature of the misreported rent . this type of misreporting includes taxpayers who reported income or expenses as rental real estate activity on part i of schedule e that they should have reported elsewhere on their tax returns and taxpayers who reported an activity elsewhere on their tax returns that they should have reported on part i of schedule e. for example , some taxpayers reported business activities as rental real estate activities on part i of schedule e that irs determined should have been reported on the schedule to the individual tax return for profit and loss from business ( schedule c ) . we also found taxpayers who reported income or expenses on schedule c that should have been reported as rental real estate activity on part i of schedule e. this type of misreporting may not have affected the calculation of the amount of income tax owed . however , reporting activities on the wrong schedule could have affected the amount of self - employment tax these taxpayers owed , as net income from a trade or business is subject to self - employment tax whereas net income from rental real estate reported on schedule e generally is not . irs estimated that underreported self - employment tax accounted for $39 billion of the 2001 tax gap . the most common reason why taxpayers misreported loss from their rental real estate activities was because they also used their rental property as a residence — including taxpayers who rented their properties at less than a fair rental price — and claimed a loss to which they were not entitled . other reasons why taxpayers misreported loss were because they were not actively participating in their rental real estate activities or exceeded applicable income limitations for deducting a loss from rental real estate . limited information reporting , complexity , and the number of taxpayers misreporting are challenges irs faces in ensuring compliance with rental real estate reporting . irs receives information returns for a relatively small number of taxpayers with rental real estate activity . for tax year 2001 , for example , irs received forms 1099-misc reporting rent received for about 327,000 taxpayers who reported rent on their tax returns . by comparison , there were about 8.2 million taxpayers who reported rent on their tax returns for whom irs did not receive a corresponding form 1099- misc from a third party reporting the rent . for taxpayers who deduct rental real estate expenses , irs generally receives information returns from third parties only for mortgage interest that taxpayers pay .