doe did not agree with our recommendation . in particular , doe stated that epa and nrc also have legal mandates to research low - dose radiation exposure and that these agencies establish their research priorities in accordance with their respective budget authorities and recommendations from independent advisory bodies . doe stated that as a result , it would not be appropriate for doe to lead the development of a mechanism for interagency collaboration . we believe that doe's concerns stem from a misinterpretation of our recommendation , and we made several changes to our report and our recommendation to clarify doe's role . we noted that we did not recommend that a mechanism for interagency collaboration serve as a replacement for agencies' legal mandates , budget authorities , and recommendations from independent advisory bodies . instead , this mechanism would help agencies address shared research priorities . in making our recommendation , we did not specify the coordinating mechanism that agencies should use and instead left it to doe to lead the development of an appropriate mechanism . we continue to believe that an interagency coordination mechanism for low - dose research is needed and that doe is in the best position to lead agencies in developing the most appropriate mechanism . chairman weber , ranking member veasey , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . if you or your staff have any questions about this statement , please contact john neumann at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or neumannj@gao.gov . in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . doe also provided funding for this study . this model assumes that the risk of cancer increases with every incremental increase in radiation exposure . accordingly , the agencies have set regulatory dose limits and issued guidance to confine exposure to levels that reduce the risk of cancer , while recognizing that scientific uncertainties occur in estimating cancer risks from low - dose radiation . we also found that , for fiscal years 2012 through 2016 , seven federal agencies — cdc , dod , doe , epa , nasa , nih , and nrc — obligated about $210 million for research on the health effects of low - dose radiation , but annual funding decreased by 48 percent . during the period we reviewed , the seven federal agencies that funded this research collaborated on particular projects , but they did not use a collaborative mechanism to address overall research priorities , such as research needs that advisory bodies identified regarding health effects of low - dose radiation . in the past , doe provided leadership in this area and advocated for greater coordination on research on low - dose radiation's health effects . however , since fiscal year 2012 , its leadership role and funding have decreased because it has phased out funding for its main research program in this area , and no other agency stepped forward to fill this role .