( app . ii contains a sample form. ) according to the dod guide , when funding actions are taken , the agreements officer must record information on whether the prime or subcontractor awardees are traditional contractors , nontraditional defense contractors , or non - profit organizations . the agreements officer also must record the names and addresses of significant nontraditional defense contractors . the summary information is sent to dod's office of defense procurement , where it is aggregated . according to the dd 2759 reports for section 845 agreements awarded in fiscal year 2001 , 16 nontraditional prime contractors and 29 significant nontraditional subcontractors participated in a total of 61 agreements . nontraditional participants included commercial business units of u.s. traditional firms as well as foreign corporations . congress requires dod to report annually on all “other transaction” projects — for research as well as prototypes — awarded in the preceding fiscal year . while the section 845 portion of the report addresses the issues set forth in the congressional reporting requirement , it does not present the number of nontraditional contractors in a clear , straightforward format , such as a summary table . because information on nontraditional participants — dod's key performance metric — is not summarized , it is difficult for congress to assess how successful dod has been in achieving this metric . in addition , at each military service and darpa , we reviewed the reports of other transactions for prototype projects ( dd form 2759 ) for all agreements awarded in fiscal year 2001 . the annual report includes a 1- or 2-page summary of each project that discusses ( 1 ) government and contractor cost contributions , ( 2 ) the reason for using the section 845 authority , and ( 3 ) how the agreement contributed to a broadening of the technology base or fostered relationships and practices that support u.s. national security interests . in the fiscal year 2001 report , these individual summaries totaled 152 pages . in a fiscal year 2000 supplemental report to congress , dod did present a narrative summary of the number of nontraditional contractors ; however , this was the only occasion when the information was clearly imparted . dod officials stated that they are reluctant to add another reporting element and that the current report format meets congressional requirements . they added that they view the number of nontraditional contractors as secondary to the agreement - level information presented in the report . dod also is not regularly reporting on or assessing the benefits derived from completed section 845 agreements . in 1996 , the under secretary of defense for acquisition and technology requested a comparison of the benefits and drawbacks of completed agreements with the expected benefits at the time of award . however , this attempt to compile “lessons learned” was abandoned because many dod officials believed that the results were parochial and not useful across the department . a draft version of the current section 845 guide included a requirement for an assessment of completed agreements , but the requirement was not incorporated in the final version because dod officials believe that another reporting requirement was not likely to produce a meaningful assessment of section 845 results .