d. robbins . “does it make any difference anymore ? competitive versus negotiated municipal bond issuance.” public administration review , vol . in addition to the individual named above , charlie daniel , assistant director ; terry draver ; thomas gilbert ; nancy hess ; larry korb ; john mingus ; ed nannenhorn ; david perkins ; cheryl peterson ; katrina taylor ; and walter vance made key contributions to this report . this is greater than any year from 1991 through 2000 . table 1 shows the annual volume and percentage of long - term , tax - exempt bonds issued for new money and refunding purposes from 1991 through 2005 . tax - exempt bond issuers tend to issue more debt when interest rates decline . since 1991 , years when interest rates were at their lowest levels generally have corresponded with the years in which the amounts of tax - exempt bonds issued , including bonds for refunding , were the highest . for example , since 2002 , average interest rates on tax - exempt bonds have fallen to their lowest levels since the early 1970s . during this same time period , the dollar amount of tax - exempt bonds issued has been at the highest level since 1993 . figure 3 shows how changes in interest rates have corresponded with the amounts of new money and refunding bonds . as the figure illustrates , generally , increases in the dollar amounts of bonds that were refunded have accompanied declines in interest rates . this indicates that municipal governments tend to take advantage of interest rate declines to restructure existing bond debt to obtain more attractive financing terms , such as obtaining a lower interest rate to reduce borrowing costs . on the other hand , changes in the dollar amounts of new bond issues do not appear to correspond as closely to interest rate changes as the amounts of refundings . one explanation for this could be that municipal governments tend to issue new bonds based on current needs to finance operations and activities , and decisions regarding new financing are likely to be less sensitive to interest rates . because the interest earned by investors who purchase tax - exempt bonds is generally excluded from federal income taxes , the federal government incurs a revenue loss each year . revenue loss estimates are based on the total dollar value of outstanding tax - exempt bonds and not on the dollar amounts of tax - exempt bonds issued in a given year . both treasury and jct provide estimates of the revenue loss associated with tax - exempt bonds . though calculated differently , both estimates show that the revenue loss is in the billions of dollars annually . according to our analysis of treasury's estimates , the revenue loss from excluding the interest earned on tax - exempt bonds from federal income tax is the ninth largest tax expenditure in the i.r.c . figure 4 shows our analysis of treasury's revenue loss estimates from 2000 to 2012 . the estimates indicate that the federal government could lose about $37 billion in 2007 — $25.4 billion from interest on governmental bonds and $11.6 billion from interest on qualified private activity bonds .