the final requirements are documented in the requirements baseline . the bsm projects we reviewed did not complete all of the activities needed to adequately document requirements . although project teams provided evidence that they created a set of high - level requirements and obtained approvals from stakeholders on this set of requirements , two of the three projects did not provide evidence that requirements were thoroughly analyzed and decomposed to lower - level system requirements . for example , part of this analysis would link all lower - level systems requirements to the original higher - level business requirements . only one of the project teams — f&pc — provided documentation showing the necessary linking or mapping of lower - level system requirements to the business requirements . mef and cade provided documentation ; however , their documentation did not fully demonstrate the linking of system - level requirements to the business requirements . a mef project official agreed that full linkage of system - level requirements to business requirements should be implemented . the mef official stated that they planned to implement this in their next version — version 4.0 . in addition , a bsm program official indicated that additional project guidance on requirements documentation would be part of the rmo's deliverables and would help to address this issue . without feasible and clearly defined requirements , projects run the risk of cost overruns , schedule delays , and deployment of systems with limited functionality . for example , incomplete definition of requirements has been cited as one reason for schedule delays and cost overruns for both cade and mef . once requirements are fully documented , software code and other work products that will guide development and testing activities need to be verified using peer review techniques against the original requirements . in addition , these products should be validated through testing to ensure that they will operate effectively in the intended environment . requirements verification ensures that the lower - level requirements , software code , and other work products that will guide development and testing activities are an accurate representation of stakeholder needs . peer reviews are an important part of the verification process and are a proven mechanism for effective defect removal . during peer reviews , teams of peers examine code and other work products to identify defects , determine the causes of the defects , and make recommendations that address changes needed to help ensure that the system will meet stakeholder and developer needs . peer reviews should follow a structured , formalized process ; peer review events should be planned in advance , with items , such as code and other work products , selected in advance ; the results of the sessions should be incorporated into peer review reports that project teams are expected to address before moving further into development activities . the bsm project teams did not provide evidence that work products had been verified against requirements through the use of a formalized peer review process and project officials did not follow recommended practices for conducting peer reviews .