he told our investigators that he had to perform additional inspections . after determining that the investigators were not transporting additional sources of radiation , the cbp inspector made copies of our investigators' drivers' licenses , returned their drivers' licenses to them , and our investigators were then allowed to enter the united states . at no time did the cbp inspector question the validity of the counterfeit bill of lading or the counterfeit nrc document . on december 14 , 2005 , our investigators placed two containers of radioactive sources into the trunk of their vehicle . our investigators drove to an official port of entry at the southern border . they also had in their possession a counterfeit bill of lading in the name of a fictitious company and a counterfeit nrc document . at the primary checkpoint , our two - person undercover team was signaled by means of a traffic light signal to drive through the radiation portal monitors and stopped at the primary checkpoint for their primary inspection . as our investigators drove past the portal monitors and approached the primary checkpoint , they observed that the cbp inspector remained in the primary checkpoint for several moments prior to approaching our investigators' vehicle . on december 21 , 2005 , we briefed cbp officials about the results of our border crossing tests . our investigators assumed that the radiation portal monitors had activated and signaled the presence of radioactive sources . the cbp inspector asked our investigators for identification and asked them if they were american citizens . our investigators told the cbp inspector that they were both american citizens and handed him their state - issued drivers' licenses . the cbp inspector also asked our investigators about the purpose of their trip to mexico and asked whether they were bringing anything into the united states from mexico . our investigators told the cbp inspector that they were returning from a business trip in mexico and were not bringing anything into the united states from mexico . while our investigators remained inside their vehicle , the cbp inspector used what appeared to be a riid to scan the outside of the vehicle . one of our investigators told him that they were transporting specialized equipment . the cbp inspector asked one of our investigators to open the trunk of the rental vehicle and to show him the specialized equipment . our investigator told the cbp inspector that they were transporting radioactive sources in addition to the specialized equipment . the primary cbp inspector then directed our investigators to park in a secondary inspection zone for further inspection . during the secondary inspection , the cbp inspector said he needed to verify the type of material our investigators were transporting , and another cbp inspector approached with what appeared to be a riid to scan the cardboard boxes where the radioactive sources was placed . the instrumentation confirmed the presence of radioactive sources . when asked again about the purpose of their visit to mexico , one of our investigators told the cbp inspector that they had used the radioactive sources in a demonstration designed to secure additional business for their company . the cbp inspector asked for paperwork authorizing them to transport the equipment to mexico .