governance . to examine differences in the quality of governance ( also known as “institutions” ) between agoa - eligible and ineligible countries , we reviewed a judgmental sample of empirical academic literature that provided evidence that property rights and political stability can promote economic growth . we judgmentally identified two measures of institutional quality from the worldwide governance indicators that may capture aspects of the security of private property , namely scores for the rule of law and political stability . we compared the simple average of scores in 2000 and 2012 for agoa - eligible countries versus ineligible countries . we rescaled the indicators to range from 0 to 5 , with higher scores indicating better perceptions of governance . aid and foreign direct investment . to examine differences in the amount of development assistance received by agoa - eligible versus ineligible countries , we used annual data from the oecd on country programmable aid . according to the oecd , country programmable aid ( cpa ) is the proportion of aid that is subjected to multiyear programming at the country level , and hence represents a subset of official development assistance ( oda ) flows . cpa is equivalent to gross oda disbursements by recipient but excludes spending that is ( 1 ) inherently unpredictable ( humanitarian aid and debt relief ) ; or ( 2 ) entails no flows to the recipient country ( administration costs , student costs , development awareness and research , and refugee spending in donor countries ) ; or ( 3 ) is usually not discussed between the main donor agency and recipient governments ( food aid , aid from local governments , core funding to nongovernmental organizations , aid through secondary agencies , oda equity investments , and aid that is not allocable by country ) . cpa counts loan repayments among the aid transferred from donor countries to developing countries . we represented country programmable aid in per person units by dividing the program aid total by the total population of the country . data on population were from the world development indicators . we computed the simple average of aid per person in each year from 2005 to 2012 for agoa - eligible countries and agoa ineligible countries . to examine differences in the amount of foreign direct investment received by agoa - eligible versus ineligible countries , we used annual data on net inflows of foreign direct investment as a percentage of gdp from the world bank world development indicators . we computed the simple average of these series in each year from 2001 to 2013 for agoa - eligible countries and agoa ineligible countries . in using the fdi data , we checked for outliers and missing values and identified equatorial guinea as an outlier based on comparisons with data from other sources ; values for equatorial guinea's net fdi inflows as a percentage of gdp were omitted from the calculation of the average . we conducted this performance audit from april 2014 to february 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .