we maintain the importance of our recommendation to ftc . elder financial exploitation is a complex , nationwide problem , and combating it effectively requires a concerted , ongoing effort on the part of states and localities . it also requires support and leadership at the federal level . each of the seven federal agencies we reviewed is working to address this problem in ways that are consistent with its mission . however , preventing and responding to elder financial exploitation also calls for a more cohesive and deliberate national strategy . this is an opportune time for the federal government to be looking at elder financial exploitation , because the elder justice act of 2009 has established the elder justice coordinating council ( ejcc ) — a group of federal agency heads charged with setting priorities , coordinating federal efforts , and recommending actions to ensure elder justice nationwide — which has recently begun to examine these issues . the ejcc can be the vehicle for defining and implementing such a national strategy . to this end , in our november 2012 report we recommended that the ejcc develop a written national strategy for combating elder financial exploitation . among other things , this strategy should ensure coordination of public awareness activities across federal agencies ; promote agency collaboration ; and promote investigation and prosecution of elder financial exploitation . the ejcc held an official meeting on may 13 , 2013 . its working group presented a number of recommendations , including ones that focused on enhancing interagency collaboration , strategically promoting public awareness , and combating financial exploitation . next steps will include receiving public comments and drafting a federal agenda for elder justice activities for ejcc consideration . chairman terry , ranking member schakowsky , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you might have . for questions about this testimony , please contact kay brown at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or brownke@gao.gov . contacts from our office of congressional relations and office of public affairs are on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include clarita mrena , eve weisberg , monika gomez , brittni milam , and james bennett . contributing to our november 2012 report were andrea dawson , gary bianchi , jessica botsford , jason bromberg , alicia cackley , paul desaulniers , holly dye , eileen larence , jean mcsween , chris morehouse , claudine pauselli , almeta spencer , kate van gelder , and craig winslow . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . our investigative activities were conducted in accordance with standards prescribed by the council of the inspectors general for integrity and efficiency .