 threat . iscd's risk assessment approach is also not consistent with the nipp because it does not consider threat for the majority of regulated facilities . according to the nipp , risk assessments should estimate threat as the likelihood that the adversary would attempt a given attack method against the target . the cfats rule requires that , as part of assessing site vulnerability , facilities conduct a threat assessment , which is to include a description of the internal , external , and internally assisted threats facing the facility and that iscd review site vulnerability as part of the final determination of a facility's tier . our review of the models and discussions with iscd officials shows that ( 1 ) iscd is inconsistent in how it assesses threat using the different models because while it considers threat for the 10 percent of facilities tiered because of the risk of release or sabotage , it does not consider threat for the approximately 90 percent of facilities that are tiered because of the risk of theft or diversion ; and ( 2 ) iscd does not use current threat data for the 10 percent of facilities tiered because of the risk of release or sabotage . iscd did not have documentation to show why threat had not been factored into the formula for approximately 90 percent of facilities tiered because of the risk of theft or diversion . however , iscd officials pointed out that the cost of adding a threat analysis for these facilities might outweigh the benefits of doing so . iscd officials said that given the complexity of assessing threat for theft or diversion , they are considering reexamining their approach . iscd officials also said that they are exploring how they can use more current threat data for the 10 percent of facilities tiered because of the risk of release or sabotage .  vulnerability . iscd's risk assessment approach is also not consistent with the nipp because it does not consider vulnerability when developing risk scores . according to the nipp , risk assessments should identify vulnerabilities , describe all protective measures , and estimate the likelihood of an adversary's success for each attack scenario . similar to the nipp , the cfats rule calls for iscd to review facilities' security vulnerability assessments as part of its risk - based tiering process . this assessment is to include the identification of potential security vulnerabilities and the identification of existing countermeasures and their level of effectiveness in both reducing identified vulnerabilities and meeting the aforementioned risk - based performance standards . our review of the risk assessment approach and discussions with iscd officials shows that the security vulnerability assessment contains numerous questions aimed at assessing vulnerability and security measures in place but the information is not used to assign facilities to risk - based tiers . iscd officials said they do not use the information because it is “self - reported” by facilities and they have observed that it tends to overstate or understate vulnerability . as a result , iscd's risk assessment approach treats every facility as equally vulnerable to a terrorist attack regardless of location and on - site security .