( see fig . some of this variation is due to significant variation in the values of certain factors used to calculate medicare dgme payments — specifically , the pra and medicare patient load . ( see table 6. ) all agencies responded to the survey . we merged data from the five programs based on each funding recipient's medicare identification number . for each funding recipient , we calculated the total amount of federal , as well as state medicaid , funding received for gme training and , where fte resident data were available , the amount of funding received per fte resident adjusted for geographic differences in the cost of labor . we also calculated the extent to which recipients received funding from more than one federal source . to assess the reliability of each of these sources of data , we reviewed documentation , interviewed agency officials , and checked the data for obvious errors . while we discuss cms data collection efforts later in this report , we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objective . to describe what is known about the costs of gme training programs , we interviewed experts from seven research and industry organizations about the costs to train residents , teaching sites' measurement of costs , and how costs compare to federal funding levels . we also conducted a literature review of studies that estimated the costs of training physician residents . to identify relevant studies , we searched multiple reference databases and reviewed the abstracts of studies initially identified to select potentially relevant studies for full review . we also asked for studies that estimated the costs of gme during interviews with experts . of the over 300 studies we initially identified , 10 were deemed relevant because the studies provided estimates of the costs of training residents . we also analyzed 2015 data on the costs of gme training reported by teaching hospitals to cms . to assess the reliability of these data , we reviewed documentation about how the data were collected and verified , and we checked the data for obvious errors . we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objective . we also interviewed officials from three medicare administrative contractors ( mac ) selected based on the high percentage of new teaching hospitals in the mac's geographic jurisdiction . we asked the mac officials about their role and responsibilities in reviewing and auditing teaching hospitals' gme costs that are reported annually to cms . to examine the extent to which the federal government collects information needed to understand its investment in gme training , we reviewed , where available , public laws , regulations , agency guidance , reporting forms and instructions , and performance reports concerning the five federal programs that fund gme training . we interviewed officials from hhs's office of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation , cms , hrsa , and va about their reporting requirements , program management and oversight responsibilities , and program evaluation and performance measurement activities .