( see fig . other priorities included improving network infrastructure and providing more training for faculty in the use of information technology as a teaching method . minority serving institutions indicated that they expect to have difficulties in meeting their goals related to technology . eighty - seven percent of tribal colleges , 83 percent of historically black colleges and universities , and 82 percent of hispanic serving institutions cited limitations in funding as a primary reason for why they may not achieve their technology - related goals . for example , the southwest indian polytechnic institute in albuquerque , new mexico , serves about 670 students and it uses distance education to provide courses for an associates degree in early childhood development to about 100 students . these differences were statistically significant . we found that minority serving institutions offered distance education courses for two main reasons: ( 1 ) they improve access to courses for some students who live away from campus and ( 2 ) they provide convenience to older , working , or married students . the following examples illustrate these conditions . northwest indian college , a tribal college in bellingham , washington , has over 10 percent of its 600 students involved in distance education . it offers distance education by videoconference equipment or correspondence . the college offers over 20 distance education courses , such as mathematics and english to students at seven remote locations in washington and idaho . according to college officials , distance education technology is essential because it provides access to educational opportunities for students who live away from campus . for example , some students taking distance education courses live hundreds of miles from the college in locations such as the nez perce reservation in idaho and the makah reservation in neah bay , washington . according to school officials , students involved in distance education tend to be older with dependents , and therefore , find it difficult to take courses outside of their community . also , one official noted that staying within the tribal community is valued and distance education allows members of tribes to stay close to their community and still obtain skills or a degree . the university of the incarnate word is a private nonprofit hispanic serving institution with an enrollment of about 6,900 students . the school , located in san antonio , texas , offers on - line degree and certificate programs , including degrees in business , nursing , and information technology . about 2,400 students are enrolled in the school's distance education program . the school's on - line programs are directed at nontraditional students ( students who are 24 years old or older ) , many of whom are hispanic . in general , the ideal candidates for the on - line program are older students , working adults , or adult learners who have been out of high school for 5 or more years , according to the provost and the director of instructional technology .