for these reasons , we have not changed our report . installations followed the typical process when developing these projects . according to a marine corps official , installations followed the typical process to develop projects included in the president's fiscal year 2009 budget request and had the same amount of time to develop projects , although marine corps headquarters provided the guidance to installations to develop projects about a month later than for the typical process and installations submitted projects to marine corps headquarters about a month later than usual . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense , secretary of the army , secretary of the navy , commandant of the marine corps , and the director of the office of management and budget . further details on our scope and methodology are in appendix i . the grow the force initiative will increase the end strength of the army and marine corps collectively by more than 100,000 by 2013 , as shown in table 1 . the army and marine corps are using personnel from their increased end strength to establish new units , as well as adding personnel to existing units . the army's increased end strength will be used to create six new brigade combat teams ( 21,000 soldiers ) , establish new combat support and combat service support units ( 16,000 soldiers ) , address shortfalls in existing units ( 13,000 soldiers ) , and establish additional training and headquarter capabilities ( 15,000 soldiers ) . the army reserve is adding two new brigades to its force structure and the army national guard will add new units and add personnel to existing units to increase its military police , engineering , and medical units to increase combat support and combat service support capabilities . the marine corps is using personnel from its increased end strength to establish new units and add personnel to existing units to address shortfalls in critical occupations , including military police , infantry battalions , intelligence battalions , and explosive ordnance disposal teams . dod projects that facility requirements associated with grow the force will cost more than $17 billion , as shown in table 2 . the army requested about $2.8 billion for military construction in its budget requests for fiscal years 2007 and 2008 , including over $400 million in the fiscal year 2007 supplemental budget request . the remaining $7.5 billion is for projects to support new combat support and combat service support units ; new brigade combat teams ; and quality of life projects , such as child development centers , at installations that are gaining additional personnel . the marine corps requested $951 million for military construction in its budget requests for fiscal years 2007 and 2008 , including approximately $493 million in the supplemental budget requests for fiscal years 2007 and 2008 . the remaining $6.1 billion will include projects for newly established units or units increasing in size through grow the force and quality of life projects . the army and marine corps followed all of the steps typically used to determine construction projects when they developed the grow the force construction projects submitted in dod's budget requests for fiscal years 2007 and 2008 , but the process was compressed .