( see app . ii for an excerpt from the conclusions and illustrations section of the ruling to demonstrate its practical application. ) as a result of the ruling , attached bracing devices , such as orthoconcepts' items and other attached devices , were placed in the dme benefit category and could no longer be billed as orthotics . ( 2 ) what has been the impact of the ruling on medicare beneficiaries ? ( 3 ) if the ruling were rescinded by cms , what would be the financial impact on medicare and medicaid ? ( 4 ) given the new bipa requirement , what would be the implications for medicare program integrity if the ruling were rescinded ? in preparing this report , we conducted interviews with officials and representatives from cms , and from durable medical equipment regional carriers ( dmerc ) , who are contractors that process orthotics and dme claims . we interviewed representatives from state medicaid programs to determine the potential financial impact of changing the ruling on states' medicaid spending for individuals dually - eligible for medicare and medicaid . we also interviewed representatives from the oig , advocacy groups , orthotic industry representatives , and provider associations ; reviewed federal statutes and regulations , documents related to a legal challenge to the ruling , cms documents , and medicare coverage policy ; and analyzed data on orthotic claims and characteristics of nursing home residents . appendix i presents the details of our methodology . we performed our work from january 2001 through march 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . cms , an agency within hhs , is responsible for much of the federal government's multi - billion dollar payments for health care , primarily through the medicare and medicaid programs . medicare covers about 40 million individuals 65 years old and older , as well as some disabled individuals . eligible individuals enroll to receive part a insurance , which helps pay for inpatient hospital , snf , hospice , and certain home health services . most medicare beneficiaries also elect to purchase part b insurance , which helps pay for physician , outpatient hospital , laboratory , and other services . medicaid is a state - administered health insurance program , jointly funded by the federal and state governments , that covers approximately 40 million eligible low - income individuals including children and their parents , the aged , blind , and disabled . each state administers its own program and determines , under broad federal guidelines , eligibility for , coverage of , and reimbursement for specific services and items , such as orthotics and dme . we addressed the following questions: ( 1 ) why did hcfa issue its ruling and did it follow required procedures in issuing it ? in 2000 , about 5.5 million low - income aged and disabled medicare beneficiaries were also covered by medicaid . for such beneficiaries , medicare serves as their primary health care coverage , while medicaid pays for certain other health care costs . the extent of their medicaid coverage is primarily dependent on their income .