partner nation shortfalls . shortfalls of partner nations , including not using assistance for the envisioned purposes , inability to maintain and sustain equipment , and difficulty in manning and training recipient units , can negatively affect the achievement of project objectives . for example , the 2016 assessment report for a 2015 project found that , although the recipient unit was able to plan and execute more complex operations to combat regional threats , such as boko haram , in a professional manner , the assessment team received no evidence that the unit had played more than a minor role in counter – boko haram operations . in a separate review of a partner nation's global train and equip projects , the 2016 assessment found that the recipient unit had difficulties in maintaining weapons in a fully mission - capable status . the assessment found that a number of the unit's small arms were old and many had warped barrels , making them much less accurate . a 2017 assessment of a 2013 project found that the recipient unit suffered from shortages of junior noncommissioned officers and officers . the unit was also found to have few soldiers in specialty jobs who had received school training . the assessment report acknowledged that certain conditions in the partner nation , such as low levels of education , presented a multitude of problems in ensuring the development and maintenance of national security forces capable of working with , and integrating , a range of modern combat systems . workforce management challenges . dod officials indicated that workforce challenges , particularly related to turnover and staffing levels , can inhibit effective project design , program implementation , and oversight . dod officials acknowledged that staff turnover , an issue that we previously identified , remains a challenge . according to the officials , there is a high degree of institutionalized turnover , particularly among security cooperation officers , at u.s. embassies and to some extent within the geographic combatant commands . as a result , the officials overseeing project implementation may not have been responsible for project development and are less likely to understand the capabilities of the intended recipient units or the capability gaps that could be addressed by equipment and training . dod officials also told us that they have been challenged to meet programmatic demands with current staffing levels , particularly given the influx of funds appropriated for the counterterrorism partnerships fund in 2015 . dod officials said that the volume of global train and equip projects expanded with the large increase in funding in 2015 and 2016 , which stressed the foreign military sales system as well as geographic combatant commands' ability to plan for , and manage , the program with existing resources . for example , dod officials said that teams of three staff at geographic combatant commands were managing over three times more funding than in prior years . as a result , staff were unable to maintain consistent levels of due diligence on issues such as ensuring that proposal packages addressed absorptive capacity and sustainment planning .