the numbers reported were not the same for most months . this section addressed only the initial identification of a suspect track . our analysis found that three of the six criteria used to determine if a track is suspicious were subjective . the checklist and other steps taken to further identify suspect aircraft are discussed elsewhere in the report . we gave examples of the criteria used to determine if an aircraft is suspected of drug trafficking . a discussion of u.s. government intelligence support to the abd program was not within the scope of our report . defense did not provide written comments . however , neither department commented on our recommendations . in addition , state and defense officials provided technical comments and updates that we incorporated throughout the report , as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees and the secretaries of state and defense . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-4268 or fordj@gao.gov . key contributors to this report were al huntington , hynek kalkus , summer pachman , and kerry lipsitz . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . ander ) assumed suspect ( uas ) an abd mission begins when relocatable over - the - horizon radar or other intelligence sources provide information about a suspicious flight to personnel at the abd command center , who then consider various questions to determine whether the track is involved in illegal drug trafficking activities . once a track is determined to be suspicious ( checklist step 1 ) , a surveillance aircraft , with a crew of colombian air force personnel and one u.s. government contractor , tries to visually locate it ( step 5 ) . the length of time it takes to find the suspicious aircraft can vary . once located , the abd aircrews try to determine its identity and order it to land in english and spanish over the radio or through the use of visual signals ( step 7 ) . if the suspicious aircraft continually fails to respond , an abd aircrew member gives a verbal warning that deadly force will be used ( step 9 ) . an interceptor aircraft called to the scene , with a colombian air force crew , fires warning shots and direct shots if the suspect fails to follow orders ( steps 10 and 14 ) . ander ) all use of force by the interceptor is pre - approved by the commander of the colombian air force .