iii ) . both hhs and dod made additional technical comments that we have incorporated where appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issue date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of health and human services , the secretary of defense , and other interested parties . we also will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7119 if you have any questions about this report . another gao contact and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix iv . fda estimated 5% 91% in total 1996 , of 3 months or more cumulative travel to europe , 1980-present , ( 23% from new deferral criteria ) fda recommends deferral of source plasma donors with 5 years cumulative travel in france from 1980 to the present . however , fda's new deferral policy for 5 years exposure elsewhere in europe does not apply to source plasma . in part , this reflects fda's belief that , on the basis of the results of experiments conducted by plasma product manufacturers , the manufacturing process for plasma - derivative products minimizes the risk of transmission of vcjd through plasma . in addition , fda is concerned that disqualifying plasma donors by extending the deferral policy to them may threaten the sufficiency of the plasma supply . the plasma protein therapeutics association ( ppta ) conducted a donor travel survey in 30 plasma collection centers and found that donor losses could range from 0 to 13 percent , with the greatest losses occurring at centers located near military bases . the overall donor loss was estimated to be about 3.5 percent . a survey conducted by one of ppta's member companies suggested that overall donor loss would be closer to 5 percent . ppta also expected that a ban on the use of plasma in the united states from european donors , as would occur if the vcjd deferral policy was applied to plasma , would adversely affect an already tight supply of plasma - derived therapeutics , causing some countries to reject european plasma and thus putting extreme pressure on other sources of plasma , such as the united states , to meet global demand . transmission of vcjd by human blood or plasma has not been demonstrated , and no laboratory or epidemiological studies have shown that blood from donors infected with vcjd carries the disease . for example , at least 20 people in the united kingdom have received blood or blood components from donors who later developed vcjd . although relatively little time has passed , none of the recipients of the blood have developed vcjd . studies of patients with vcjd and a prior history of receiving blood transfusions have not revealed any cases of vcjd among the donors involved . nonetheless , laboratory experiments point to a theoretical risk of transmission of vcjd through blood .