this decision , however , was not documented . ( see app . cost is also an important factor . in 2000 , we reported that doe spent more than $700 million to manage llrw from 1997 through 1999 . one tool for evaluating llrw management costs is life - cycle cost analysis . such analysis calculates the total cost to manage waste over its life , including cost elements like waste packaging , treatment , transportation , disposal , and monitoring of the disposal site after closure . the analysis is valuable for comparing the total costs of various waste management options leading up to and including disposal to identify the most cost - effective alternative . the results of such analyses can be used in making llrw management decisions that weigh cost against noncost factors such as safety , health , and schedule . doe's use of complete , current , and well - documented life - cycle cost analyses in making llrw management decisions , if properly conducted , is consistent with the intent of doe order 430.1b on real property asset management . this order identifies requirements for life - cycle management of real property assets , including doe land , improvements , facilities , and structures , from planning and acquisition through disposal . while we would agree that flexibility may be important in determining the level of cost analyses required , we believe this flexibility should be accompanied by proper documentation to support the level of analysis completed and the degree to which life - cycle cost principles were followed . doe's comments on our draft report are presented in appendix ii . we are sending copies of the report to the secretary of energy , the director of the office of management and budget , and appropriate congressional committees . we will make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will also be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . in response , in its 2002 report to congress on life - cycle cost analysis of llrw disposal , doe listed among its next steps for em sites to consider the cradle - to - grave costs as they make llrw management decisions . on july 18 , 2002 , em issued guidance directing each site office to develop the mechanisms necessary to ensure that contractors' llrw disposal decisions include the best estimate of full cradle - to - grave costs and analysis of alternatives . several other documents on life - cycle cost analyses are also available . for example , doe has a cost - estimating guide , developed in the mid - 1990s , that provides a chapter dedicated to life - cycle cost analysis , including definitions , processes , limitations , common errors made in life - cycle cost analysis , methods , examples , and diagrams . in addition , although not directly applicable to llrw management , guidance and manuals prepared by other federal agencies for other doe programs may be useful to the sites in explaining life - cycle cost analysis methods .