such action will address the intent of our recommendation . dhs also provided us with technical comments , which we considered and incorporated in the report where appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of the report , we plan no further distribution for 30 days from the report date . do you periodically conduct exercises and drills ? for these questions , and 29 others like them , psd staff may have been able to locate the information they needed in notes and documents to reconstruct the second protocol , but we had no assurance that this was possible or done in an accurate and reliable manner . we have previously reported that performance measures should reliably assess progress such that the same results would be achieved if applied repeatedly to the same situation . furthermore , errors in data accuracy could alter conclusions about the extent to which performance goals have been achieved , such as reporting performance at either a higher or lower level than is actually being attained . we have also reported that decision makers must have assurance that the program data being used to measure performance are sufficiently accurate and reliable if the data are to inform decision - making . thus , the usefulness of agency performance information depends to a large degree on the reliability and accuracy of performance data . because of the changes in the csr protocol questions and concerns about the reliability of reconstructed operator responses transferred to a different form , the baseline data psd used in comparing operators' first and second csr scores and resulting reports may not be accurate . as such , psd's outcome performance measure — the differences in vulnerability gaps as calculated using csr scores — suggests a level of precision that may not be supported . psd officials said they did not see this as a significant problem because not all the baseline csrs involved reconstructed data and , as they continue to conduct csrs , they will eventually be able to compare the results of operators' second to third csrs in reporting improvements . furthermore , although psd's csr data may be useful for some analytical purposes , such as analyzing industry trends and assessing individual operators' security planning and preparedness , some of the early data are not useful for reporting the extent to which the vulnerability gap has closed . psd and decision makers could be better informed and could more effectively prioritize efforts if psd maintains a more reliable baseline for its outcome performance measure and does not use reconstructed data in reporting its baseline . securing the nation's vast network of hazardous liquid and natural gas pipeline systems is a formidable task . the importance of pipeline systems to the nation's economy underscores the need for psd to employ a risk management approach to prioritize its security efforts . psd has taken actions to implement a risk management approach , including identifying the 100 pipeline systems it considers most critical and being the first of the surface transportation modes to develop a risk assessment model . nevertheless , work remains to ensure that the highest risk pipeline systems are given the necessary scrutiny .