( see fig . the army has also established wtus at locations in germany — bavaria , heidelberg , and landstuhl . for servicemembers with less complex medical needs , the army uses its existing network of community - based health care organizations , which it now refers to as community - based wtus . the community - based wtus allow servicemembers to live at home and receive medical care while remaining on active duty . a servicemember was eligible for placement in a wtu if he or she required more than 6 months of medical treatment and required complex case management . army guidance specifies that the mission of servicemembers assigned to a wtu is to heal and transition — return to duty or to civilian life — and while wtu servicemembers may have work assignments in the unit , this work may not take precedent over the servicemembers' treatment . wtus have a defined staffing structure that includes leadership positions of commanders and platoon sergeants , as well as administrative staff , such as human resources and financial management specialists . within each unit , the servicemember is assigned to a team of three key staff — the triad of care — who provide case management services to ensure continuity of care . ( see fig . servicemembers in the wtus vary by the type of medical condition for which they are receiving care and include army active component , reserve , and national guard servicemembers . active component servicemembers comprise about two - thirds of the wtu population , and active duty reserve and national guard servicemembers collectively comprise about one - third . as of december 1 , 2008 , about 60 percent of servicemembers in wtus had been wounded in combat or had incurred a noncombat injury or illness during oef or oif , which may have resulted in burns , amputations , or other types of conditions . the remaining servicemembers in the units included those who may have been referred to the wtu for completion of the disability evaluation process ; those who incurred a noncombat injury , such as during a training exercise ; and those who incurred a noncombat illness such as cancer that required complex case management . the army has issued additional wtu policies aimed at reducing staffing shortfalls , modifying the staffing model , and revising servicemember entry and exit criteria . to reduce staffing shortfalls , the army issued policies designed to ensure that wtus achieve and maintain staffing at required staff - to - servicemember ratios . the army also implemented a revised wtu staffing model that includes new staff - to - servicemember ratios for two of the three triad of care positions . in addition , the army issued policies to revise its criteria for servicemembers entering and leaving wtus — a policy that affects population size and staffing needs . although the army had increased the number of staff being assigned to the wtus , staffing shortfalls continued through june 2008 .