conclusion . cpsia amended section 29 of cpsa to allow the commission to make publicly available information to any federal , state , local , or foreign government agency upon prior certification or agreement that the information will be maintained in confidence , as defined in the act . at that time , cpsc was working with its foreign counterparts to implement its new authorities under cpsia that allow it to share nonpublic information with foreign counterparts . in the course of this review , however , we found that when attempting to implement these authorities , cpsc has faced certain legal constraints in sharing information with its foreign counterparts and has not completed any new agreements concerning the exchange of nonpublic information , as they had expected at the time of our 2009 report . gao - 09-803 . readily identify a manufacturer , cpsc must afford the manufacturer the opportunity to designate the information as business confidential — that is , information a company considers and designates to be proprietary or confidential — and barred from disclosure . the cpsa contains an additional restriction on the public disclosure of certain regulatory information , such as information that identifies a product manufacturer or private labeler . specifically , section 6 ( b ) ( 1 ) generally prohibits cpsc from publicly disclosing information that would readily identify the product manufacturer unless it first takes reasonable steps to assure that the information is accurate and that the disclosure is fair in the circumstances and reasonably related to carrying out cpsc's purposes under its jurisdiction . the inclusion of section 6 ( b ) grew out of concern about damage that manufacturers would incur if the agency released inaccurate information about the manufacturers' products . before publicly disclosing the information , cpsc must give the manufacturer advance notice and the opportunity to comment on the disclosure of the information , which adds more time before cpsc can publicly respond to a potential product hazard . if cpsc decides to disclose information that the manufacturer claims to be inaccurate , it generally must provide 5 days advance notice of the disclosure , and the manufacturer may bring suit to prevent the disclosure . cpsc has issued a rule that interprets the public disclosure restrictions of section 6 ( b ) as covering disclosures to any person unless specified exceptions apply . section 29 ( e ) of cpsa permits cpsc to disclose accident or investigation reports to officials of other federal , state , and local agencies engaged in health , safety , or consumer protection activities , but only if business - confidential information is removed and the recipient agency agrees to maintain certain confidentiality restrictions . section 29 ( f ) of cpsa , as amended by cpsia , authorizes cpsc to disclose certain information to foreign government agencies in addition to federal , state , and local government if the recipient agency certifies in writing in advance that the information will be kept confidential .