( see fig . these evaluation criteria reflect a broad range of benefits and effects of the proposed project , such as cost - effectiveness , as well as the ability of the project sponsor to fund the project and finance the continued operation of its transit system . fta has developed specific measures for each of the criteria outlined in statute . however , fta currently assigns a 50 percent weight to both the cost - effectiveness and the land use criteria when developing the project justification summary rating . the other project justification criteria are not weighted , although the mobility improvements criterion is used as a “tiebreaker.” on the basis of their evaluation measures , fta assigns proposed projects a rating for each criterion and then assigns a summary rating for local financial commitment and project justification . these two ratings are averaged together , and fta assigns each project a “high,” “medium - high,” “medium,” “medium - low,” or “low” overall rating , which is used to rank projects and determine which projects to recommend for funding . projects are rated at several points during the new starts process , including as part of the evaluation for entry into the preliminary engineering and final design phases , and they are rated yearly for inclusion in the new starts annual report . in addition , in 2008 , fta officials said that they began requiring project sponsors to submit a copy of their alternatives analysis initiations packages for fta review and comment . finally , fta officials said they were in the process of developing a spreadsheet to record various project approval dates — including statutorily required approval dates and internal fta review dates — and just completed a year long pilot project of an electronic case management system . project sponsors also do not consistently retain milestone data for projects that have completed the new starts process . because of the limitations of fta's data , we attempted to collect data from project sponsors that have received a ffga since 1997 , on the time it takes for a project to move through the new starts evaluation and rating process . we queried the project sponsors for several new starts milestone dates . however , we found that some of the project sponsors do not consistently maintain records on completed projects . in addition , some projects had multiple project sponsors during the new starts evaluation and rating process , which complicated record keeping . nonetheless , we were able to gather some milestone dates for 30 of the 40 projects , but these data were not complete due to missing milestone dates and therefore we were not able to calculate valid timelines for all projects . ( see app . iii for more information on these data. ) however , of the 30 project sponsors that provided information to us , only 9 had complete sets of new starts milestone dates . figure 3 shows the time it took for each of these projects with complete data to move from the beginning of alternatives analysis to the approval for a ffga , ranging from about 4.5 years for 3 projects to over 14 years for 2 projects .