exercises . an underlying reason that insufficient plans existed at all levels is that the disaster plans had not been tested and refined with a robust exercise program . such exercises are designed to expose weaknesses in plans and allow planners to refine them . as a result , when hurricane katrina struck , a lack of understanding existed within the military and among federal , state , and local responders as to the types of assistance and capabilities that the military might provide , the timing of this assistance , and the respective contributions of the national guard and federal military forces . the homeland security council has issued 15 national planning scenarios — including a major hurricane scenario — that provide the basis for disaster exercises throughout the nation . while dod sponsors or participates in no less than two major interagency field exercises per year , few exercises led by the department of homeland security or dod focused on catastrophic natural disasters , and none of the exercises called for a major deployment of dod capabilities in response to a catastrophic hurricane . in addition , although dod has periodically held modest military support to civil authorities exercises , the exercises used underlying assumptions that were unrealistic in preparing for a catastrophe . for example , dod assumed that first responders and communications would be available and that the transportation infrastructure would be navigable in a major hurricane scenario . finally , the first u.s. army conducted planning and exercises in response to six hurricanes in 2005 . improved communications . hurricane katrina caused significant damage to the communication infrastructure in louisiana and mississippi , which further contributed to a lack of situational awareness for military and civilian officials . even when local officials were able to conduct damage assessments , the lack of communication assets caused delays in transmitting the assessments . under the nrp , the department of homeland security has responsibility for coordinating the communications portion of disaster response operations . however , neither the nrp , the department of homeland security , nor dod fully identified the extensive military communication capabilities that could be leveraged as part of a proactive federal response to a catastrophe . dod's plan addressed internal military communications requirements but not the communication requirements of communities affected by the disaster . because state and local officials were overwhelmed and the department of homeland security and dod waited for requests for their assistance rather than deploying a proactive response , some of the military's available communication assets were never requested or deployed . in addition , some deployed national guard assets were underutilized because the sending states placed restrictions on their use . communications problems , like damage assessment problems , were also highlighted following hurricane andrew . coordinated search and rescue efforts . while tens of thousands of people were rescued after katrina , the lack of clarity in search and rescue plans led to operations that according to aviation officials , were not as efficient as they could have been . the nrp addressed only part of the search and rescue mission , and the national search and rescue plan had not been updated to reflect the nrp .