labor agreed with our recommendation . in december 2007 , the agency announced it had begun a quasi - experimental evaluation⎯an impact evaluation that does not use a control group — of the wia adult and dislocated worker programs , with a final report expected in november 2008 . federal law recommends , but does not require , that all grants be awarded through competition . the federal grant and cooperative agreement act encourages competition in grant programs , where appropriate , to ensure that the best possible projects are funded . in addition , labor's own guidance governing procurement and grant operations — the department of labor manual series — states that competition is recommended , unless one or more of eight exceptions apply . further , a guide on improving grant accountability developed by the domestic working group grant accountability project recommends grants be awarded competitively because competition facilitates accountability , promotes fairness and openness , and increases assurance that grantees have the systems in place to efficiently and effectively use funds to meet grant goals . effective monitoring is also a critical component of grant management . the domestic working group's suggested grant practices state that financial and performance monitoring is important to ensure accountability and the attainment of performance goals . labor monitors most grants through a risk - based strategy based on its core monitoring guide . a key goal is to determine compliance with specific program requirements . in addition , entities receiving labor grants are subject to the provisions of the single audit act if certain conditions are met . a single audit is an organization - wide audit that covers , among other things , the recipient's internal controls and its compliance with applicable provisions of laws , regulations , contracts , and grants . we have not reviewed the sufficiency of these steps . when it was enacted in 1998 , wia created a new , comprehensive workforce investment system designed to change the way employment and training services are delivered . under wia , each state designates local workforce investment areas across the state . each local area is governed by local workforce investment boards that make decisions about the number and location of one - stop career centers , where partner programs make their services and activities available . local boards are required to promote employers' participation in the workforce investment system and assist them in meeting hiring needs . training services provided must be directly linked to occupations in demand in the local area . wia requires states and localities to track the performance of wia - funded activities and labor to hold states accountable for their performance in the areas of job placement , employment retention , and earnings change . the employment and training administration ( eta ) oversees the high growth , community based , and wired grant initiatives . the vast majority of these grants are awarded under a provision of wia , which provides authority for demonstration , pilot , multiservice , research , and multistate projects , and a provision of the american competitiveness and workforce improvement act ( acwia ) , which provides authority for job training grants funded by the h - 1b visa program .