rrap . these assessments are conducted to assess vulnerability to help improve resilience and allow for an analysis of infrastructure “clusters” and systems in various regions . this program , which uses vulnerability assessments and surveys , along with other tools , has included ports as a transportation hub element of a larger regional analysis , but has not yet been applied to focus solely on a port . the rrap evaluates critical infrastructure on a regional level to examine vulnerabilities , threats , and potential consequences from an all - hazards perspective to identify dependencies , interdependencies , cascading effects , resilience characteristics , and gaps . for example , an rrap review could involve compiling information from reviews of critical infrastructure assets — such as electricity providers and transport companies — to form an overall assessment of a key transportation and energy corridor within a state . the rrap assessments are conducted by dhs officials , including psas in collaboration with ssas ; other federal officials ; state , local , territorial , and tribal officials ; and the private sector , depending upon the sectors and assets selected as well as a resilience subject matter expert or experts . the results of the rrap are to be used to enhance the overall security posture of the assets , surrounding communities , and the geographic region covered by the project . according to dhs officials , the results of specific asset - level assessments conducted as part of the rrap are made available to asset owners and operators and other partners ( as appropriate ) , but the final analysis and report are delivered to the state where the rrap occurred . further , according to dhs , while it continues to perform surveys and assessments at individual assets , prioritizing efforts to focus on regional assessments allows dhs to continue to meet evolving threats and challenges . ip officials also informed us that through the rraps , the focus of its vulnerability assessment efforts has evolved over the years from a single - facility assessment to an approach that integrates the results of multiple single - facility assessments to inform a regional analysis of resilience and security through the study of dependencies and interdependencies between and among asset operators . ip officials stated that the coast guard participates in rraps that include a maritime component . the officials have also informed us that the results of coast guard reports and assessments are included in the resiliency assessment ( the rrap final report ) for rraps that include a maritime component , and the information is appropriately derived to alleviate any information - sharing concerns . ip also reports that it has done some ecips / site assistance visits at facilities associated with ports ( eg , refineries , storage facilities , and marine terminals ) . in addition , officials we spoke with from four coast guard sectors and psas representing five areas report maintaining relationships with one another through the amscs or other venues to facilitate information sharing . while the coast guard and ip have collaborated on some regional resilience assessments , there may be opportunities for further collaboration and use of existing tools to conduct portwide resilience assessment efforts .