we disagree . while the scope of our audit did change after our initial notification letter of june 17 , 2005 , was sent to dod , we notified the proper officials of this change in a december 2 , 2005 , email to the agency - designated liaison within the dod inspector general's office . in this email , we specifically said that we would be contacting dmdc and that we would be focusing on data for reserve component activation , mobilization , and deployment for gwot . in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards ( gagas ) , gao analysts are expected , as appropriate , to review an agency's internal controls as they relate to the scope of the performance audit . specifically , we are required by gagas to review the reliability of the data and the data analyses provided to us . to assess the reliability of data and data analyses , we often review an agency's internal controls that are put in place to ensure the accuracy of the data and analyses . as we discuss in our report , we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . however , over the course of the work , the analyses of the data dmdc provided to us continued to have errors . this raised concerns about the adequacy of dmdc's internal controls for preparing and verifying these analyses , which dmdc stated were not documented . in accordance with gagas , when reporting on the results of their work , auditors are responsible for disclosing all material or significant facts known to them which , if not disclosed , could mislead knowledgeable users or misrepresent the results . consistent errors in dmdc's analyses led us to include an audit objective on the reliability of the data and the data analyses . in its written comments , dod generally concurred with three of our recommendations and did not concur with one of our recommendations . dod also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated in the report , as appropriate . regarding our recommendation that dod provide guidance to the services to better define and standardize the use of key terms , dod stated that this requirement has already been addressed because these terms are defined . we acknowledged in our draft report that these key terms are defined in the department of defense dictionary of military and associated terms . however , as we state in our report , our audit work indicates that the services are not operationalizing the use of the terms in a consistent manner . the intent of our recommendation is to have dod standardize the use of the key terms across the services . dod generally concurred with our recommendation that the services provide all required data to dmdc and address data inconsistencies , and stated that the services have been directed to provide all necessary data and are working to address data inconsistencies . while we agree that the services are working with dmdc to address data inconsistencies with regard to the rebaselining of mobilization data , we also identified other data inconsistencies that dod has not addressed , such as social security numbers that are duplicated in more than one reserve component .