gao - 07-817 . washington , d.c.: june 14 , 2007 . we made no recommendations in the report . the department of labor provided technical comments on the report , which we incorporated where appropriate . the department of state did not have comments on the report . according to the department of labor , in 2005 , about 60 percent of u.s. women age 16 and older were in the workforce , compared to 46 percent in 1975 . some u.s. employers offer alternative work arrangements to help workers manage both work and other life responsibilities . one type of alternative work arrangement allows workers to reduce their work hours from the traditional 40 hours per week , such as with part - time work or job sharing . the family and medical leave act ( fmla ) of 1993 requires most employers to provide workers 12 weeks of unpaid leave from work for a variety of reasons , such as childbirth , caring for relatives with serious health conditions , or other personal reasons , such as their own serious health condition or the adoption of a child , and employers must guarantee workers a similar job upon return . some arrangements adopted by employers , such as flextime , allow employees to begin and end their workday outside the traditional 9-to - 5 work hours . other arrangements , such as telecommuting from home , allow employees to work in an alternative location . child care facilities are also available at some workplaces to help workers with their care giving responsibilities . in addition to benefiting workers , these arrangements may also benefit employers by helping them recruit and retain workers . the federal government also provides child care subsidies for certain low - income families , and tax breaks for most parents , both to support their ability to work and to balance work - family responsibilities . under programs funded by the child care and development fund , temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) and state resources , states have the flexibility to serve certain types of low - income families . the head start program provides comprehensive early childhood education and development services to low - income preschool children , on a part - or full - day basis . last , the child and dependent care tax credit allows parents to reduce their tax on their federal income tax return if they paid someone to care for a child under age 13 or a qualifying spouse or dependent so they could work or look for work . in addition , the federal government offers workforce development and training programs designed to assist low - wage / low - skilled workers in the united states . the workforce investment act ( wia ) of 1998 requires states and localities to bring together a number of federally funded employment and training services into a statewide network of one - stop career centers . low - skilled workers and dislocated workers can choose the training they determine best for themselves , working in consultation with a case manager .