no action has been taken to issue guidance . however , senior faa officials say that the agency has held internal discussions on the circumstances under which it would regulate crew and space flight participant safety before 2012 in the event of a casualty or close call . the officials noted that launch vehicle operators are required to report to faa mishaps and safety - related anomalies and failures and take appropriate corrective actions prior to the next launch . as long as it has a promotional role , faa should work with the department of commerce to develop a memorandum of understanding that clearly delineates the two agencies' respective promotional roles in line with their statutory obligations and larger agency missions . faa's office of commercial space transportation and commerce's office of space commercialization signed a memorandum of understanding in september 2007 . faa has no agreement with commerce's international trade administration , which also has responsibilities for promoting the commercial space industry and its competitiveness . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the law that allows for indemnification expires in december 2009 . some industry experts have said that it is important that the law be extended because the cost of providing insurance for launches could be unaffordable without indemnification . according to a space insurance expert , as there has not been an incident requiring the u.s. government to pay out third - party claims , the cost to the government of providing indemnification has been only for administrative purposes . nonetheless , according to a senior commerce official , there is always a possibility of a launch mishap that could invoke indemnification . faa has asked for the law's extension as a means to promote the growth of the industry , and the department of commerce supports this position . a senior commerce official told us that without federal indemnification , smaller launch companies may go out of business . in addition , industry representatives that we interviewed told us that export licensing requirements affect the ability of the u.s. commercial space launch industry to sell its services abroad . these regulations are designed to establish controls to ensure that arms exports are consistent with national security and foreign policy interests include launch vehicles because they can deliver chemical , biological , and nuclear weapons . a senior department of commerce official told us that the u.s. industry has asked congress to consider changing the statute that restricts space manufacturing items for export . a change in statute would allow for the departments of state and defense to review individual items , as they do for other industries . as the space tourism industry develops , the issue will arise of establishing a foundation for a common global approach to launch safety .