management weaknesses . in june 2015 , we found shortcomings in bia's management of permits , and other approvals for energy development have led to lengthy review times and negatively impacted energy development on tribal lands . these lengthy review times have increased energy development costs for tribes , delayed projects , and led to lost revenue , among other impacts . for example , according to a tribal official , bia took as long as 8 years to review some of its energy - related documents . in the meantime , the tribe estimates it lost $95 million in revenue that it could have earned from tribal permitting fees , oil and gas severance taxes , and royalties . we recommended that bia develop a documented process to track its review and response times and enhance its data collection efforts . as of november 2019 , the agency had taken initial steps toward implementing the recommendation by developing system enhancements to capture key dates during the review and approval process for energy - related documents . however , bia needs to collect data from its system , develop time frames , and monitor agency performance to fully address these recommendations . in our january 2019 work on tribal self - governance , we reported that interior's process does not ensure that funds associated with self - determination contracts and self - governance compacts are disbursed in a timely manner , according to tribal stakeholders . these funding delays can therefore be a factor that hinders tribal use of these agreements . when funds are not disbursed in a timely manner , a tribal stakeholder told us that tribes may have to use funds from their general revenue accounts or seek other sources to cover federal program expenses . according to several tribal stakeholders , when a tribe has to use its own funds for the administration of federal programs — even temporarily — it can adversely affect the tribe in various ways . to help ensure that funds are disbursed in a timely manner , we recommended that interior establish a process to track and monitor the disbursement of funds associated with self - determination contracts and self - governance compacts . interior agreed with this recommendation , and as of november 2019 , we are following up on its status . weaknesses in planning . inadequate funding . we have previously reported on agency and tribal perspectives on the adequacy of funding and how it impacts federal programs and also examined spending levels of some programs . in may 2018 , we reported that federal agencies provided about $370 million to develop , construct , or repair tribal drinking water and wastewater infrastructure projects to address tribes' needs in fiscal year 2016 . for example , in our september 2018 report examining advance appropriations authority for ihs , ihs officials and tribal representatives described several effects of budget uncertainty on their health care programs and operations .