we disagree . the objectives in our final report are consistent with the objectives we presented to dod when we first notified the department of our review at the beginning of this engagement , and we did provide positive examples where dod had responded to congressional direction , especially as those actions related to our report's objectives . for example , we state clearly in our report , among other things , that dod assessed to varying degrees the existing and future critical skills and competencies for all but one of its mission - critical occupations . this has been a longstanding issue and represents progress . further , we reported that dod developed performance measures to assess progress in implementing its workforce plan . this was a new reporting requirement for dod , and we reported that dod had been responsive to this requirement . dod also asserted that our recommendations simply restate areas for improvement that the department already identified in its plan , and which have already been implemented since the plan was published . we note , however , that these issues are not new . we first reported on dod's strategic workforce planning for its civilian workforce in 2004 . subsequently , congress mandated that dod develop and submit civilian workforce strategic plans to the congressional defense committees , and that we conduct our own independent assessment of those plans . we have previously conducted 3 reviews of dod's plans since 2008 and our work has reported mixed results . we recommended in 2008 , for example , that dod address all of its statutory reporting requirements , and note that dod did not concur with this recommendation . ( in 2010 , we reported that dod's civilian workforce plan addressed 5 and partially addressed 9 of dod's 14 legislative requirements. ) in 2009 , we recommended , among other things , that dod develop a performance plan that includes establishing implementation goals and timeframes , measuring performance , and aligning activities with resources . dod partially concurred with these recommendations . given the response by dod to our previous reports and recommendations on these issues , we have reviewed the recommendations that we present in this report and continue to believe that corrective action is needed . dod concurred with our first recommendation to include in guidance that it disseminates for developing future workforce plans clearly defined terms and processes for conducting these assessments . dod stated in its agency comments , among other things , that it has already provided numerous governance and policy documents , and more , to assist key stakeholders in meeting strategic workforce plan reporting requirements . we make similar statements in our report . dod also stated in its agency comments , however , that the department strives for continuous improvement and has already provided additional guidance for the next planning cycle , for this reason they believe no additional direction from the secretary of defense is needed . we do not disagree that dod strives for continuous improvement . however , during the course of our audit work , we found , as we state in our report , that functional community managers interpreted questions in dod's guiding template differently and developed different understandings of key terms .