mr . chairmen , ranking members , and members of the subcommittees , this concludes my prepared remarks . i would happy to answer any questions that you may have . for questions about this statement , please contact belva martin at ( 202 ) 512-4841 , or at ( martinb@gao.gov ) . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include william russell , assistant director ; caryn kuebler , analyst - in - charge ; marie ahearn ; lisa gardner ; laura greifner ; amanda parker ; and roxanna sun . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . nasa concurred and plans to revise existing guidance . nasa may also be missing an opportunity to use voluntary disclosures to help improve export control compliance . nasa's export control npr provides that it is every nasa employee's personal responsibility to comply with u.s. export control laws and regulations ; and further provides the departments of state and commerce's regulatory requirements for voluntary self disclosure of noncompliance in export activities , even if the errors were inadvertent . nasa's headquarters' export control program officials told us that few or no voluntary disclosures might indicate a weakness in a center's export control program . we found little usage of the voluntary disclosure process at the nasa centers: a total of 13 voluntary disclosures divided among four of the nasa centers since 2011 , and potential noncompliance ranged from failure to file a record of shipment to germany to potential foreign national exposure to a program's technical data . our work was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we found weaknesses in the implementation of nasa's export control policy and procedures concerning the cea function and foreign national access procedures , which increase the risk of unauthorized access to export - controlled technology . variations in cea position , function , and resources: nasa's export control policy provides the cea the responsibility to ensure compliance of all center program activities with u.s. export control laws and regulations and states that the position should be “senior - level,” but does not define what “senior - level” means . nasa headquarters export control officials define senior - level as a person at the gs - 15 level or in the senior executive service ; however , we found that no ceas were at the senior executive service level , three were gs - 15s , and the ceas at the remaining seven centers were at the gs - 14 and gs - 13 levels . in addition , nasa's export control npr does not contain a provision on the placement of the export control function and cea within the center's organizational structure .