anthrax is not contagious . anthrax is a potential terrorist weapon because , if refined and introduced into letters and packages , anthrax spores can be released into the air as letters are processed or opened . the use of the mail as a vehicle for transmitting anthrax threatens the nation's mail stream and places the american public and federal employees at risk . to what extent do these actions address the problems that occurred ? to address these questions , we analyzed , among other things , pertinent after - action reports , incident timelines , the contract for mail - screening services at the pentagon , mail - screening procedures , federal mail management and other applicable regulations and guidance , and the federal framework for responding to biological incidents . we compared whether the actions taken by dod , its mail - screening contractor at the pentagon , and employees at the skyline complex were in accordance with , among other things , the existing contract provisions , mail - screening procedures , federal regulations and guidance , dod's mail manual , and the federal framework for responding to biological incidents . we interviewed a wide range of federal and local officials involved in the response to the two incidents . we also interviewed personnel from the pentagon's mail - screening contractor to obtain their perspective on what occurred at the pentagon . we analyzed current procedures at the pentagon related to detecting and responding to biological agents . to assist in our analyses , we reviewed previous gao work regarding anthrax incidents , pertinent literature and previous gao work on internal controls , guidance prepared by the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) for responding to the detection of anthrax in the workplace , and regulations and guidance issued by the general services administration ( gsa ) on mail security and responding to biological threats in the mail . we performed our work from june 2005 to august 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . further details about our scope and methodology appear in appendix i . anthrax is an acute infectious disease caused by the spore - forming bacterium bacillus anthracis . the anthrax bacterium is commonly found in the soil and forms spores ( like seeds ) that can remain dormant in the environment for many years . human anthrax infections are rare in the united states and are usually the result of occupational exposure to infected animals or contaminated animal products , such as wool , hides , or hair . although infection in humans is rare , a person can die if airborne anthrax spores are inhaled into the lungs . once airborne , there is greater possibility that the spores will be inhaled . medical experts believe that symptoms of inhalation anthrax ( sore throat , muscle aches , and mild fever ) typically appear within 4 to 6 days of exposure , depending on how the disease is contracted . while anthrax is potentially fatal , individuals who are exposed to anthrax spores will not necessarily develop the disease . inhalation anthrax can be treated with antibacterial drugs , but medical treatment does not necessarily ensure recovery .