( see fig . 1 and table 1. ) nasa's current transportation vehicle , the space shuttle , has been in use for 20 years and requires a significant portion of nasa's resources to operate and maintain . sli is a highly ambitious program . it will require nasa to develop and advance new technologies , such as propulsion and airframe systems , which in turn can potentially be used by u.s. industry to create new business opportunities in space . the undertaking will also require a high level of communication and coordination between a range of partners , including private - sector contractors , academia , and the department of defense ( dod ) . moreover , it will require effective controls and oversight to reduce cost , scheduling , and technical risks . nasa's previous attempts to develop a new generation of space vehicles were unsuccessful largely because nasa did not successfully implement and adhere to critical project management controls and activities . you requested that we assess nasa's progress with the space launch initiative , particularly with respect to defining requirements and implementing management controls . nasa also anticipates building a third generation of vehicles in 2025 and even a fourth generation in 2040 . ( see fig . nasa anticipates that these vehicles would reach orbit in one stage ; travel beyond low - earth orbit to far - reaching interstellar missions ; and employ revolutionary technologies , such as ( 1 ) rocket engines that breath oxygen from the air during the climb to orbit rather than carrying heavy oxidizers onboard , ( 2 ) propellantless electromagnetic propulsion , and ( 3 ) solar - powered space sails . building the second - generation vehicle will be a considerably complex and challenging endeavor for nasa — from both a technical and business standpoint . for example , nasa plans to develop and advance new technologies for the new vehicle . these include ( 1 ) new airframe technologies that will include robust , low - cost , low - maintenance structure , tanks , and thermal protection systems , using advanced ceramic and metallic composite materials , and ( 2 ) new propulsion technologies , including main propulsion systems , orbital maneuvering systems , main engines , and propellant management . if successfully developed , nasa believes that these new technologies could substantially reduce the costs to maintain and operate the vehicle and increase its reliability . nasa also plans to develop the new vehicle through partnerships with private industry , academia , and dod . it is partnering with the private sector so that it can help create business opportunities in space , and it is partnering with dod because of military needs for a reusable launch vehicle . such partnerships will require a high level of coordination and communication , since agreements need to be reached on what the basic capabilities of the new vehicle will be , what designs or architecturesshould be pursued , how development costs will be shared , and what individual partner responsibilities will be . nasa recognizes that there are substantial technical and business risks with sli , and it is undertaking activities aimed at reducing them .