this is consistent with our report . we believe that our portrayal of the relationship between the 24-hour rule and csi is accurate . our report states that the 24-hour rule was implemented to ensure that customs would obtain complete and timely manifest data . this is based on specific evidence found in our examination of the 24-hour rule , as published in the federal register . ( see fig . according to customs officials , while customs inspectors review container data using the automated targeting system and seek assistance from local customs to screen containers , the intelligence analyst conducts further analyses using additional research tools and real - time information sharing with local customs' intelligence analysts . the team leader serves as a liaison between the csi team and the foreign customs administration and reports to the customs attaché regarding csi operations . currently , each csi team is assigned to a foreign port under a temporary duty assignment and is replaced by other customs personnel after a 120-day period . however , customs officials told us that they are currently seeking to convert these temporary positions to permanent csi staff positions at foreign ports . the budget for the csi program is expected to grow as the program expands , as shown in table 3 . in fiscal year 2002 , customs spent about $3.3 million , using emergency supplemental no - year funds to support preliminary csi needs . these funds were budgeted for such needs as travel to promote the program to foreign customs , the purchase of computer equipment for csi ports , and the maintenance of a csi team in rotterdam . customs' fiscal year 2003 budget is approximately $28.4 million to support csi operations in an anticipated 21 foreign ports and conduct assessments of 6 additional ports . as of march 2003 , customs had spent $3.4 million of fiscal year 2003 funds to support operations in 9 ports . as part of the new dhs budget , customs requested $61.2 million to support anticipated csi operations in 30 foreign ports in fiscal year 2004 . announced in november 2001 , c - tpat is a voluntary partnership program between the business community and customs , designed to enhance the security of international supply chains and thus reduce the number of containers that otherwise might be screened for wmds because of risk considerations . customs plans to achieve these objectives by encouraging importers , freight forwarders , carriers , and other logistics service providers to improve security practices and to persuade their service providers along their supply chain to do the same . customs accomplishes this through partnership agreements and by reviewing and following - up on company supply chain security profiles . in return , customs offers a number of incentives , including the key benefit of a reduced likelihood of inspection for wmds . customs is still developing critical aspects of the program intended to ensure that member companies respond to c - tpat recommendations for improving and maintaining supply chain security practices . like csi , the budget for c - tpat is expected to increase as the program expands .