3 ) as it had in previous years . for example , the 2006 eeo - 1 data show that african - americans and asians represented about 6.4 percent and 5.0 percent , respectively , of all financial services managers in 2006 . in addition , the 2006 eeo - 1 data show that commercial banks and insurance companies continued to have higher representation by minorities and women at the management level than securities firms . however , it is important to keep in mind that eeo - 1 data may actually overstate representation levels for minorities and white women in the most senior - level positions , such as chief executive officers of large investment firms or commercial banks , because the category that captures these positions — “officials and managers” — covers all management positions . thus , this category includes lower - level positions ( eg , assistant manager of a small bank branch ) that may have a higher representation of minorities and women . recognizing this limitation , starting in 2007 , eeoc revised its data collection form for employers to divide the “officials and managers” category into two subcategories: “executive / senior - level officers and managers” and “first / midlevel officials.” we hope that the increased level of detail will provide a more accurate picture of diversity among senior managers in the financial services industry over time . however , it is too soon to assess the impact of this change on diversity measures at the senior management level . officials from the firms that we contacted said that their top leadership was committed to implementing workforce diversity initiatives , but they noted that making such initiatives work was challenging . in particular , the officials cited ongoing difficulties in recruiting and retaining minority candidates and in gaining employees' “buy - in” for diversity initiatives , especially at the middle management level . minorities' rapid growth as a percentage of the overall u.s. population , as well as increased global competition , have convinced some financial services firms that workforce diversity is a critical business strategy . since the mid - 1990s , some financial services firms have implemented a variety of initiatives designed to recruit and retain minority and women candidates to fill key positions . officials from several banks said that they had developed scholarship and internship programs to encourage minority students to consider careers in banking . some firms and trade organizations have also developed partnerships with groups that represent minority professionals and with local communities to recruit candidates through events such as conferences and career fairs . to help retain minorities and women , firms have established employee networks , mentoring programs , diversity training , and leadership and career development programs . industry studies have noted , and officials from some financial services firms we contacted confirmed , that senior managers were involved in diversity initiatives . some of these officials also said that this level of involvement was critical to success of a program . for example , according to an official from an investment bank , the head of the firm meets with all minority and female senior executives to discuss their career development .