participation also varied . for example , participation was higher for the mandated preseparation counseling and generally lower for the employment workshops , where attendance is voluntary . in addition , while full - time active duty service members may participate in the full range of tap services , members of the reserves and national guard participate in an abbreviated version of some components and generally receive no employment preparation because they are often released from active duty within days after they return from overseas . the agencies administering tap have taken actions to improve its content and increase participation , but they continue to face challenges serving reserve and national guard members because of their rapid demobilization . to improve program content , the agencies have updated , or plan to update , their manuals , forms , and other briefing materials , and dol is assessing its employment workshop curriculum using focus groups and survey data . to increase participation , dol and va provide some employment workshops and veterans' benefits briefings overseas , and dod is considering a policy change that would mandate participation in all components . while the agencies have not assessed when and where to offer tap for members of the reserves and national guard , dol has pilot programs in three states that will offer employment workshops after the members return home . the role of the armed forces in the global war on terrorism and in military operations in afghanistan and iraq has heightened concerns about the assistance that these and other service members receive when they transition back into civilian life . all service members who have been on active duty for at least 180 days are eligible for tap , and those separating because of disability are eligible regardless of the length of their active duty service . about 309,000 servicemen and women separated from the military in fiscal year 2004 with sufficient time on active duty to meet the tap eligibility criteria . of these , about 192,000 were members of the full - time active duty armed forces — the air force , army , navy , or marine corps . the remaining 117,000 were members of the reserves and national guard , many of whom had been employed in civilian occupations before they were called to active duty . in recent years , more members of the reserves and national guard have been called to active duty and sent overseas than at any time since the korean war . further , the number of days they spend on average in active duty status has doubled since 1990 , when tap was established . dod expects this trend to continue through at least fiscal year 2007 , with reserves and national guard members serving on active duty for a year or more on average . each agency administering tap is responsible for the content and delivery of one of the program's four core components , as shown in figure 1 . in the first component , dod provides preseparation counseling , which includes a brief overview of available services and benefits .