government. ) how can we measure our performance ? how will we use that information to make improvements ? gpra forces a shift in the focus of federal agencies — away from such traditional concerns as staffing and activity levels and toward a single overriding issue: results . gpra requires agencies to set goals , measure performance , and report on their accomplishments.” organizations use performance measures to help demonstrate the level of progress in achieving results , to inform decision makers , and to hold managers accountable . to better articulate a results orientation , organizations create a set of performance goals and measures that address important dimensions of program performance . establishing and using performance measures for checkpoint operations and other strategy components would allow the border patrol to help assess the comparative success of each checkpoint in addressing program goals as well as checkpoints generally in comparison with line and patrol operations . a comparison of the effectiveness of each sector , using performance measures , would permit the border patrol to more meaningfully assess the success of its overall strategy than does a count of total apprehensions or contraband seizures . without knowing how much effort produced an outcome — in this case , apprehensions or contraband seizures — it is difficult to know if one sector or region is performing better than another ( on a per input basis ) . with such knowledge , more effective management strategies can be devised , if needed , to better allocate agency resources , in conjunction with other data and information . we acknowledge that developing performance measures applied to all checkpoints can be challenging for the reasons stated by border patrol officials . nevertheless , it is important that the border patrol develop performance measures to gauge success in meeting strategic goals and that these measures go beyond the traditional output data it currently uses to indicate the effectiveness of law enforcement efforts . although the border patrol told us that the legislative restrictions on funding for construction of checkpoints in the tucson sector , combined with the requirement to relocate checkpoints on a 7- or 14-day schedule , had reduced their effectiveness , it did not have a data - based analysis to support these statements . it did have data , by sector , on apprehensions of illegal entrants at interior checkpoints and for line watch / line patrol , as well as for work hours charged at interior checkpoints and line watch / line patrol . ( agent work hour data have not been maintained by the border patrol for tactical checkpoints versus permanent ones and were therefore not available. ) to test the feasibility of developing additional measures of performance that would address these concerns , we used border patrol data to measure apprehensions per agent work year and cost of apprehensions per agent work year . such measures might help to determine if the available data support the border patrol's statements on the impact of the legislative restrictions on the tucson sector's interior checkpoints effectiveness .