iii. ) regarding practices other than mandatory audit firm rotation that may have potential value to enhance auditor independence and audit quality , the sarbanes - oxley act provides the pcaob with the authority to set auditing and related attestation , ethics , independence , and quality control standards for registered public accounting firms and for conducting inspections to determine compliance of each registered public accounting firm with the rules of the pcaob , the sec , or professional standards in connection with the performance of audits , the issuance of audit reports , and related matters involving public companies . in that respect , the pcaob's inspection program for registered public accounting firms could also provide the pcaob with the opportunity to provide a “fresh look” at the auditor of record's performance regarding auditor independence and audit quality . for example , the inspections could include factors potentially affecting auditor independence , such as length of the auditor's tenure , partners or managers of the audit firm who recently left the firm and are now employed by the public company in financial reporting roles , and nonaudit services provided by the auditor of record , as suggested by the conference board commission on public trust and private enterprise in its january 9 , 2003 , report . also , the inspections could consider the auditor's work in high - risk areas of the public company's operations and related financial reporting . ( limited to section 9 , “maintaining the independence of auditors , rotation of auditors” ) . “audit fees and auditor change ; an investigation of the persistence of fee reduction by type of change” , journal of business finance and accounting , by a. gregory , and p. collier , january 1996 . “auditor changes and tendering: uk interview evidence” , accounting , auditing and accountability journal , v11n1 , v. beattie , and s. fearnley , 1998 . we analyzed the issues identified from our review of studies , articles , position papers , and reports to develop an understanding of the background and related advantages and disadvantages of mandatory audit firm rotation . we developed three separate survey instruments incorporating a variety of issues related to auditor independence , audit quality , mandatory audit firm rotation and the potential effects on audit costs , audit fees , audit quality , audit risk , and competition that may arise with a mandatory audit firm rotation requirement . in addition , these survey instruments solicited views on the impact of specific provisions of the sarbanes - oxley act intended to enhance auditor independence and audit quality , other practices for enhancing audit quality , views on implementing mandatory audit firm rotation , and overall opinions on requiring mandatory audit firm rotation . we performed field tests of the survey instruments to help ensure that the survey questions would be understandable to different groups of respondents , eliminate factual inaccuracies , and obtain feedback and recommendations to improve the surveys . we took the feedback and comments we received into consideration in developing our final survey instruments .