inventories of relevant properties . programmatic agreements can include inventories of historic properties that are relevant to the agreement . generally , the procedures outlined in the programmatic agreement would apply to all of the properties listed in the inventory . dispute resolution and emergency plans . programmatic agreements can also include dispute resolution mechanisms between parties to the agreement and contingency plans for the maintenance and repair of historic properties in the event on an emergency . dod instruction 4715.16 on cultural resource management states that installations should adapt and reuse existing structures at their installation before disposal , new construction , or leasing . see figure 3 below . officials from two of the four shpos said that due to positive working relationships between the installation and the shpo , a programmatic agreement has been put in place to help manage the installation's historic properties . these programmatic agreements can be used to address routine maintenance activities for historic properties that can be carried out by the installation with no further consultation with the shpo . in the four states that we visited , shpo officials said they executed programmatic agreements with some installations that can save time and reduce the number of required consultation meetings . according to officials from two of the four shpos we interviewed , having programmatic agreements in place can increase the efficiency of the historic preservation process . generally , these programmatic agreements can include the following: standard operating procedures . programmatic agreements can include a number of routine maintenance plans pre - approved by the shpo ( such as the replacement of historic windows , repairing leaking historic roofs , and painting historic buildings ) that an installation cultural resource manager can then follow without having to go through the consultation process . installations typically consult with the shpo before renovation work can proceed on historic properties , but , according to officials at one installation , alternative solutions can be reached if there is a good working relationship . in the figure below , at one military installation we visited , a historic property formerly used by national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) and now used by the installation is in the process of being renovated and converted into additional office space . the concrete dome was used to test the aerodynamics of some of nasa's satellite and spaceship components and is being converted into a new conference room after the shpo approved the installation's plan . see figure 4 below . while all of the installation cultural resource managers we spoke to told us they regularly communicate with their shpo and five of these cultural resource managers said that good working relationships with the shpo made the consultation process more efficient , installation officials may still experience challenges when trying to address historic preservation concerns . for example , maintenance officials at four of the 10 installations expressed some concerns about a backlog of consultations due in part to the increased time that they felt it takes to conduct these consultations . according to these officials , consultation backlogs caused delays to maintenance projects on historic properties at their installations .