the national infrastructure protection plan . dhs developed this plan to guide the national effort to manage risks to critical infrastructure . identifying security concerns at federal courthouses is critical to managing the risk to those courthouses . we previously compiled a risk management framework applicable to protecting federal facilities that defined risk management in general as managing across a portfolio . the judiciary receives a court security appropriation . the information provided in this report is more limited in scope , as it excludes such sensitive information , but it addresses the same questions that the law enforcement sensitive / limited official use report does , and the overall methodology used for both reports is the same . to determine the physical security concerns identified by the aousc , the u.s . marshals service ( marshals service ) , and the federal protective service ( fps ) , we reviewed and analyzed documents from these federal stakeholders , including capital - planning documents , security assessments , information on physical security concerns , and other reports , and interviewed aousc , marshals service , and fps officials to understand how they each identify security concerns and what data they collect . we limited our scope to information collected by these federal stakeholders , and we did not independently determine what constitutes a physical security concern . rather , we relied on these stakeholders to determine physical security concerns as defined in their own standards and guidance . as part of our review of these data , we assessed federal stakeholders' documentation and written responses about data collection procedures and their views of the quality of the data . we analyzed aousc's march 2016 security scores , but we did not analyze the scores of non - resident courthouses and bankruptcy - only courthouses due to differences in security requirements of the different court operations and facilities , differences that limit the comparability of security scores , leaving 267 courthouses for our analysis . we believe that aousc's security scores , developed as part of the judiciary's long - range capital - planning process , are sufficiently reliable for our purposes based on answers that aousc provided to our questions on data reliability . we also reviewed incident and threat data collected by the marshals service and fps , but based on our assessment , we do not believe these data were sufficiently reliable for describing physical security concerns across courthouses . we based this conclusion primarily on interviews with the marshals service and fps officials who both stated that there were significant limitations in these data . we reviewed the methods of collecting information by these federal stakeholders to determine whether it was used to understand security concerns portfolio - wide as defined in our risk management framework . to understand how the csp has or will address physical security concerns , we visited eight courthouses , which we selected to cover six csp projects at various stages of implementation ( completed , under construction , and pre - construction ) as well as two courthouses that were considered but not selected .