we do not agree . determining whether atpa is meeting its intended purpose of providing alternative economic opportunities for coca producers and workers in the four andean countries was beyond the scope of our review . however , our report does describe how asparagus production has contributed to economic development in peru . we disagree . the report provides information on both the fresh and processed sectors of the u.s. asparagus industry from 1990 to 2000 . for example , figures 1 , 4 , 5 , and 6 contain information on fresh and processed asparagus . we disagree . as we reported in figure 5 , the inflation - adjusted prices for fresh asparagus have trended upward from 1990 through 2000 while prices for processed asparagus remained relatively flat during this same period . see comment 1 . itc's most recent study estimates that atpa displaced an estimated 2 to 8 percent of the total value of domestic fresh asparagus production from what it would have been without the act . the 1999 data used for their study were the most current information available at the time of their analysis . we agree . the scope of our work did not include evaluating the economic impact on domestic growing regions . we disagree . the quantity and value of domestic asparagus production data for 1999 that we used to prepare our draft report were the most current available at the time of our review . subsequently , in january 2001 , the department of agricultures's national agricultural statistics service released its vegetables 2000 summary report . we updated our draft with the production information from that report . the updated information did not alter the results of our analyses . most of the decline occurred in washington . if atpa is reauthorized , the producers of asparagus and , in particular , asparagus for processing will likely face some continued displacement from imports , but consumers can expect continued benefits from the year - round availability of fresh asparagus . however , some of this displacement will likely occur even if atpa is not reauthorized and the normal tariff is imposed: 5 percent in 2 of the 5 months when the majority of peru's asparagus is imported , and 21.3 percent in the other 3 months . this is because u.s. consumers prefer fresh asparagus , which domestic producers cannot supply in some months , and because of peru's advantages in climate and labor costs . in addition , consumers would likely face decreased availability and pay higher prices than they would otherwise to the extent that the increase in tariff creates a reduction in imports from peru and hence an overall reduction in asparagus supply . u.s. asparagus producers will also face increasing competition from mexican imports under the north american free trade agreement . in the longer term , the free trade area of the americas , currently being negotiated , could go beyond both nafta and atpa by creating a duty - free trade zone in the western hemisphere for many products , including asparagus .