but this is only part of the story . the federal government for years has been borrowing the surpluses in the social security trust funds and other similar funds and using them to finance federal government costs . when such borrowings occur , treasury issues federal securities to these government funds that are backed by the full faith and credit of the u.s. government . although borrowing by one part of the federal government from another may not have the same economic and financial implications as borrowing from the public , it represents a claim on future resources and hence a burden on future taxpayers and the future economy . if federal securities held by those funds are included , the federal government's total debt is much higher — about $9 trillion as of the end of fiscal year 2007 . it should also include ( 1 ) a statement of fiscal sustainability that provides a long - term look at the sustainability of social insurance programs in the context of all federal programs , and ( 2 ) other sustainability information , including intergenerational equity . the federal accounting standards advisory board is currently considering possible changes to social insurance reporting and has initiated a project on fiscal sustainability reporting . as shown in figure 6 , total federal debt increased over each of the last four fiscal years . ultimately , the goal of such a reevaluation would be reporting enhancements that can help the congress deliberate on strategies to address the federal government's challenges , including its long - term fiscal challenge . in closing , it is important that the progress that has been made in improving federal financial management activities and practices be sustained by the current administration as well as the new administration that will be taking office next year . across government , financial management improvement initiatives are underway , and if effectively implemented , they have the potential to greatly improve the quality of financial management information as well as the efficiency and effectiveness of agency operations . however , the federal government still has a long way to go before realizing strong federal financial management . for dod , the challenges are many . we are encouraged by dod's efforts toward addressing its long - standing financial management weaknesses , but consistent and diligent management oversight toward achieving financial management capabilities , including audit readiness is needed . federal agencies need to improve the government's financial management systems . the civilian cfo act agencies must continue to strive toward routinely producing not only annual financial statements that can pass the scrutiny of a financial audit , but also quarterly financial statements and other meaningful financial and performance data to help guide decision makers on a day - to - day basis . addressing the nation's long - term fiscal challenge constitutes a major transformational challenge that may take a generation or more to resolve . gao is committed to sustained attention to this fiscal challenge to help ensure that this is not the first generation to leave its children and grandchildren a legacy of failed fiscal stewardship and the hardships that would bring .