we interviewed 30 of these webcasters . rock and pop are the types of music they most often delivered to listeners , although they also webcast rhythm and blues , jazz , “oldies,” and electronic dance music . for 17 of these small webcasters , the targeted audience includes both men and women , while the audience for the remaining 11 is predominately men . almost all of these small webcasters target listeners between the ages of 25 and 34 . small webcasters have economic arrangements with various third parties , including bandwidth providers , advertisers , and merchandise providers . other less commonly reported arrangements with third parties included those with companies that help small webcasters manage or obtain advertising , such as companies that insert ads either on the web site or into the webcast , and companies that sell advertising based on the aggregate audience of multiple webcasters . we determined that the economic arrangements of the small webcasters that elected to follow the terms in the small webcaster agreement and those that elected not to do so were not substantially different . fifty - two , or 91 percent , of the small webcasters that we interviewed reported having had arrangements with bandwidth providers during the year 2003 . in addition , 24 small webcasters said that they had received free bandwidth . however , only 16 of them had received free bandwidth in 2003 . fifteen small webcasters reported that they had received bandwidth at a reduced price at some point , while 14 were receiving it at a reduced price in 2003 . although bandwidth is the dominant cost component for most webcasters , some bandwidth providers offer these incentives as a means to gain business for themselves and to promote the small webcaster market in general . over half of the small webcasters interviewed had attempted to sell advertising space , either directly or through advertising firms . of the 40 small webcasters that reported having attempted to sell advertising space , 38 said they were currently running advertising on their stations and 2 stated that they had run advertising in the past , but were no longer doing so . as shown in figure 4 , these small webcasters had various methods of selling advertising space . most reported that the owners or employees of their stations sold advertising space . other arrangements to sell advertising space , such as through advertising firms or coalitions of webcasters , were less common . small webcasters use various types of advertising on their sites . banner ads , which are graphic images that typically appear toward the top of web pages , were the most common type of advertising used by small webcasters ( see fig . thirty - three of the small webcasters reported that they use banner ads on their sites , and another 2 reported that they used banner ads in the past , but no longer do so . audio ads , which play at the beginning or during a small webcaster's stream , were currently being used by 29 of the small webcasters , and another 3 reported having used them in the past .