deferred model . this model was developed under the assumption that , given current funding constraints , it may not be realistic for two major decontamination and decommissioning projects to be done concurrently . thus , deferred time frames were determined by doe , assuming that all work would be completed at the portsmouth plant first and then initiated at the paducah plant . for the deferred model , portsmouth's final decontamination and decommissioning work was estimated to be completed from 2010 to 2037 and paducah's from 2038 to 2052 . revenue - added model . this model was developed to assess the effect of the government's meeting its total authorized annual contributions on the balance of the fund , which by the start of fiscal year 2004 , was $707 million less than authorized under the energy policy act . for the revenue - added model , we used baseline time frames but assumed that government contributions to the fund would continue annually at the 2004 authorized level until all government contributions as authorized by law had been met , which would occur in fiscal year 2009 . revenue - added - plus - interest model . for this model , we built on the revenue - added model to include the effect of forgone interest that the fund could have earned had the government contributed the full authorized amount . we assumed that these additional payments would be made to the fund in the same amounts as the 2004 annual authorized amount and extended payments through fiscal year 2010 . irrespective of which model we used , we found that the fund would be insufficient to cover the projected cleanup costs at the uranium enrichment plants ( see table 1 ) . at best , assuming no additional funding is provided beyond the 2007 authorized amount , fund costs could outweigh revenues by $3.8 billion ( in 2007 dollars ) . even with current authorized amounts extended out through fiscal year 2010 , the fund could still be insufficient by close to $0.46 billion ( in 2007 dollars ) . although our analysis was able to capture several uncertainties potentially affecting the fund — including interest rates , inflation rates , cost and revenue variances , and the timing of decontamination and decommissioning — additional uncertainties exist that we could not capture . these uncertainties included possible changes to the scope of the cleanup ; whether the fund would be required to pay for additional activities , such as long - term water monitoring once the plants were closed ; and the extent of potential future litigation costs that the fund would have to support . for example , a risk analysis completed by doe in 2004 for the paducah plant indicated that changes in the scope of cleanup could increase cleanup costs by more than $3 billion and extend the time frame for cleanup to more than 30 years past the original scheduled date of 2019 . in addition , when they developed their cleanup cost estimates , doe officials assumed that the costs of long - term stewardship activities — such as groundwater monitoring , which may continue after all necessary cleanup costs have been completed — would be covered by a separate funding source .