whistleblowers . whistleblowers provide irs information on suspected noncompliance . they have the potential to help irs collect billions in tax revenue that may otherwise go uncollected . since irs expanded its whistleblower program in 2007 , it has collected over $1 billion because of whistleblower claims . we have ongoing work for this committee that focuses on improving irs's communication with whistleblowers and the timeliness of claims processing , among other things , which could help irs recover more unpaid tax revenues . given that the tax gap has been a persistent issue , we have previously reported that reducing it will require targeted legislative actions , including the following: additional third - party information reporting . as noted earlier , taxpayers are much more likely to report their income accurately when the income is also reported to irs by a third party . in 2008 and 2009 , we suggested congress consider expanding third - party information reporting to include payments for services to rental real estate owners and payments for services provided by corporations , respectively . in 2010 , the joint committee on taxation estimated potential revenue increases for a 10-year period to be $2.5 billion for third - party information reporting of rental real estate service payments and $3.4 billion for third - party information reporting of service payments to corporations . congress enacted a more expansive regime in 2010 , covering reporting of payments for goods as well as services , and subsequently repealed these provisions . a more narrow extension of reporting requirements of payments for services provided by corporations and for services provided to rental real estate owners remains an important option for improving compliance . enhanced electronic filing . requiring additional taxpayers to electronically file tax and information returns could help irs improve compliance in a resource - efficient way . for example , partnerships with more than 100 partners and corporations with assets of $10 million or more that file at least 250 returns during the calendar year must electronically file their returns . in 2014 , we suggested that congress consider expanding the mandate for partnerships and corporations to electronically file their tax returns , as this could help irs reduce return processing costs , select the most productive tax returns to examine , and examine fewer compliant taxpayers . math error authority . irs has the authority to correct calculation errors and check for other obvious noncompliance such as claims above income and credit limits . treasury has proposed expanding irs's “math error” authority to “correctible error” authority to permit it to correct errors in cases where information provided by the taxpayer does not match information in government databases , among other things . expanding such authority — which we have suggested congress consider with appropriate safeguards — could help irs correct additional errors and avoid burdensome audits and taxpayer penalties . in march 2015 , the joint committee on taxation estimated that more flexible correctible error authority could raise $133 million through 2025 . paid preparer regulation . establishing requirements for paid tax return preparers could improve the accuracy of the tax returns they prepare . oregon began regulating preparers in the 1970s and requires testing among other requirements .