in circular no . a - 11 , omb referred agencies to circular no . a - 123 for requirements related to erm implementation , including for developing a risk profile as a component of the agency's annual strategic review . a risk profile is a prioritized inventory of the most significant risks identified and assessed through the risk assessment process . it considers risks from a portfolio perspective , identifies sources of uncertainty that are both positive ( opportunities ) and negative ( threats ) , and facilitates the review and regular monitoring of risks . together , these two omb circulars constitute the erm policy framework for executive agencies by integrating and operationalizing specific erm activities and helping to modernize existing risk management efforts . standards for internal control in the federal government describes internal control as a process put in place by an entity's oversight body , management , and other personnel that provides reasonable assurance that objectives related to performing operations effectively and efficiently , producing reliable internal and external reports , and complying with applicable laws and regulations will be achieved . internal control serves as the first line of defense in safeguarding assets . its importance to federal agencies is further reflected in permanent requirements enacted into law . the internal control processes required by fmfia and the standards for internal control in the federal government help to form an integrated governance structure designed to improve mission delivery , reduce costs , and focus corrective actions toward key risks . omb circular no . a - 123 precludes agencies from concluding that their internal control is effective if there are one or more material weaknesses identified from its assessment . as a component of dod , the air force is required to ( 1 ) identify and manage risks , ( 2 ) establish and operate an effective system of internal control , ( 3 ) assess and correct control deficiencies , and ( 4 ) report on the effectiveness of internal control through an annual statement of assurance . in addition , the chief financial officers act of 1990 ( cfo act ) , as amended by the government management reform act of 1994 and implemented by guidance in omb bulletin no . 19-03 , audit requirements for federal financial statements ( august 27 , 2019 ) , requires the air force to annually undergo a financial statement audit . however , since 1990 , the air force has continued to be unable to demonstrate basic internal control that would allow it to pass a financial statement audit , which has contributed to dod's financial management remaining on the gao high - risk list since 1995 . for fiscal year 2018 , the air force reported 11 material weaknesses in internal control over operations and 14 material weaknesses in internal control over reporting in its statement of assurance . for fiscal year 2019 , it reported the same number of operations - related material weaknesses , and its reporting - related material weaknesses increased to 25 .