surveys . to obtain employees' views on sec's personnel management and organizational culture , we implemented two web - based surveys from march 2019 to may 2019 . we administered the first survey to a stratified random sample of 877 nonexecutive employees in mission - critical occupations in mission - critical offices and divisions . we administered the second survey to all 80 senior officers in mission - critical offices and divisions . to determine our sample of nonexecutive employees , we stratified the population of mission - critical sec employees into sampling strata by office and division to help mitigate the risk that a particular part of sec could be over - or underrepresented by the respondents to our survey . we stratified the division of enforcement and the office of compliance inspections and examinations into two further categories ( “headquarters” and “regional office” ) because this division and office have a majority of their staff located in one of sec's 11 regional offices . table 3 shows the total number of employees and the number of employees selected in our sample for each of the strata . due to their small employee counts , we combined the offices of the chief accountant and credit ratings into one stratum for the purpose of selecting the sample . prior to selecting the sample , we sorted the sample frame by supervisory status within each stratum . we then selected the sample via systematic random sampling within each stratum . our initial sample size allocation was designed to achieve a stratum - level margin of error no greater than plus or minus 8 percentage points at the 95 percent level of confidence . based upon our prior surveys on sec's personnel management , we assumed a response rate of 70 percent to determine the sample size for the mission - critical employees . at the time of our review , sec had plans to implement a new performance management system , including a new incentive bonus program , in january 2020 but had not yet completed detailed policies and procedures to implement this new system . however , we compared the system's key features with criteria identified in prior gao work , including work on strategies federal agencies can use for fair and transparent performance management . in addition , we reviewed the sec office of inspector general's 2018 report that described progress and challenges in the agency's performance management efforts . to examine sec's workforce and succession planning practices , we obtained and reviewed a copy of sec's fiscal year 2019 – 2022 workforce and succession planning strategy , which outlines new approaches to workforce and succession planning that sec began to implement in fiscal year 2019 . we also obtained and reviewed documentation of sec's implementation of key steps in its workforce and succession planning processes , such as the survey instrument used to identify skill gaps for all sec occupations , slide presentations of sec divisions' operating plans and budget requests that are informed by human capital review meetings , examples of action plans sec divisions and offices developed to address identified skill gaps , sec's succession planning tool kit , and relevant training plans for sec divisions .