continuous coverage . naic and stakeholders cited fema's interpretation of the continuous coverage requirement in connection with private flood insurance and the effect on consumers' ability to qualify for nfip discounted rates . effective april 1 , 2016 , fema prohibits the use of discounted rates ( subsidized or “grandfathered” rates ) for policies when there has been a lapse in nfip coverage of more than 90 days ( see fig . fema officials noted that excluding non - nfip policies from constituting continuous coverage was due to fema's interpretation of the hfiaa provision on policy lapses . some stakeholders , including private insurers , noted that fema's decision to exclude private flood insurance policies from constituting continuous coverage could have financial repercussions for consumers seeking to reinstate their previously discounted nfip coverage ( after using a private policy to insure their properties from flood losses ) . so , if a nfip policyholder who qualified for subsidized rates switched to a private flood policy , and then switched back to an nfip policy , the policyholder would no longer qualify for subsidized rates and would be charged full - risk rates based on the elevation of the property . a single - family primary residence with $200,000 in building coverage and $50,000 in contents coverage would pay a subsidized premium of $2,880 , but their full - risk rate would be based on elevation . for example if this building's elevation was 1 foot below base flood elevation , the full - risk premium would be $4,650 . if it was 2 feet below , the full - risk premium would be $6,890 . two private insurers and an association representing insurers told us that due to the risk of losing their discounted nfip rates , consumers may avoid the private market as an option to insure against flood losses . narrowed opportunities for premium refunds . according to naic and the private flood insurance companies with whom we spoke , another recent regulatory change — a fema guidance revision related to policy cancellations — could discourage the use of private flood insurance by consumers . fema allows nfip coverage to be terminated in accordance with its stated cancellation reasons . if coverage is terminated for a valid cancellation reason , the insured may be entitled to a full or partial refund of the paid nfip premium . effective november 1 , 2015 , fema no longer allows policyholders to cancel their nfip policy and obtain a refund if they obtained a non - nfip policy ( private flood insurance policy ) . however , fema had allowed for refunds under this scenario previously ( see fig . according to naic officials , if the reason for cancellation of an insurance policy is the request of the policyholder , the policyholder generally would receive a refund of the paid premium , which may be less than the prorated premium , if stipulated by the insurance policy . two organizations that represent private insurers also stated that policyholders generally would receive a refund of their paid premium when cancelling a policy after the effective date of the policy .