a receipt for the transaction . while the go ! card has additional controls and does not function as a traditional purchase card , we included the transactions in our sample because they were subject to omb circular a - 123 , appendix b , in fiscal year 2014 , according to gsa officials , and therefore in the scope of our review . according to hhs officials , psc program administrators reviewed the monthly statements for anomalies and occurrences of potentially fraudulent purchases , but at the time of our review the agency did not have a formal process of ao approval after the transaction posted to the bank . therefore , the transactions we identified had incomplete documentation due to missing documentation of ao approval . as of october 2016 , hhs had produced a draft policy for the go ! card program that included ao approval of the monthly bank statements and that the agency estimated would be finalized in may 2017 . officials from two agencies in our sample initially were unable to provide documentation of final ao approval made through one of the three smartpay banks because the agencies relied on the bank to maintain the records for 3 years . while the bank's online purchase card management system enabled aos to electronically approve transactions , the bank's system did not retain transaction approval history information , including final approval by the ao , beyond 2 years of the transaction . according to the gsa smartpay2 master contract and the far , in fiscal year 2014 contractors were required to maintain electronic records for a minimum of 3 years after payment . however , according to a bank official , the bank did not consider the transaction approval process part of the transaction but rather information appended through the online system . under the smartpay2 master contract , the bank was only required to allow access to that online system for 18 months . failure to retain records for 3 years after final payment limits the ability of the agency , gao , and other oversight groups to provide oversight of the program as part of an overall effort to reduce instances of fraudulent , improper , and abusive purchase card activity . as a result of our current review , gsa worked with the bank used by these two agencies to develop short - and long - term solutions for the retention of ao approval records . in the short term , the bank developed a transaction - specific manual process to locate and produce ao approval records for transactions that had aged out of the online system . the bank also agreed to provide this manual service on a case - by - case basis for audits and investigations for the duration of the smartpay2 master contract . in the longer term , gsa will pursue a contract modification in the smartpay2 master contract in fiscal year 2017 to further clarify review and approval record - retention requirements , according to a gsa official .