2466 requirement . we reviewed supporting details ( summary records , accounting reports , budget submissions , and contract documents ) at departmental headquarters , major commands , selected maintenance activities , and reporting centers . we compared processes to determine consistency and compliance with legislative provisions , office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) guidance , and military service instructions . we selected certain programs , reporting centers , and maintenance activities for a more - detailed review . we particularly examined reporting categories that department of defense ( dod ) personnel and we had identified as problem areas in current and past reviews . these areas included interserviced workloads , contractor logistics support , warranties , software maintenance , and depot maintenance at nondepot locations . we evaluated processes for collecting and aggregating data to ensure accurate and complete reporting and to identify errors , omissions , and inconsistencies . to determine whether the future - year projections were based on accurate data , valid assumptions , and existing plans and represented reasonable estimates , we followed the same general approach and methodology we used to review the prior - years report . although the future - years report is a budget - based projection of obligations , the definitions , guidance , organization , and processes used to report future - years data are much the same as those for the prior - years report of actual obligations . we discussed with dod officials the main differences between the two processes and the manner in which the data were derived from budgets and planning requirements and key assumptions made in the out - year data . for reviews of both 50-50 reports , we performed certain checks and tests , including variance analyses , to judge the consistency of this information with data from prior years and with the future - years budgeting and programming data used in dod's budget submissions and reports to the congress . for example , we compared each service's 50-50 data reported in february and april 2004 for fiscal years 2002 through 2008 with data reported for these same years in the 50-50 reports submitted in fiscal year 2003 . we found repeated and significant changes , even though the estimates were prepared only about 1 year apart . we used this analysis to further discuss with officials and analyze reasons for changes in reported data and percentage allocations between the 2003 and 2004 reports submitted to the congress . our work has shown that dod's 50-50 data cannot be relied upon as a precise measure of the allocation of depot maintenance funds between the public and private sectors . however , the mandate in 10 u.s.c . 2466 requires ( 1 ) dod to report the data , which are the only data available and accepted and used for dod decision making and for congressional oversight , and ( 2 ) gao to submit its views to the congress on whether dod has complied with the 50-50 requirement .