checkbook with a bank account. ) because of the fundamental importance of the reconciliation , gao reviewed the processes used by the navy , marine corps , and the defense finance and accounting service , which processes much of dod components' financial data , including transactions that affect fbwt . we recommended that the navy and marine corps improve policies and procedures that guide the fbwt reconciliation process , provide training to communicate these policies and procedures to staff , and resolve system deficiencies . the effective implementation of enterprise resource planning ( erp ) systems will be critical to the success of all of dod's planned long - term financial improvement efforts . erp systems are integrated , multifunction systems that perform business - related tasks such as general ledger accounting and supply chain management . dod considers their implementation essential to transforming its business operations . however , dod continues to encounter difficulties in implementing its planned erp systems on schedule and within budget . for example , in october 2010 , we reported that six of nine critical dod erps we also experienced schedule delays ranging from 2 to 12 years . reported that five of these erps incurred cost increases totaling an estimated $6.9 billion . we made eight recommendations to dod aimed at improving schedule and cost practices and the development of performance measures to evaluate whether the erps' intended goals are being accomplished . however , the federal government continues to be unable to adequately account for and reconcile intragovernmental activity and balances . for both fiscal years 2011 and 2010 , amounts reported by federal entity trading partners for certain intragovernmental accounts were not in agreement by significant amounts . omb and treasury require the cfos of 35 significant federal entities to reconcile , on a quarterly basis , selected intragovernmental activity and balances with their trading partners . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . your involvement is critical to assuring continued progress . our testimony today discusses the following major issues relating to the consolidated financial statements for fiscal years 2011 and 2010: ( 1 ) the results of our audit , including continued major impediments to an opinion on the accrual - based consolidated financial statements and certain significant uncertainties that prevented us from expressing opinions on the 2011 and 2010 statements of social insurance,2011 statement of changes in social insurance amounts ; ( 2 ) the effects of the last economic recession and the federal government's actions to stabilize financial markets and promote economic recovery on the federal government's financial condition ; and ( 3 ) challenges posed by the federal government's long - term fiscal outlook . as well as on the both the consolidated financial statements and our related audit report are included in the fiscal year 2011 financial report of the united states government ( financial report ) . provide our report on the consolidated financial statements , internal control , and compliance with selected provisions of laws and regulations .