flexibility . issuers can generally structure debt protection products more easily , consistently , and quickly than they can state - regulated credit insurance , and can offer a broader array of products . issuer representatives cited the desire for more flexible products that meet cardholder needs as a reason for their decision to shift from credit insurance to debt protection products . potentially higher earnings . representatives of regulators and one consumer group noted that debt protection products offer more potential for earnings than credit insurance . this may be in part because of the absence of price controls that states generally impose on credit insurance rates and the nonuniformity of state regulation . in addition , because credit card issuers sell their debt protection products directly to cardholders , they do not have to share product earnings with an insurance company and can retain more of the fees . debt protection products cancel or suspend some or all of a cardholder's debt after the occurrence of certain qualifying events ( see fig . all of the nine largest issuers' primary debt protection products include a cancellation benefit , and four of these products also include a suspension benefit: cancellation benefits forgive some or all of a cardholder's debt . these benefits may cancel the total credit card balance if the cardholder dies or may cancel the minimum monthly payment for a specific time during a period of unemployment , for example . as a result , debt cancellation benefits reduce the cardholder's account balance by the amount of debt being canceled . suspension benefits allow a cardholder to skip the minimum monthly payment without penalty and without accruing interest for a specified time period . debt suspension does not reduce the cardholder's account balance . these cancellation and suspension benefits are triggered by certain events . benefits vary among products , with most debt protection products covering loss of life , disability , involuntary unemployment , and leave of absence from employment . some products also cover other events , such as the birth or adoption of a child , marriage , relocation , divorce , hospitalization , call to active u.s. military duty , retirement , loss of a spouse or child , or natural disaster . at least one issuer also includes an emergency payment benefit , which cancels the minimum monthly payment once per year for any reason . another issuer includes a benefit that allows cardholders to suspend one monthly payment per year in months that include specific federal holidays . each product offered by the nine issuers covers a different number of events , ranging from 4 to 21 events . some products allow benefits to be triggered by events affecting individuals other than the primary cardholder , such as the cardholder's spouse or domestic partner , other authorized users of the card , or the highest wage earner in the cardholder's household . for example , benefits could be triggered by the involuntary unemployment of the cardholder's spouse . debt protection product fees are generally charged monthly and are based on the cardholder's outstanding balance . fees for the nine largest credit card issuers' debt protection products range from $0.85 to $1.35 per month for every $100 of the outstanding balance .