sbdcs . information on the number of sbdcs hosted by hbcus is incomplete . sba's records do not allow for ready identification of hbcus as host institutions because there is no field to identify whether a host institution is an hbcu . while sba provided information on the number of sbdc lead centers hosted by hbcus over time , information was not available on the number of sbdc service centers hosted by hbcus during the time frame of our review ( 2008 – 2018 ) because according to sba officials , host institutions for service centers can change over time . strategic alliance memorandums . information on the number of strategic alliance memorandums signed with hbcus is incomplete . in september 2018 , sba provided us a list of hbcus that signed strategic alliance memorandums from 2008 through 2018 , developed by cross - referencing records of memorandums with a list of hbcus . sba identified 24 such hbcus , but we identified an additional three hbcus that had signed strategic alliance memorandums during this period . in june 2019 , sba provided us a list of all strategic alliance memorandums signed from 2015 through 2018 , but we found that a 2016 memorandum with alabama a&m university ( huntsville , alabama ) was not included . co - sponsorship agreements . federal internal controls standards state that management should use quality information to achieve the entity's objectives . for example , management obtains relevant data based on the identified information requirements and relevant data have a logical connection with the identified information requirements . sba lacks information related to programs and activities with hbcus because district offices and sbdcs with hbcus in their service areas have not been required by relevant program offices to collect or report information specific to hbcus , including information relevant for measures developed in sba's 2018 plan . without collection of relevant information for its hbcu - related efforts , particularly for measures developed for annual plans , sba will not be able to establish a baseline of its efforts to support hbcus . moreover , without this baseline sba cannot determine the extent or effectiveness of its efforts to support and engage hbcus . sba's priority goals include reaching emerging markets that are socially and economically disadvantaged . the agency's efforts related to hbcus , which educate many low - income students and help support their local communities , can assist the agency in advancing that goal . but while sba has long participated in the white house initiative on hbcus , it has not clearly assigned responsibilities among relevant offices for addressing its plan for the initiative ; communicated its plan to support hbcus to sba district offices and sbdcs ( with hbcus in their service areas ) , which deliver training and counseling ; and collected relevant information to establish a baseline and track ongoing efforts to support hbcus . addressing these issues would better position sba to assess the extent to which it is reaching its goals specific to supporting hbcus , as well as agency - wide priority goals to more broadly reach socially and economically disadvantaged communities .