progress reviews . gprama also requires that the director of omb , with the support of the pic , review progress towards each cap goal with the appropriate lead government official at least quarterly . specifically , the law requires that these should include a review of progress during the most recent quarter , overall trends , and the likelihood of meeting the planned level of performance . as part of these reviews , omb is to assess whether relevant agencies , organizations , program activities , regulations , tax expenditures , policies , and other activities are contributing as planned to the goal . the law also requires that omb categorize the goals by risk of not achieving the planned level of performance and , for those at greatest risk of not meeting the planned level of performance , identify strategies for performance improvement . in an earlier evaluation of the implementation of quarterly performance reviews at the agency level , we found that regular , in - person review meetings provide a critical opportunity for leaders to use current data and information to analyze performance , provide feedback to managers and staff , follow up on previous decisions or commitments , learn from efforts to improve performance , and identify and solve performance problems . as part of this work we also identified nine leading practices that can be used to promote successful performance reviews at the federal level . to identify these practices , we conducted a review of relevant academic and policy literature , including our previous reports . we refined these practices with additional information obtained from practitioners at the local , state , and federal level who shared their experiences and lessons learned . nine leading practices that can be used to promote successful performance reviews leaders use data - driven reviews as a leadership strategy to drive performance improvement . key players attend reviews to facilitate problem solving . reviews ensure alignment between goals , program activities , and resources . leaders hold managers accountable for diagnosing performance problems and identifying strategies for improvement . there is capacity to collect accurate , useful , and timely performance data . staff have skills to analyze and clearly communicate complex data for decision making . rigorous preparations enable meaningful performance discussions . reviews are conducted on a frequent and regularly scheduled basis . participants engage in rigorous and sustained follow - up on issues identified during reviews . reporting requirements . in addition to requiring quarterly reviews , gprama requires that omb make information available on “a single website” ( now known as performance.gov ) for each cap goal on the results achieved during the most recent quarter , and overall trend data compared to the planned level of performance . in addition , information on performance.gov is to include an assessment of whether relevant federal organizations , programs , and activities are contributing as planned , and , for those cap goals at risk of not achieving the planned level of performance , information on strategies for performance improvement . new cap goals . as required by gprama , in march 2014 , omb announced the creation of a new set of cap goals in the fiscal year 2015 budget .