it did not do so when redesigning the passport card . by conducting such an assessment , state potentially could have identified and addressed any vulnerabilities of the passport card's design to resist fraudulent use . state has taken actions to conduct such assessments in future redesigns , which , if effectively implemented , should better position state to identify vulnerabilities in its travel documents' abilities to resist fraud before they can be exploited . security assessments and testing can provide the added assurance that the cards meet security requirements . the card is then mailed to the traveler . in general , passport cards are personalized at state's arkansas passport center , but the tucson passport center also has the capacity for high volume personalization of the cards and most passport agencies have the capability of personalizing limited volumes of cards . ( 2 ) how are cbp officers using the security features of passport cards and second generation bccs to prevent fraudulent use at land poes ? to answer these questions , we evaluated the security features of passport cards and second generation bccs and assessed the inspection of these cards at land poes . specifically , it examines the following two questions: ( 1 ) how effectively does state's development process — including procurement and testing and evaluation — for the passport card and second generation bcc mitigate the risk of fraudulent use ? we did not evaluate the issuance processes for these cards because they follow the procedures for passport and visa issuance and we have completed recent work on these issuance processes . to determine how effectively state's development process for the passport card and second generation bcc mitigates the risk of fraudulent use , we interviewed officials from state's bureau of consular affairs , cbp , and the forensic document laboratory ( fdl ) in dhs's u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) . we interviewed state and dhs officials on the designs for the security features of the passport card and bcc and assessed them against applicable standards and guidelines . while state addressed most of the issues raised and recommendations made during evaluation and testing of the prototype passport card , it either did not address some of the issues and recommendations or did not document its reasons for not doing so . finally , we interviewed officials at the tucson passport center to understand and observe how second generation bccs are personalized . to determine how cbp officers use the security features of passport cards and second generation bccs to prevent fraudulent use at land poes , we interviewed officials from cbp and reviewed cbp policies , procedures , guidance , and training documents regarding the inspection of travelers presenting passport cards and second generation bccs for the purpose of entry to the united states , including the use of the cards' physical security features and cardholder information retrieved from cbp border inspection systems . we conducted site visits to five land poes in two port areas to interview cbp officials and observe the inspection process of travel documents to understand how cbp officers use the physical security features and dhs database information to verify the eligibility of a traveler presenting a passport card or bcc to enter the united states .