testing . testing is the process of executing a program with the intent of finding errors . without adequate testing , an organization ( 1 ) is taking a significant risk that substantial defects will not be detected until after the system is implemented and ( 2 ) does not have reasonable assurance that new or modified systems will function as planned . we found that hhs faced challenges in implementing a disciplined testing program , because , first of all , it did not have an effective requirements management system that produced clear , unambiguous requirements upon which to build its testing efforts . in addition , hhs had scheduled its testing activities , including those for converting data from existing systems to ufms , late in the implementation cycle leaving little time to correct defects identified before the scheduled deployment in october 2004 . project management and oversight using quantitative measures . we found that hhs did not have quantitative metrics that allowed it to fully understand ( 1 ) its capability to manage the entire ufms effort ; ( 2 ) how problems in its management processes would affect the ufms cost , schedule , and performance objectives ; and ( 3 ) the corrective actions needed to reduce the risks associated with the problems identified with its processes . such quantitative measures are essential for adequate project management oversight . without such information , hhs management can only focus on the project schedule and whether activities have occurred as planned , not on whether the substance of the activities achieved their system development objectives . as we note in our report , this is not an effective practice . risk management . we noted that hhs routinely closed its identified risks on the premise that they were being addressed . risk management is a continuous process to identify , monitor , and mitigate risks to ensure that the risks are being properly controlled and that new risks are identified and resolved as early as possible . an effective risk management process is designed to mitigate the effects of undesirable events at the earliest possible stage to avoid costly consequences . in addition , hhs' effectiveness in managing the processes associated with its data conversion and ufms interfaces will be critical to the success of this project . for example , cdc's ability to convert data from its existing systems to the new system will be crucial to helping ensure that ufms will provide the kind of data needed to manage cdc's programs and operations . the adage “garbage in garbage out” best describes the adverse impact . furthermore , hhs expects that once ufms is fully deployed , the system will need to interface with about 110 other systems , of which about 30 system interfaces are needed for the cdc deployment . proper implementation of the interfaces between ufms and the other systems it receives data from and sends data to is essential for providing data integrity and ensuring that ufms will operate as it should and provide the information needed to help manage its programs and operations . compounding these ufms - specific problems are departmentwide weaknesses we have previously reported in information technology ( it ) investment management , enterprise architecture , and information security .