officers at the u.s . forces in korea posed a slightly different problem . given its remote location , officers typically serve in korea for only 1-2 years . dod has implemented these recommendations . most recently , congress amended the law regarding the promotion criteria for officers being considered for promotion to the general and flag officer pay grades . the goldwater - nichols act established a requirement that officers must have served in a joint position prior to being selected for these promotions . the amendment , contained in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2002 , will require most officers being considered for appointment to this grade after september 30 , 2007 , to complete the joint education program as well . dod uses a number of multiservice and multinational commands and organizations to plan and support joint matters . since passage of the goldwater - nichols act , officers serving in these commands and organizations have overseen a number of joint and multinational military operations that range from humanitarian assistance and peacekeeping to major operations such as operation desert storm and ongoing operations in afghanistan . the number of joint positions in these organizations has ranged from a low of 8,217 positions in fiscal year 1988 to a high of 9,371 positions in fiscal year 1998 . changing missions and reorganizations have contributed to this variation . in fiscal year 2001 , dod had a total of 9,146 joint positions . of these positions , 3,400 positions were allocated to the air force ; 3,170 positions were allocated to the army ; 2,004 positions were allocated to the navy ; and 572 positions were allocated to the marine corps . figure 1 shows that the air force had the largest percentage , followed by the army , the navy , and the marine corps . officers in pay grades o - 4 ( majors in the air force , army , and marine corps and lieutenant commanders in the navy ) and above can receive credit for joint experience when they serve in the joint staff , joint geographic and functional commands , combined forces commands , and defense agencies . in addition , the secretary of defense has authority to award joint credit to officers for serving in certain joint task force headquarters staffs . dod has developed a joint duty assignment list that includes all of the active duty positions in pay grades o - 4 and above in the multiservice organizations that are involved in or support the integrated employment of the armed forces . dod's policy places limits on the number of positions in the defense agencies and other jointly staffed activities that can be included on the list . the list of joint organizations and demographic descriptions of the officers serving in those organizations are provided in appendix ii . the assistant secretary of defense for force management policy , under the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , has overall responsibility for the policies and procedures governing dod's joint officer management program .