arcos . as discussed above , arcos monitors the flow of transactions of schedule i , ii , iii and select schedule iv controlled substances from their point of manufacture to their point of sale or distribution at the dispensing or retail level ( such as hospitals , retail pharmacies , practitioners , and teaching institutions ) . the data in arcos are used to , among other things , track regulatory compliance in the pharmaceutical drug industry and to detect abuse of legally manufactured pharmaceuticals that are diverted to illegal markets , according to dea diversion control division officials . suspicious order reporting system ( sors ) . dea developed sors to receive and store suspicious order reports . to date , dea has developed three versions of sors as described below . ( 2 ) to what extent does dea collaborate with industry stakeholders to combat opioid diversion ? to address our first objective , we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , program guidance , and relevant reports and conducted interviews with dea headquarters offices , including the diversion control division and a non - generalizable sample of eight dea field division offices . this included interviewing dea officials at these field division offices to learn about how diversion investigators use industry - reported data and what , if any , improvements might be needed . to identify which of the 23 dea field division offices to interview , we prioritized our selection based on criteria such as the controlled prescription drug availability rate in their geographic area , whether the office was the location of a doj opioid - related task force , and whether the office was in a top ten state for controlled prescription drug prescribing rates , based on data from cdc . in addition , we reviewed dea documentation of procedures for conducting drug - related investigations , information system manuals for data and information systems used by dea , written communications from dea to registrants , and dea forms registrants use to report prescription drug transactions to dea . we also interviewed officials from other federal , state , and local entities with opioid diversion prevention responsibilities , such as state level prescription drug monitoring programs , the department of health and human services , including the centers for medicare and medicaid services , and the doj u.s. attorney's office opioid fraud and abuse detection unit . we also conducted interviews with industry associations and private sector industry members to gather their perspectives and experiences with efforts to detect and report suspicious opioid orders . to determine what opportunities exist , if any , for dea to improve data use efforts , such as using computer algorithms or real - time reporting , we analyzed the data dea collects to identify possible types of analyses dea could conduct to identify unusual patterns of distribution using computer algorithms . in addition , we reviewed key data governance practices identified through our past work , to determine the extent to which dea applied select practices to manage how it collects and uses data to support diversion control efforts .