gao - 08-719 . washington , d.c.: june 27 , 2008 . medicare part d low - income subsidy: ssa continues to approve applicants , but millions of individuals have not yet applied . gao - 08-812t . washington , d.c.: may 22 , 2008 . we provided cms with a draft of this report for their review and comment . the agency provided written comments , which have been reprinted in appendix i . it also provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate . cms concurred with our recommendation and agreed that beneficiaries need plan benefit information that is easy to read and understand . the agency noted that its process for developing the model anoc and the eoc included a review of other programs' model materials such as those used in the fehbp , as well as restructuring the model to eliminate duplication and increase readability . cms pointed out that , in preparation for the 2010 aep , it has engaged a contractor to evaluate and improve the required notification materials sent to beneficiaries . cms expects this evaluation to further address issues of length and readability . the contractor will obtain input from beneficiaries as part of its effort to redesign the anoc for the 2010 aep . citing the near perfect timeliness rate for plans' 2008 aep anoc mailing , cms asserted that beneficiaries had the information they needed to make informed decisions about their plan options . however , we remain concerned that despite this timeliness , the volume and complexity of documents exceeding 100 pages continue to pose challenges for some beneficiaries . while cms's effort to evaluate the anoc - eoc is an important , worthwhile step , such a review would benefit by a focus on streamlining as opposed to maximizing the amount of information that beneficiaries receive . beyond the current evaluation , cms should continue its efforts to improve the understandability of its aep materials by testing more concise formats with beneficiaries . as we note in this report , a single - page , customized model that shows each beneficiary's drug use and any upcoming changes in coverage and costs may more clearly communicate the essential information part d beneficiaries need to be adequately informed . cms acknowledged the challenges inherent in the current aep schedule . the agency reiterated its strategies for ensuring that beneficiaries are able to access their new plan benefits while their enrollment is still being processed . for example , cms highlighted its consistent efforts to encourage beneficiaries to submit their enrollment applications by early december . however , as we discuss in this report , one consequence of this approach is a reduction in the amount of time beneficiaries have to consider and enroll in an alternative plan that could better meet their needs . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or kingk@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii .