emergency services , 4 . what are states' responsibilities for establishing exchanges ? what actions have selected states taken to establish exchanges and what challenges have they encountered ? to identify states' responsibilities for establishing exchanges , we reviewed selected ppaca provisions and hhs implementing regulations and guidance related to the following categories of responsibilities: establishing a governance and operating structure ; ensuring exchanges will be capable of certifying qualified health ensuring financial sustainability of the exchange . plans ; simplifying and streamlining eligibility and enrollment systems ; conducting consumer assistance and outreach ; and during our review , we obtained status updates on the development of regulations and guidance from the center for consumer information and insurance oversight ( cciio ) within hhs's centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) that oversees the implementation of exchanges . we also met with cciio officials to discuss the ways in which they provided guidance to the states . to identify the actions selected states have taken to establish exchanges and the challenges they encountered , we conducted semi - structured interviews with state exchange officials in the district of columbia and six states: iowa , minnesota , nevada , new york , oregon , and rhode island . for the purposes of this report , we hereafter refer to the district of columbia as a state . to identify states' responsibilities for establishing exchanges and the challenges they encountered , we reviewed selected patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) provisions and department of health and human services ( hhs ) implementing regulations and guidance related to the following categories: establishing a governance and operating structure ; ensuring exchanges will be capable of certifying qualified health ensuring the financial sustainability of the exchange . plans ; simplifying and streamlining eligibility and enrollment systems ; conducting consumer assistance and outreach ; and our review of hhs's guidance included hhs's blueprint for approval of state - based and partnership exchanges , information bulletins , questions and answers , and webinars . we selected these states on the basis of: ( 1 ) a 3- year average of the uninsured population within states ; ( 2 ) the uninsured population in states in 2011 ; ( 3 ) the amount of federal exchange grants awarded to states on a per capita basis ; ( 4 ) geographic dispersion , and ( 5 ) whether states will have a state - based , federally facilitated , or partnership exchange . specifically , we reviewed reports from the congressional budget office , the congressional research service , and relevant state associations , such as the national association of insurance commissioners , the national conference of state legislatures , the national association of state budget officers , and the national academy for state health policy . to identify actions selected states have taken to create exchanges and the challenges they encountered , we conducted semistructured interviews with officials in seven states: the district of columbia , iowa , minnesota , nevada , new york , oregon , and rhode island . we selected these states on the basis of: 1 . the percentage of the uninsured population in states based on a 3- year average ( 2008 to 2010 ) ; 2 .