( see fig . officials from the four territories that do not cover all mandatory medicaid benefits cited multiple reasons for not doing so , including limited funding and a lack of infrastructure . in particular , officials from puerto rico and american samoa said that their programs do not cover nursing facility services due to insufficient funding and because they do not have nursing homes ; cnmi officials noted that its program does not cover freestanding birth center services because there are no such facilities in the territory ; and due to the lack of available providers , certain specialty services covered by american samoa , cnmi , and guam are only available off - island . for example , in cnmi , most cardiac , orthopedic , chemotherapy , and radiation services are only available off - island ; in guam , pediatric oncology , hematology , dermatology , and procedures such as cardiac bypass surgery , are only available off - island . in addition to mandatory medicaid benefits , each territory has chosen to cover optional benefits , with all five territories providing coverage for outpatient prescription drugs , clinic services , dental and eyeglasses , prosthetics , physical therapy , and rehabilitative services . optional services commonly covered by states — such as targeted case management , personal care services , and intermediate care facilities for individuals with intellectual disabilities — are not covered by any of the five territories . ( see fig . the recent temporary increases in federal funding have enabled the territories to increase medicaid and chip spending , and avoid federal funding shortfalls . most notably , ppaca's appropriation of an additional $7.3 billion in medicaid funding for the territories — available for expenditure through at least fiscal year 2019 — provided them flexibility in terms of when they choose to draw down the additional funds . for example , between fiscal year 2010 when ppaca funds were not available and fiscal year 2014 when they were , the average annual percentage change in total medicaid and chip spending in cnmi and guam was 23 percent and 19 percent , respectively , with total spending in these territories more than double in fiscal year 2014 compared to fiscal year 2010 . ( see table 2. ) prior to the availability of these temporary funds , the territories often exhausted their medicaid funds anywhere from the first through the third quarter of each fiscal year , and generally utilized all of their chip funding each year . the territories used various strategies to address these federal funding shortfalls . such information can assist in identifying improper payments . further , a cnmi official said it was normal for their providers to provide services in one year and be paid the following year . in addition to all five territories avoiding federal funding shortfalls , officials in three of the territories noted that these temporary funds have allowed them to improve their programs by covering more benefits , enrolling more providers , or both . for example , american samoa officials said they plan to use some of their ppaca funds to pay for services provided by new providers , thereby expanding access to services beyond the island's only hospital .