who are my adversaries ? the second step is to identify and characterize the threat to these assets . the intent and capability of an adversary are the principal criteria for establishing the degree of threat to these assets . step three involves identifying and characterizing vulnerabilities that would allow identified threats to be realized . in other words , what weaknesses can allow a security breach ? what are my priorities ? in the fourth step , risk must be assessed and priorities determined for protecting assets . risk assessment examines the potential for the loss or damage to an asset . risk levels are established by assessing the impact of the loss or damage , threats to the asset , and vulnerabilities . the final step is to identify countermeasures to reduce of eliminate risks . in doing so , the advantages and benefits of these countermeasures must also be weighed against their disadvantages and costs . countermeasures identified through the risk management process support the three integral concepts of a holistic security program: protection , detection , and reaction . protection provides countermeasures such as policies , procedures , and technical controls to defend against attacks on the assets being protected . detection monitors for potential breakdowns in protective mechanisms that could result in security breaches . reaction , which requires human involvement , responds to detected breaches to thwart attacks before damage can be done . because absolute protection is impossible to achieve , a security program that does not incorporate detection and reaction is incomplete . biometrics can support the protection component of a security program . it is important to realize that deploying them will not automatically eliminate all security risks . technology is not a solution in isolation . effective security also entails having a well - trained staff to follow and enforce policies and procedures . weaknesses in the security process or failures by people to operate the technology or implement the security process can diminish the effectiveness of technology . furthermore , there is a need for the security process to account for limitations in technology . biometrics can help ensure that people can only enroll into a security system once and to ensure that a person presenting himself before the security system is the same person that enrolled into the system . however , biometrics cannot necessarily link a person to his or her true identity . while biometrics would make it more difficult for people to establish multiple identities , if the one identity a person claimed were not his or her true identity , then the person would be linked to the false identity in the biometric system . the quality of the identifier presented during the enrollment process is key to the integrity of a biometrics system . procedures for exception processing would also need to be carefully planned . as we described , not all people can enroll in a biometrics system . similarly , false matches and false nonmatches will also sometimes occur . procedures need to be developed to handle these situations . exception processing that is not as good as biometric - based primary processing could be exploited as a security hole .