we will continue to monitor dhs's efforts . regarding the second recommendation , that dhs develop and implement a mechanism to monitor dhs's department - wide border security coordination with tribes , dhs concurred . dhs agreed that developing an agency - wide program could further enhance the interests of the tribes and the department for border security and many other programs . dhs stated that , in consultation with tribes , it will convene an internal group to discuss the feasibility of establishing a permanent program or an intra - agency oversight committee to address border security and other issues related to interaction and program delivery with tribes . this action , if implemented effectively , should address the intent of the recommendation . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or gamblerr@gao.gov . the following examples illustrate these coordination challenges . officials from one of the tribes in our review reported that they are not given advance notification of border patrol law enforcement actions , such as independently patrolling the reservation or the deployment of undercover surveillance teams , occurring on their reservation . these officials reported that they would be in a better position to support federal agencies with border security efforts if they received information regarding planned federal law enforcement actions in a more timely manner . border patrol officials from the sector stated that the border patrol notifies tribal law enforcement of its own operations , as well as joint operations , which often involve tribal law enforcement , on the reservation . however , the border patrol does not provide detailed information on its patrol schedule and dates and times of operations , among other enforcement activities , to non - law - enforcement entities . a tribal official from another indian reservation stated that there are numerous law enforcement agencies with different enforcement objectives working on the reservation and that there have been a few instances in which a tribal law enforcement unit and another federal agency were tracking the same suspects unaware of each other's presence . these situations , according to tribal officials , were problematic because the agencies were concerned that the overall operation would fail because of the lack of notification by each agency of its respective operations . although a border patrol official with border security responsibilities on this indian reservation was not aware of the border patrol being involved in such incidents , according to tribal officials , when tribal officials and the border patrol work together , they can complement each other and act as force multipliers by utilizing their respective resources . we have previously reported on the importance of deconfliction and coordinating to prevent law enforcement entities from unknowingly interrupting each other or duplicating each other's efforts . moreover , cbp reports that in some areas along the border , surveillance and response capabilities are limited , so the success of its border security initiatives depends on leveraging intelligence and partnerships with federal , state , local , and tribal governments .