security . the confidentiality of student and staff records must be ensured and data must be safe . a research report from the school dropout demonstration assistance program evaluation . utility . gingras , rosano , and rudy careaga . limited english proficient students at risk: issues and prevention strategies . silver spring , maryland: national clearinghouse for bilingual education , 1989 . greene , j. p. and marcus a. winters . public school graduation rates in the united states ( new york: manhattan institute for policy research , 2002 ) , http: / / www.manhattan - institute.org / pdf / cr_31.pdf ( accessed june 21 , 2005 ) . kemple , james j . career academies: impacts on labor market outcomes and educational attainment . new york: manpower demonstration research corporation , december 2001 . kemple , james j. , corinne m. herlihy , and thomas j. smith . making progress towards graduation: evidence from the talent development high school model . new york: manpower demonstration research corporation , may 2005 . kerbow , david . “patterns of urban student mobility and local school reform.” journal of education for students placed at risk . vol . lehr , camilla a. and cheryl m. lange . “alternative schools serving students with and without disabilities: what are the current issues and challenges.” preventing school failure , vol . opuni , k. a . project grad newark: 2003-2004 program evaluation report , houston , texas: center for research on school reform , february 2005 . quint , janet , howard s. bloom , alison rebeck black , lafleur stephens lafleur , and theresa m. akey . the challenge of scaling up educational reform: findings and lessons from first things first , new york: manpower demonstration research corporation , july 2005 . rumberger , russell , and scott thomas . “the distribution of dropout and turnover rates among urban and suburban high schools.” sociology of education , vol . sinclair , m. f. , s. l. christenson , and m. l. thurlow . “promoting school completion of urban secondary youth with emotional or behavioral disabilities.” exceptional children , ( in press ) . snow , catherine e. , m. susan burns , and peg griffin , eds . preventing reading difficulties in young children . washington , d.c.: national academy press , 1998 . swanson , christopher b . keeping count and losing count: calculating graduation rates for all students under nclb accountability . washington , d.c.: urban institute , 2003 , http: / / www.urban.org / url.cfm ? id=410843 ( downloaded june 21 , 2005 ) . shannon , sue g. , and pete bylsma . helping students finish school: why students drop out , and how to help them graduate . olympia , washington: office of superintendent of public instruction , 2003 . u.s. department of education , national center for education statistics , national forum on education statistics . forum guide to building a culture of quality data: a school and district resource . nfes 2005-801 . washington , d.c.: 2004 . u.s. department of education , national center for education statistics . national institute of statistical sciences / education statistics services institute task force on graduation , completion , and dropout indicators . nces 2005-105 . washington , d.c.: 2004 .