staff capacity . officials from doe stated that they would need to hire a total of 550 staff — both permanent and temporary — to carry out recovery act - related work . however , several issues affected doe's ability to staff these federal positions , including the temporary nature and funding of the recovery act and limited resources for financial management and oversight . to address those issues , doe was granted a special direct hire authority as part of the recovery act for certain areas and program offices . the authority allowed doe to expedite the hiring process for various energy efficiency , renewable energy , electricity delivery , and energy reliability programs and helped doe fill longer term temporary ( more than 1 year , but not more than 4 years ) and permanent positions . however , according to doe officials , government - wide temporary appointment authority does not qualify an employee for health benefits , and thus few candidates have been attracted to these temporary positions . according to doe officials , the office of management and budget recently approved direct - hire authority for doe , which officials believe will alleviate issues related to health care benefits . some state officials told us that they experienced heavy workloads as a result of the recovery act , which impaired their ability to implement programs . as we reported in december 2009 , smaller localities , which are often rural , told us that they faced challenges because of a lack of staff to understand , apply for , and comply with requirements for federal recovery act grants . for example , some local government officials reported that they did not employ a staff person to handle grants and therefore did not have the capacity to understand which grants they were eligible for and how to apply for them . in the district of columbia , department of the environment officials explained that weatherization funds had not been spent as quickly as anticipated because officials needed to develop the infrastructure to administer the program . for example , the department needed to hire six new staff members to oversee and manage the program . officials reported that , as of late january 2010 , the department had still not hired any of the six new staff required . officials from the national association of counties said that some localities had turned down recovery act funding to avoid the administrative burdens associated with the act's numerous reporting requirements . state , local , or tribal issues . in our recently issued report on factors affecting the implementation of recovery act projects , we noted that the economic recession affected some states' budgets , which , in turn , affected states' ability to use some recovery act funds . for example , according to a recent report by doe's office of inspector general , implementation of the weatherization assistance program's recovery act efforts was delayed in part by state hiring freezes , problems resolving local budget shortfalls , and state - wide furloughs . state - level budget challenges have affected the implementation of other recovery act projects .