wosb program guidance . staff from 13 of the14 stakeholder groups we interviewed discussed guidance available to contracting officers under the wosb program . most generally said that the program requirements outlined in the far are fairly detailed and help contracting officers implement the program . according to sba officials , sba provides training on wosb program requirements to contracting officers in federal agencies by request , through outreach events , and through an annual webinar . sba officials also said that the training materials include all the regulatory issues that contracting officers must address . however , representatives from two third - party certifiers described feedback received from their members about the need to provide additional training and guidance for contracting officers to better understand and implement the wosb program . staff from two contracting offices also expressed the need for sba to provide additional training and guidance . staff from one of these contracting offices said that the last time they received training on the wosb program was in 2011 , when the program was first implemented . sba disagreed with both of these recommendations . in its response to the first recommendation , sba stated that it is not responsible for the oversight of other agencies' contracting officers and therefore is not in a position to implement the corrective actions . with respect to the second recommendation , sba stated that adding such controls to fpds - ng would further complicate the wosb program and increase contracting officers' reluctance to use it . sba also stated its preference for focusing its efforts on ensuring that contracting officers select the appropriate naics code at the beginning of the award process . in our review , we also found several issues with wosb program set - asides being awarded under ineligible naics codes . our analysis of fpds - ng data on all obligations to wosb program set - asides from the third quarter of fiscal year 2011 through the third quarter of fiscal year 2018 found the following: 3.5 percent ( or about $76 million ) of wosb program obligations were awarded under naics codes that were never eligible for the wosb program ; 10.5 percent ( or about $232 million ) of wosb program obligations made under an edwosb naics code went to women - owned businesses that were not eligible to receive awards in edwosb - eligible industries ; and 17 of the 47 federal agencies that obligated dollars to wosb program set - asides during the period used inaccurate naics codes in at least 5 percent of their wosb set - asides ( representing about $25 million ) . according to sba officials we spoke with during this review , wosb program set - asides may be awarded under ineligible naics codes because of human error when contracting officers are inputting data in fpds - ng or because a small business contract was misclassified as a wosb program set - aside . they characterized the extent of the issue as “small” relative to the size of the fpds - ng database and said that such issues do not affect the program's purpose .