gao - 12-208g . jennifer grover , director , ( 202 ) 512-7141 or groverj@gao.gov . accomplishing the agency's objectives . examples of control activities include establishment and review of performance measures and indicators , accurate and timely recording of transactions and events , and appropriate documentation of transactions and internal controls . the guidance provided on how to select shipments to answer the three questions , depending on the question , states that 10 percent of all shipments are to be randomly selected , with a minimum of 10 shipments and no more than 20 shipments , or 20 shipments are to be randomly selected among high - risk shipments . after port directors or their designees submit their completed worksheets , cbp ofo calculates the national compliance rate by dividing the number of worksheets that have at least 1 shipment that did not conform to policy by the total number of self - inspection worksheets submitted to ofo . to what extent does cbp ensure that its policies on the disposition of high - risk shipments are being followed ? this report is a public version of a prior sensitive report that we provided to you . through its self - inspection program , cbp has identified a minimal number of noncompliant shipments requiring corrective action . for example , five corrective actions were taken nationwide based on the 2011 self - inspection reporting cycle , and two corrective actions based on the 2012 cycle . cbp's compliance rate was over 93 percent for both cycles , leading cbp to reduce the frequency of the self - inspections for maritime cargo targeting from every year to every other year , according to cbp ofo officials . however , as discussed previously , we determined that 3 of 40 shipments identified as waived were actually examined , but the examinations were not properly recorded and 6 of 40 shipments identified as not examined / not waived were examined or waived , but not properly recorded . thus , cbp's compliance estimates may be overstated . cbp could improve its ability to estimate national compliance rates for maritime cargo targeting practices through different methods . for example , cbp could increase the number of shipments sampled by ports with the greatest number of arriving shipments or consider a stratified sample with strata defined in terms of size of ports and other factors that might be related to compliance or risk , such as whether shipments appear in its data as not examined / not waived . by enhancing its methodology for selecting shipment samples , cbp could better identify any deficiencies and take appropriate corrective actions . according to a director in ofo , cbp is considering changing the shipment sample size to a percentage of high - risk shipments , which would result in port directors of larger ports analyzing a greater number of shipments than the 20 shipments per question they currently sample . however , cbp has not finalized its plans for making this change . further , cbp's method for calculating the compliance rate does not accurately reflect compliance nationwide because it does not calculate the rate based on the number of shipments sampled .