fha agreed with this recommendation . comprehensive and accurate data on hecm terminations would provide fha with a better understanding of loan outcomes — information fha and congress need in order to know how well the program is helping seniors age in place . fha also has not established comprehensive performance indicators for the hecm portfolio and has not regularly tracked key performance metrics , such as the percentage of hecm terminations due to borrower defaults , the proportion of active hecms with delinquent property charges , or the percentage of distressed borrowers who have received foreclosure prevention options . for example , hud's most recent strategic plan and corresponding performance report do not include hecm - specific performance indicators , and the last comprehensive evaluation of the hecm program was done in 2000 . fha officials told us they were in the planning phase for a new evaluation of the program but had not set a start date and did not expect the evaluation to include an analysis of the reasons for hecm terminations or the use of foreclosure prevention options for borrowers in default . we are recommending that fha establish , periodically review , and report on performance indicators for the hecm program and examine the impact of foreclosure prevention options in the forthcoming hecm program evaluation . fha agreed with this recommendation . better performance assessment could provide fha important information about how well the hecm program is working . additionally , we found shortcomings in fha's internal reporting and analysis for the hecm program . for example , fha has not developed internal reports to comprehensively monitor patterns and trends in loan outcomes , such as the percentage of hecm terminations due to borrower defaults . fha has generated some reports from hermit to help oversee the hecm portfolio , but it has been slow to develop regular and comprehensive reporting mechanisms . more details on our methodology can be found in the issued report . our analysis of fha data found that 272,155 hecms terminated from fiscal years 2014 through 2018 . the number of terminations rose from about 24,000 in fiscal year 2014 to a peak of roughly 82,000 in fiscal year 2016 , before declining to about 60,000 in fiscal year 2018 . in recent years , a growing percentage of hecms have terminated because borrowers defaulted on their loans . while death of the borrower is the most commonly reported reason why hecms terminated , the percentage of terminations due to defaults increased from 2 percent in fiscal year 2014 to 18 percent in fiscal year 2018 ( see fig . most defaults were due to borrowers not meeting occupancy requirements or failing to pay property charges . for about 30 percent of terminations , we were unable to readily determine a termination reason from fha's data . we also found that servicers' use of foreclosure prevention options for hecm borrowers was limited or fha did not have readily available data to assess the extent of use .