programs have interrelated technologies . the air force's mgue program is managed within the gps program office , which also manages other gps satellite and ground system programs . programs have related acquisition strategies . the navy's john lewis class fleet replenishment oiler ( t - ao ) program is managed within a portfolio of commercially designed and developed ships . this program is managed within a program office that oversees approximately 85 types of commercially derived auxiliary ships , boats , service craft , and special mission ships . regardless of how the acquisition program is structured , other dod organizations also provide personnel to support a program's workload requirements . there are various specialized dod organizations that support programs and provide specific acquisition functions or skill sets , such as contracting , cost estimating , and engineering . for the 11 selected programs we reviewed , these organizations supported multiple programs and were either structured ( 1 ) within the peo that was responsible for the programs we reviewed or ( 2 ) external to the peo . these external support organizations include contracting commands , warfare centers , and engineering organizations that are intended to provide the program specialized technical expertise from across the military department . program officials stated that these organizations may share personnel with a program on a full or part - time basis , and the shared personnel may or may not be co - located with the program . figure 5 is a notional representation of the way that programs are supported by different organizations . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . dod acquires new weapons for its warfighters through a management process known as the defense acquisition process . this process has multiple phases , including: ( 1 ) technology maturation and risk reduction , ( 2 ) engineering and manufacturing development , and ( 3 ) production and deployment . in this report we refer to these three phases as concept development , system development , and production . programs typically complete a series of milestone reviews and other key decision points that authorize entry into a new acquisition phase . dod instruction 5000.02 delegates responsibility for developing and procuring weapon systems to the military departments and other defense agencies . this policy does not specify a standard organizational structure — or program structure — to manage acquisition programs , but rather states that programs are to be tailored as much as possible to the characteristics of the product being acquired , and to the totality of circumstances associated with the program including operational urgency and risk factors . in addition , dod's guidance for managing its workforce states that the approach should be flexible , adaptive to program changes , and responsive to new management strategies . dod decides how many personnel and how much program funding to request for each military department through the planning , programming , budgeting , and execution ( ppbe ) process . dod programming policy requires the military departments and defense agencies to develop a program objective memorandum that identifies and prioritizes requirements and total funding needs for the current budget year and 4 additional years into the future .