goal leader . data for this question is intentionally not reported because it is difficult to summarize and / or could identify respondents . how much involvement , if any , does each of the following officials have in your agency's quarterly performance reviews ? no opinion not applicable 4 0 33 . for each of the following officials , has their involvement in agency performance management increased , remained about the same , or decreased as a result of your agency's quarterly performance reviews ? gprama establishes in law the performance improvement council ( pic ) . the pic is an interagency council made up of agency pios that is charged with assisting omb with topics related to gprama and facilitating the exchange of useful practices among agencies . how often do you attend the every - other - month performance improvement council meetings that are for pios only ( not deputies or staff ) ? rarely or never attend meetings 2 37 . how often do you attend the every - other - month performance improvement council meetings that are open to pios , deputy pios , and staff ? rarely or never attend meetings 12 38 . how often does a deputy pio or another representative ( s ) from your agency attend the every - other - month performance improvement council meetings that are open to pios , deputy pios , and staff ? rarely or never attend meetings 1 39 . which of the following working groups of the performance improvement council do / did you actively participate in personally as the pio ? ( check all that apply ) number of respondents 24 3 . internal agency reviews working group 6 . i do not personally participate in any working groups 39a . if other working group , please specify: data for this question is intentionally not reported because it is difficult to summarize and / or could identify respondents . in which of the following working groups of the performance improvement council do / did other representatives from your agency actively participate ? ( check all that apply ) if other aspect ( s ) specified in question 41 , what was each additional aspect ? data for this question is intentionally not reported because it is difficult to summarize and / or could identify respondents . data for this question is intentionally not reported because it is difficult to summarize and / or could identify respondents . to what extent are you able to apply successful practices and other information and tools shared by the pic to your agency's performance management ? please provide an example or examples of case ( s ) in which you have applied successful practices and other information and tools shared by the pic in your agency . ( check all that apply ) number of respondents 24 4a . if other , please specify: data for this question is intentionally not reported because it is difficult to summarize and / or could identify respondents . when did you start serving as pio at your agency ? 6. who do you report to in your role as pio ? ( check all that apply ) 1 . chief operating officer ( i.e . deputy secretary or equivalent ) 6a .