both documents contained the same fictitious name that was used on the application . however , if state had crosschecked the information from these two bogus documents against the same records that it did in the previous case , it could have discovered that neither were representative of the bearer . further , if state officials had checked the ssn in the application , state would have concluded that it was recently issued and did not coincide with the date of birth represented in the application . in addition , our application indicated that our applicant's height was 5' 10” while his bogus driver's license showed a height of 6' . according to state , these were fraud indicators that should have been questioned prior to the issuance of the passport . the following day , our investigator returned to the same location and was issued a genuine u.s. passport . state again issued a genuine passport even though the application contained multiple indicators and discrepancies that should have raised red flags for identity theft and fraud . this application also included a counterfeit florida birth certificate and west virginia driver's license , both in the same fictitious name that was used on the application . if state had adequately corroborated the information from these two bogus documents against the same records that it did in case number two , it could have discovered that the documents were counterfeit and not representative of the bearer . in addition , if state had adequately verified the ssn in the application , it would have found that the recent issue date did not coincide with the age or date of birth represented in the application . state also did not identify about a 10 year age difference between the applicant's passport photo and the photo in his driver's license . finally , the application included suspicious addresses and contact information — a california mailing address , a permanent and driver's license address from west virginia and telephone number from the district of columbia . according to state , these were fraud indicators that should have been questioned prior to the issuance of the passport . state identified the fraud indicators and discrepancies that we included in this test and did not issue a passport . in addition , the agency identified this application as a gao undercover test . first , state identified a major discrepancy with the ssn in our application . when our investigator spoke with a state employee about the status of his application , he was told that the birth year in his application did not match ssa records . in our investigator's fabricated explanation , he explained that he was recently a victim of identity theft and had a new ssn issued . second , the agency determined that our florida birth certificate was fraudulent after its check against florida bureau of vital statistics records indicated that the document was counterfeit . state also identified physical properties of the document that were inconsistent with an original . table 1 and the text that follows provide more detail about each of our tests . state issued a genuine passport even though the application contained multiple indicators that should have raised suspicion of fraud , either independently or in aggregate .