fema concurred with this recommendation . the federal government owns and operates hundreds of thousands of buildings and facilities that a changing climate could affect . for example , in its 2010 quadrennial defense review , the department of defense ( dod ) recognized the risk to its facilities posed by climate change , noting that the department must assess potential impacts and adapt as required . we plan to report later this year on dod's management of climate change risks at over 500,000 defense facilities . in addition , the federal government manages about 650 million acres – – nearly 30 percent of the land in the united states – – for a variety of purposes , such as recreation , grazing , timber , and fish and wildlife . in 2007 , we recommended that that the secretaries of agriculture , commerce , and the interior develop guidance for their resource managers that explains how they expect to address the effects of climate change , and the three departments generally agreed with this recommendation . however , as we showed in our may 2013 report , resource managers still struggled to incorporate climate - related information into their day - to - day activities , despite the creation of strategic policy documents and high - level agency guidance . the federal government invests billions of dollars annually in infrastructure projects that state and local governments prioritize and supervise . in total , the united states has about 4 million miles of roads and 30,000 wastewater treatment and collection facilities . according to a 2010 congressional budget office report , total public spending on transportation and water infrastructure exceeds $300 billion annually , with roughly 25 percent of this amount coming from the federal government and the rest coming from state and local governments . these projects have large up - front capital investments and long lead times that require decisions about addressing climate change before its potential effects are discernable . the federal government plays a limited role in project - level planning for transportation and wastewater infrastructure , and state and local efforts to consider climate change in infrastructure planning have occurred primarily on a limited , ad hoc basis . infrastructure is typically designed to withstand and operate within historical climate patterns . however , according to nrc , as the climate changes and historical patterns — in particular , those related to extreme weather events — no longer provide reliable predictions of the future , infrastructure designs may underestimate the climate - related impacts to infrastructure over its design life , which can range as long as 50 to 100 years . these impacts can increase the operating and maintenance costs of infrastructure or decrease its life span , or both , leading to social , economic , and environmental impacts . for example , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration estimates that , within 15 years , segments of louisiana state highway 1 — the only road access to port fourchon , which services virtually all deep - sea oil operations in the gulf of mexico , or about 18 percent of the nation's oil supply — will be inundated by tides an average of 30 times annually due to relative sea level rise .