identified . for example , noaa transferred key staff from the npoess program to the jpss program and coordinated with the air force to negotiate contract changes . following the decision to disband npoess , both noaa and dod were responsible for transferring key management responsibilities to their respective programs . this entailed ( 1 ) establishing separate program offices for their respective follow - on programs , ( 2 ) establishing requirements for their respective programs , and ( 3 ) transferring contracts from npoess to the new programs . both agencies made progress on these activities , but recent events have resulted in major program changes . specifically , noaa established its jpss program office , established program requirements , and transferred most sensor contracts . however , the agency now plans to remove key requirements , including selected sensors and ground systems , to keep the program within budget . dod established its dwss program office and modified its contracts accordingly before deciding in early 2012 to terminate the program and reassess its requirements ( as directed by congress ) . after the february 2010 decision to disband npoess , noaa transferred management responsibilities to its new satellite program , defined its requirements , and transferred contracts to the new program . specifically , noaa established a program office to guide the development of the npp and jpss satellites . noaa also worked with nasa to establish its program office to oversee the acquisition , system engineering , and integration of the satellite program . by 2011 , the two agencies had established separate — but colocated — jpss program offices , each with different roles and responsibilities . noaa's program office is responsible for programmatic activities related to the satellites' development , including managing requirements , budgets , and interactions with satellite data users . alternatively , nasa's program office is responsible for the development and integration of the sensors , satellites , and ground systems . in january 2012 , both agencies approved a management control plan that delineates the two agencies' roles , responsibilities , and executive oversight structure . in september 2011 , noaa established its official requirements document for the jpss program . this document defines the components of the program as well as the expected performance of the satellites and ground systems . key components include npp , the two jpss satellites , the five sensors , a distributed ground - based network of satellite data receptor sites , and four ground - based data processing systems . this system is to deliver 31 satellite data products within 80 minutes of observation on the first satellite and within 30 minutes on the second satellite . over the 2 years since the decision to disband npoess , noaa has also been working to transfer and refine the contracts for four of the sensors that are to be launched on the first jpss satellite from the air force to nasa . the program completed the transfer of all of the contracts by september 2011 and then began the process of updating the contracts to match jpss' requirements . this process has been completed for three sensors ( cris , omps , and atms ) .