( see fig . 2 for locations of grantees. ) ( see appendix ii for a list of grantees and year of grant award. ) education officials attributed the small number of grantees that use hud's choice program to the fact that few grantees have distressed public housing within their footprint that is eligible for this funding . although promise grantees conduct their own inventories of the existing federal and other resources in their neighborhoods in order to develop their strategies , two grantees we spoke with were unaware of some of the other federal programs that could contribute towards their strategies . for example , one implementation grantee we spoke to with concerns about school safety was unaware of doj's byrne criminal justice innovation grant program . another planning grantee who completed our survey commented that a list of related federal programs like the one in our survey would be especially useful to grantees who did not receive implementation grants . education officials with the promise program told us that sometimes grantees are unaware that the community is benefiting from certain federal programs because programs are renamed as they filter down through the state or local levels . education officials said they emphasize to grantees the importance of reaching out to key partners to ensure they are aware of other federally funded programs in the neighborhood because their partners may be more knowledgeable about other sources of federal funding . while encouraging grantees to reach out to key partners is helpful , education , through its coordination with other federal agencies , would likely have more knowledge about existing federal resources . without a federal level inventory , education is not well - positioned to support grantee efforts to identify other federal programs that could contribute to promise program goals . further , education lacks complete information to inform decisions about future federal coordination efforts and identify potential fragmentation , overlap , and duplication . while education is collecting a large amount of data from promise grantees that was intended , in part , to be used to evaluate the program , the education offices responsible for program evaluation — the institute for educational sciences ( ies ) and office of planning , evaluation , and policy development ( opepd ) — have not yet determined whether or how they will evaluate the program . one of education's primary goals for the promise program , as described in the federal register , is to learn about the overall impact of the program through a rigorous program evaluation . however , the practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce nonsampling errors , such as variations in how respondents interpret questions and their willingness to offer accurate responses . we took steps to minimize nonsampling errors , including pretesting draft instruments and using a web - based administration system . specifically , during survey development , we pretested draft instruments with five grantees that received planning and / or implementation grants . in the pretests , we were generally interested in the clarity , precision , and objectivity of the questions , as well as the flow and layout of the survey . this approach has been described as the collective impact model .