goals . gao - 07-78 . washington , d.c.: nov. 15 , 2006 . afghanistan reconstruction: despite some progress , deteriorating security and other obstacles continue to threaten achievement of u.s . goals . gao - 05-742 . washington , d.c.: july 28 , 2005 . afghanistan security: efforts to establish army and police have made progress , but future plans need to be better defined . gao - 05-575 . washington , d.c.: june 30 , 2005 . rebuilding iraq: preliminary observations on challenges in transferring security responsibility to iraqi military and police . gao - 05-431t . washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2005 . afghanistan reconstruction: deteriorating security and limited resources have impeded progress ; improvements in u.s. strategy needed . gao - 04-403 . we disagree . the three phases and associated time frames of ansf development are articulated differently in the 5-page document and the cstc - a campaign plan . for example , phase iii in cstc - a's campaign plan — transition to strategic partnership — is not identified as a phase in the 5-page document . defense also contends that differences between the two documents are due to developments in the security environment . while this may be true , absent a detailed plan with specific time frames , it is difficult to assess the extent to which deteriorating security delayed ansf development . defense notes that until government revenues increase in afghanistan , the international community will need to sustain the ansf and that such international support is required for the “near - term.” moreover , defense states that , where appropriate , it supports efforts to increase government revenues in afghanistan . however , in the absence of further detail regarding the expected timeline for increasing government revenues — or the definition of “near - term” — it remains unclear how long the united states will need to support the ansf . as we note in our report , the united states has been a major contributor to this mission — investing about $16.5 billion to develop the ansf . furthermore , current costs to sustain the force are estimated to be at over $2 billion annually . given that the afghan government is currently unable to support the recurring costs of its security forces and that u.s. officials estimate this mission could exceed a decade , additional clarity on the estimated length of time and amount of money needed to complete this mission , and the potential for afghan financial contributions , could assist in conducting oversight of the program . defense states that the 5-page document received by gao was a longer articulation of a plan approved by state . however , although defense and state are partners in training the anp , the fact remains state did not participate in the development of the 5-page document defense provided to gao , nor has state developed a plan of its own . defense's 5-page document does share basic end - strength and capability information with two slides on ansf development approved by the principals committee for ansf development .