pub . 113-66 , 127 stat . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or trimbled@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . in addition to the individual named above , jonathan gill , assistant director ; nancy kintner - meyer ; cynthia norris ; and kiki theodoropoulos made key contributions to this report . refocused federal oversight . the kcp field office sought to refocus federal oversight by ( 1 ) changing its approach from reviewing compliance with requirements to monitoring contractor assurance systems for lower - risk activities ; ( 2 ) exerting greater control over audit findings at the field office level ; and ( 3 ) increasing its use of external reviewers . first , the field office changed its oversight approach from reviewing compliance of all contractor activities to allowing the contractor to assume responsibility for ensuring performance in lower - risk activities , allowing federal staff to concentrate resources on monitoring high - risk activities such as safety and security . in this approach , the field office moved from a traditional “transactional” oversight — in which performance is determined by federal oversight staff checking compliance against requirements — to a “systems - based” oversight — in which performance on lower - risk activities is ensured by monitoring the contractor's systems , processes , and data , including its systems of self - assessment and actions to correct problems . according to kcp field office officials , federal oversight staff assumed the role of reviewing the contractor's management and oversight systems , as well as reviewing selected data provided by these systems , to ensure adequate processes were in place to identify and correct problems . second , the field office exerted greater control over audit findings from external reviews , by determining which findings would need to be addressed by the contractor . according to kcp field office and contractor officials , this ability to accept or reject audit findings from external reviews enabled the field office to prevent implementation of new requirements that would not be applicable at the site . according to another kcp field office official , although the field office had this authority under the reforms , it had not rejected any audit findings . finally , to revise its oversight approach , the kcp field office relied more on third - party assessments or certifications of contractor performance in place of federal oversight reviews , according to a field office official . such assessments included those by the contractor's parent corporation , as well as external groups , such as the excellence in missouri foundation , which administers the missouri quality award to promote quality in business in the state . clear contractor goals and meaningful incentives . kcp field office officials noted that , under the reforms , the field office and the contractor agreed on five outcome areas for contractor performance , and performance award fees were linked to these outcome areas .