franchise funds are one such type of organization . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions about this report or need additional information , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 ( cooperd@gao.gov ) . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . other staff making key contributions to this report were amelia shachoy , assistant director ; lily chin ; lara laufer ; janet mckelvey ; kenneth patton ; monty peters ; and ralph roffo . in memory of monty peters ( 1948-2005 ) , under whose skilled leadership this review was conducted . we encourage omb to give additional consideration to providing guidance that would clarify roles and responsibilities of the parties involved in interagency contracting through franchise funds . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of defense , the interior , and the treasury ; the director of the office of management and budget ; and interested congressional committees . we will provide copies to others on request . we reviewed legislation establishing the franchise fund pilot program , governmentwide guidance relating to the program , and reports summarizing program outcomes . we held discussions with office of management and budget representatives responsible for overseeing and providing guidance for the program and with department of defense ( dod ) officials responsible for oversight of procurement issues . we performed work at the franchise funds managed by the departments of the interior and the treasury and interviewed officials and reviewed records relating to interior's govworks and treasury's fedsource programs . the interior and treasury franchise funds accounted for about 76 percent of total revenues for the six franchise funds during fiscal year 2003 ( the most recently completed fiscal year at the time we were planning our field work ) and about 95 percent of all services the six funds provided dod . contracting services the govworks and fedsource programs provided accounted for over 95 percent of total revenues at the interior and treasury franchise funds . to gain insight into how dod customers were using franchise funds and into franchise fund contracting processes , we reviewed documentation relating to 17 selected customer projects totaling $249 million in funding provided and interviewed govworks and fedsource contracting personnel responsible for these projects and representatives of the dod customers . to determine how dod customers determined whether franchise funds provided a good value , we interviewed representatives of dod customers for the selected projects and reviewed available documentation relating to decisions to use franchise fund contracts . we also reviewed information available from the franchise funds that would indicate whether the franchise funds provided a good value , and interviewed franchise fund officials . to determine how franchise fund contracting officers worked with dod customers to define measurable quality standards for goods and services and develop effective oversight mechanisms , we reviewed contract documentation for selected customer projects that would establish quality standards , and documentation relating to contract oversight . we also discussed these issues with franchise fund contracting personnel .