veterans served . between fiscal year 2014 and fiscal year 2018 , according to va data , the number of unique ai / an veterans receiving services reimbursed by va each year has increased from about 3,800 in 2014 to a high of nearly 5,300 . ( see fig . while ihs facilities accounted for a larger percentage of veterans with reimbursed services compared to thps , the number of veterans receiving services reimbursed by va at thps increased significantly . for fiscal year 2014 , 2,965 ai / an veterans received services reimbursed by va at ihs facilities , which decreased slightly to 2,829 in fiscal year 2018 . in comparison , 885 veterans received services reimbursed by va at thp facilities in fiscal year 2014 , which nearly tripled to 2,531 veterans in fiscal year 2018 . prescriptions filled . similar to increases in the numbers of ai / an veterans served under the reimbursement agreements , ai / an veterans' utilization of va's consolidated mail outpatient pharmacy program has also increased . prescriptions filled through this program more than doubled — from more than 440,000 prescriptions in fiscal year 2014 to nearly 886,000 prescriptions in fiscal year 2018 . ( see fig . va and ihs annual reports indicate that the pharmacy program has been one of the most successful collaborations between va and ihs for ai / an veterans , providing more than 2 million prescriptions for va - ihs patients since the pharmacy program collaboration began in 2010 . while this program was originally limited to ai / an veterans served at ihs facilities , in december 2016 , va and ihs entered into an interagency agreement that extended the program to thps . officials from the majority of ihs and thp facilities we contacted said they were generally pleased with the reimbursement agreements . among those , officials from one thp noted that the revenue received from their reimbursement agreement freed up other resources that allowed them to hire an additional part - time worker to conduct va outreach activities . additionally , a representative of a national tribal organization noted that ihs and thp facilities' funding is limited and this revenue helps them extend services to eligible ai / an veterans . however , officials from a number of ihs and thp facilities also had concerns about the agreements , including the lack of reimbursement for prc program services provided by ihs and thp facilities , the length of time it took to enter into the agreements , and the time frames of the agreements: lack of reimbursement for prc program services . officials at most ihs and thp facilities we contacted said they believed va should reimburse facilities for services from external providers paid through the prc program . officials at some facilities said they have had to deny prc services due to a lack of program funds . according to some facility and ihs area office officials , this issue is particularly relevant in states where medicaid was not expanded under the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) . in states where medicaid eligibility was expanded , more ai / an individuals may therefore be eligible for medicaid — potentially freeing up prc funds .