ii ) . we shared preliminary drafts of this table with experts at doe and nrc and with leading scientists in the field of sealed radiological source security from nonfederal organizations , such as the monterrey institute of international studies and the low - level waste forum . we received and incorporated their comments as appropriate on the structure and contents of the table . on the basis of this process , we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to examine the actions doe has taken to recover and dispose of unwanted sealed radiological sources , we interviewed source recovery project personnel and officials from the u.s. radiological threat reduction program . we also conducted interviews with representatives from nonfederal entities , including the monterrey institute of international studies , the health physics society , crcpd , the national research council , and the council on foreign relations . we discussed with these agency officials and representatives the likelihood of doe's needing to recover more non - gtcc waste from unwanted sealed radiological sources in the future if the barnwell , south carolina , disposal site restricts access for licensees in 36 states by mid - 2008 as planned . to obtain a better understanding of how much non - gtcc waste might be stored if licensees in these states are denied disposal access for this waste , we gathered information on the quantity of non - gtcc waste disposed at the two commercial disposal sites that can accept classes b and c waste in richland , washington , and barnwell , south carolina , between 2001 and 2004 . to determine the reliability of these data , we first asked disposal operators a series of data reliability questions that addressed specific areas , such as data entry , data access , quality control procedures , and data accuracy and completeness . we added follow - up questions as necessary . in consultation with a gao expert in research methodology , we analyzed their responses for relevant weaknesses in data reliability that would make their data unusable for our analysis and reporting purposes . on the basis of these efforts , we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for summarizing volumes of disposed waste at these disposal sites . to determine the extent to which doe can identify and track unwanted sealed radiological sources for recovery and disposal , we interviewed doe and nrc officials regarding the scope , capabilities , and limitations of their existing databases for tracking these sources . we reviewed past estimates of the number of sealed radiological sources in the united states , including the scope and methodologies used to create these estimates . to examine nrc efforts to develop a national source tracking system for certain sealed radiological sources , we interviewed nrc and doe officials who participated in the system's initial formulation . we reviewed planning and management documents , including related nrc submissions to the office of management and budget , nrc's business case analyses , and the proposed rule for implementing a national source tracking system . we also reviewed the survey instrument nrc used to populate the interim database .