gao - 17-32c . washington , d.c.: april 7 , 2017 . we also reviewed additional data from him . we also interviewed 1st tsc officials . for more information on our objectives , scope , and methodology , see appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from september 2016 to may 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . congress authorized itef in december 2014 to provide assistance , including training and equipment , to military and other security forces of , or associated with , the government of iraq , including kurdish and tribal security forces or other local security forces with a national security mission . as of december 31 , 2016 , dod had obligated about $2.2 billion of the $2.3 billion congress appropriated for itef in fiscal years 2015 and 2016 and had disbursed about $2 billion . see figure 1 for examples of equipment that dod purchased with these funds , according to dod documents . the process for providing itef - funded equipment to iraq's security forces generally falls into three phases: ( 1 ) acquisition and shipment , ( 2 ) staging in kuwait and iraq , and ( 3 ) transfer to the government of iraq or the kurdistan regional government ( see fig . multiple dod components are responsible for ensuring the visibility and accountability of itef - funded equipment throughout the itef equipping process up until u.s. personnel in iraq transfer the equipment to vetted officials from the government of iraq or the kurdistan regional government . for example: in addition to maintaining scip , dsca oversees program administration for the itef program and provides overall guidance to dod components through its security assistance management manual ( samm ) and associated policy memos . cjtf - oir manages the itef program for the u.s. central command ( uscentcom ) and maintains overall responsibility for providing itef assistance to iraq's security forces . dod's primary implementing agency , usasac — supported by other dod agencies — maintains overall responsibility for case development , execution , and closure . the department of state's osc - i supports cjtf - oir through each phase of the itef equipping process . it is also responsible for communicating itef program objectives to government of iraq or kurdistan regional government officials . the 1st tsc , in coordination with cjtf - oir and osc - i , receives , stages , and transports itef - funded equipment in kuwait and iraq and oversees the transfer of the equipment to vetted government of iraq or kurdistan regional government officials in iraq . dod generally administers itef - funded equipment purchases as individual building partnership capacity cases within the u.s. government's foreign military sales ( fms ) infrastructure . an individual case may have multiple — sometimes thousands — of requisitions or procurement actions .