we disagree . the joint executive council's strategic planning and annual reports focus on joint efforts between the departments and do not report on the performance of the military services' wounded warrior programs . therefore , we do not believe that the performance information on the wounded warrior programs would be redundant or of limited value given that the department itself is currently unable to systematically determine how well these programs are functioning . as we reported , one of the key problems hindering a department - wide assessment of these programs is the lack of common terms and definitions used by the military services . although dod acknowledges that this is an issue , it asserts that it has instituted some common definitions through the senior oversight committee and through its instruction for the rcp and that it will work towards a common understanding and use of these approved definitions . although we are aware of efforts to define some terms , on the basis of our work , it does not appear that the military services are using them consistently . therefore , substantial progress towards a common understanding and use will be critical to the department's ability to oversee these programs . dod did not respond directly to our recommendation for developing a common mechanism for performance measurement , which we found is not systematically conducted across the wounded warrior programs . during our collection of performance data from the wounded warrior programs , we found that the programs vary in their ability to report performance outcome measures on the basis of what each program chooses to track . in addition , we found that some of the programs had difficulty reporting basic data , such as enrollment numbers , and only compiled these data following our request — sometimes taking about 5 months to do so . lastly , our recommendation is consistent with the call of the interagency care and coordination committee that the military programs develop more useful quantitative and qualitative metrics that would effectively demonstrate their performance . until dod takes the necessary steps to assess these programs department - wide , it will never know with certitude whether these programs are meeting the needs of its recovering servicemember population . dod and va both concurred with our second recommendation that the departments ensure that care coordination , disability evaluation , and electronic health record sharing receive sustained leadership attention and collaboration at the highest levels , with a singular focus on what is best for the individual servicemember or veteran to ensure continuity of care and a seamless transition from dod to va . in addition to its comments on our recommendation , va asserted that the care coordination challenges facing both departments are broader and more complex than issues concerning just the frcp and rcp and that our overall analysis and conclusions are over simplified . va stated that through its recently formed task force , both departments identified over 40 programs that provide some level of coordination or management of care and services across the continuum of care and acknowledged that there is no common operational picture that facilitates collaborative planning or situational awareness . we agree that the care coordination challenges are broader and more complex than the frcp and rcp .