irs has acknowledged that this estimate is uncertain . because these costs are fixed , their average will depend on the number of paid preparers who register for a ptin . in addition to setting the user fee , there are key questions that should be addressed when implementing a new user fee that cover collecting , using , and reviewing the fee . table 3 shows irs's actions to date , as well as planned actions , to address these key questions . an official who helped to estimate the ptin registration user fee acknowledged that the ptin registration cost estimates are uncertain and subject to change . the official stated that irs plans to conduct a first review of the ptin registration user fee in the summer of 2011 . additionally , the rpo director said that irs will be able to change the user fee following the review if actual costs are higher or lower than predicted . irs has discussed but not documented a framework for how it plans to develop service and enforcement efforts that leverage the new paid preparer requirements to improve taxpayer compliance . instead it may evolve as irs develops and assesses additional strategies . we recommend that the commissioner of internal revenue document a strategic framework showing how irs intends to use the paid preparer requirements to improve taxpayer compliance and assess their effectiveness . in a letter commenting on a draft of this report , irs agreed with the recommendation . irs stated that it has begun working on a strategic framework and plans for the final product to detail the overall mission , vision , and overall goals to ensure return preparer oversight will ultimately achieve improved taxpayer compliance and tax administration . irs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . irs's comments are reprinted in appendix ii . we are sending copies of this report to the commissioner of internal revenue and other interested parties . the report is also available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9110 or whitej@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . to describe irs's plans for implementing and ensuring compliance with the new paid preparer requirements , we reviewed documents , including treasury's proposed and final regulations containing the new requirements . additionally , we interviewed officials from irs's return preparer implementation project office and return preparer office ( rpo ) responsible for implementing the paid preparer requirements . to describe irs's outreach campaign to inform paid preparers of the new requirements , we reviewed irs documents on communication with external stakeholders and the public about the new requirements . additionally , we interviewed the official responsible for leading irs's communication with external stakeholders and the public .