iv ) . lack of government support . some stakeholders reported some operational challenges related to the region's national and provincial governments . for example , stakeholders involved in the conflict free tin initiative stated that sales of tin from their mine in south kivu were halted for nearly 2 months in 2013 after the provincial government of the region imposed harsh taxes on the minerals mined there . additionally , solutions for hope officials reported that the drc's current tax structure is not conducive to legitimizing gold and that expanding the initiative to include gold is therefore difficult . lack of buyers for conflict minerals from conflict zones . several stakeholders and agency officials reported that some companies are reluctant to buy minerals produced in the drc and adjoining countries because of the high cost of the due diligence required by the dodd - frank act and the perceived reputational risk . for example , according to one industry official , a major challenge to responsible sourcing in the region is that the cost of complying with the sec rule makes it difficult for sec - reporting companies to compete in the global market against companies that are not required to perform costly due diligence . in addition , an official from the responsible jewellery council noted that gold is mined in many locations around the world and that production costs must always be taken into account . she stated that because the cost of due diligence for gold is usually proportional to risk , mining and sourcing responsibly in the great lakes region could become more expensive than in other , lower - risk areas and that this represents a challenge to responsible sourcing efforts in the region . some stakeholders and governments in the region provide publicly available information related to in - region mining of conflict minerals and responsible sourcing initiatives . according to industry officials , the amount of publicly available data reported by responsible sourcing initiatives has increased over the past year . we found that itsci publishes various reports on its public website as part of its due diligence system for its members . these reports provide production and export data for tin , tantalum , and tungsten , including amounts traced through the itsci program , from three provinces in the drc and rwanda , as well as the mineral sales in u.s. dollars ( for more details , including the applicable quantitative data , see app . also on its website , itsci publishes third - party audits of member companies , which assess the extent to which the companies have implemented the oecd due diligence guidance and evaluate the companies' adherence to itsci's traceability and due diligence procedure . additionally , itsci publishes governance assessments covering a range of topics . examples include the security and political situation in areas without an itsci presence and the risks and performance , relative to the oecd due diligence guidance and the sec rule , of stakeholders that are part of , or play a role in monitoring , the conflict minerals supply chain .