international outreach . two experts suggested actions the federal government could take to conduct outreach internationally to promote programs , policies , or technologies that can reduce marine debris . for example , one expert suggested the federal government conduct outreach to government officials in countries that have limited waste management infrastructure to demonstrate effective waste management technologies . the expert said that the federal government could partner with private sector companies to demonstrate waste - to - energy technologies , such as gasification and pyrolysis that can convert plastic waste to fuel . according to the expert , demonstrating such technologies would provide information on its benefits , including reducing sources of waste and creating a source of energy to either use or sell . several agency officials we interviewed agreed that international outreach efforts are critical to successfully addressing marine debris and that emphasis should be placed on assisting countries with improving their waste management practices . however , these officials said there are many factors to consider with regard to waste - to - energy technologies . for instance , state department officials said such technologies may not be supported by civil organizations because of environmental concerns . waste - to - energy technologies could also entail high upfront capital investments , and waste - to - energy facilities should adhere to strict environmental standards with monitoring and enforcement to help ensure the technology is not causing negative effects , according to agency officials . as a result , they said it may not be practical for some countries to adopt such technologies . in addition , usaid officials said that promoting waste - to - energy technology presupposes that waste is already being collected in sufficient quantity and quality to serve as a fuel for such technology , but that in some countries waste is openly dumped or burned and therefore sufficient waste may not be available . they cautioned that waste - to - energy technologies can be a part of a response to address marine debris abroad , but would not be sufficient alone . microfibers are a widespread type of microplastic ; they have been found on the shorelines of six continents and in oceans , rivers , soils , table salt , and public drinking water , according to scientific studies . microfibers enter the marine environment through various pathways . for example , microfibers are shed from synthetic clothing and other materials made of polyester and nylon . these microfibers pass through to waterways because washing machines and wastewater treatment plants typically do not have processes sufficiently refined to remove the fibers . little is known about other potential sources of microfibers , such as carpet manufacturing ; the rate of generation , such as how quickly materials break down and shed microfibers ; and any health impacts to humans or wildlife . federal requirements for manufacturers to design certain products to minimize the chances of material becoming marine debris . for example , two experts suggested the federal government develop design standards for washing machine manufacturers to ensure filters are designed to prevent microfibers from entering wastewater systems and then the marine environment .