executive order no . 12,919 , as amended , delegates the president's priorities and allocations authority for various resources to the following agency heads: secretary of agriculture: food and agriculture resources secretary of energy: all forms of energy secretary of health and human services: health resources secretary of transportation: all forms of civil transportation secretary of defense: water resources secretary of commerce: all other materials , services , and facilities , including construction materials , known as industrial resources . the department of commerce ( commerce ) administers the only priorities and allocations system that is actively used — the defense priorities and allocations system ( dpas ) — which is used for industrial resources . commerce has delegated authority to use priority ratings on contracts for industrial resources to the departments of defense ( dod ) , energy ( doe ) , and homeland security ( dhs ) for use in support of approved national defense , energy , and homeland security programs . under the dpas , agencies can assign a “do” or a “dx” priority rating to orders . do ratings are used for items critical to national defense , while a dx rating denotes the highest national defense urgency . priority rated orders have preference over all unrated orders as needed to meet required delivery dates , and among rated orders , dx - rated orders have preference over do - rated orders . while commerce has delegated the ability to use dpas authority to four agencies , it may also provide special priorities assistance to authorize other government agencies , foreign governments , owners and operators of critical infrastructure , or companies to place priority ratings on contracts on a case - by - case basis , or to resolve any problems that may arise in the use of priorities and allocations authority . commerce reported that since late 2003 , it has taken approximately 180 actions to provide special priorities assistance , primarily to support foreign government requirements related to dod - approved programs . with some exceptions , all dod contracts for industrial resources receive a priority rating under dpas , which amounts to approximately 300,000 contracts annually that receive priority ratings . for example , dod has used its authority in the past several years to prioritize the delivery of ballistic material used in body armor for the army and marine corps . in addition , dod has worked to manage dod - wide demand for armor plate steel and helped steel firms manage schedules in order to prevent armor plate shortages resulting from a surge in production on the mine resistant ambush protected ( mrap ) vehicle program . the u.s. army corps of engineers , which executes dod's priorities and allocations authority for water resources , also uses rated orders to procure water in advance of or during emergency events .