what is most important is that the problem has been recognized . across government , agencies have efforts underway to implement new financial management systems or to upgrade existing systems . agencies expect that the new systems will provide reliable , useful , and timely data to support day - to - day managerial decision making and assist taxpayer and congressional oversight . whether in government or the private sector , implementing and upgrading information systems is a difficult job and brings a degree of new risk . organizations that follow and effectively implement accepted best practices in systems development and implementation ( commonly referred to as disciplined processes ) can manage and reduce these risks to acceptable levels , organizations that do not typically suffer the consequences . for example , our work at dod and the national aeronautics and space administration this past year has shown that these agencies , which have experienced significant problems in the past in implementing new financial management systems , were not following the necessary disciplined processes for efficient and effective development and implementation of such systems . as i mentioned earlier , nasa is on its third attempt to implement a new financial management system . the first two attempts , which cost $180 million , failed and the current system initiative which is expected to cost close to $1 billion , has experienced problems . as we pointed out in recent testimony before this subcommittee , many of the problems nasa has been experiencing with its financial management system stemmed from inadequate implementation of disciplined processes . as the federal government moves forward with ambitious financial management system modernization efforts to identify opportunities to eliminate redundant systems and enhance information reliability and availability , adherence to disciplined processes is a crucial element to reduce risks to acceptable levels . in the area of financial reporting , we see two challenges: ( 1 ) the elimination of restatements and ( 2 ) greater transparency in financial reporting . many cfo act agencies have obtained clean or unqualified audit opinions on their financial statements , but the underlying agency financial systems and controls still have some serious problems . this manifested itself last year when a number of cfo act agencies had to restate their financial statements . as we have previously testified , at least 11 of the 23 cfo act agencies restated their fiscal year 2003 financial statements , and 5 cfo act agencies restated their fiscal year 2002 financial statements . the restatements to cfo act agencies' fiscal year 2003 financial statements ranged from correcting 2 line items on an agency's balance sheet to numerous line items on several of another agency's financial statements . the amounts of the agencies' restatements ranged from several million dollars to over $91 billion . nine of those 11 agencies received unqualified opinions on their financial statements originally issued in fiscal year 2003 . seven of the 9 auditors issued unqualified opinions on the restated financial statements , which in substance replace the auditors' opinions on their respective agencies' original fiscal year 2003 financial statements .