an expenditure target . sets an acceptable level of growth in the volume and intensity of physician services. the congress introduced spending targets for physician services in conjunction with the physician fee schedule in 1992 to help constrain the rise in medicare spending for physician services . the targets incorporated limited growth in the volume and intensity of services and were revised each year based on estimates of changes in the number of medicare beneficiaries and physician input prices . if actual spending exceeded the targeted amounts , future payment rates would be reduced , relative to what they would have been if actual spending had equaled the targets , to offset the excess spending . if actual spending fell short of the targets , future payment rates would be increased . since 1992 , the growth in the volume and intensity of physicians' services per medicare beneficiary has moderated ( see fig . between 1992 and 2000 , the average annual increase in medicare spending due to changes in volume and intensity of services per beneficiary was about 2 percent . in contrast , between 1985 and 1991 , immediately before the introduction of spending targets , volume and intensity of services per beneficiary increased at an average annual rate of about 8 percent . the application of the sgr system in 2002 resulted in a 5.4 percent reduction in physician payment rates , despite an estimated 2.6 percent increase in the costs of inputs used to provide physician services . the reduction occurred because estimated cumulative physician services spending since 1996 exceeded the target for cumulative spending by approximately $8.9 billion , or 13 percent of projected 2002 spending . in part , the payment update reflects adjustments made to the spending targets for previous years for revisions in gdp estimates and for more accurate actual spending statistics . correcting these errors in previous years' targets and spending totals to reflect more recent data resulted in larger physician payment increases in those years than if accurate data had been used , and they contributed to the size of the reduction in payments in 2002 . the sgr system sets spending targets for physician services and adjusts payment rates to bring spending in line with those targets . conceptually , if spending equals the targeted amount , physician payment rates are updated to keep pace with the percentage change in input prices as measured by the mei . if spending exceeds the target , the change in payment rates is smaller than the change in input prices . if spending falls short of the target , payment rates are allowed to grow faster than the rise in input prices . by adjusting payment rates when prior - year spending has been too high , the sgr system moderates the growth in medicare outlays for physician services . the sgr adjustments to the input price update are determined by how much the cumulative physician spending since 1996 differs from the cumulative spending target since then . spending and targets must both be estimated from information available each november when payment rates are set for the following year . previously , those estimates were then used in subsequent years .