enforcement . congress would need to determine which enforcement mechanisms to authorize fta to use and fta would need to develop an enforcement approach that makes the best use of these enforcement mechanisms . other dot modal administrations with safety oversight responsibilities , such as the federal aviation administration and fra , are authorized to issue fines or civil penalties to operators that violate regulations . however , transit agencies are usually publicly owned and face many financial challenges . as a result , fines and penalties could be counterproductive to enhancing safety when funding is at a premium and local riders or taxpayers ultimately could bear the cost of fines . other enforcement tools are options . the following questions would need to be considered when determining whether changes are needed in the balance of federal versus state responsibility for establishing rail transit safety: are uniform federal standards and nationwide coverage essential to achieving rail transit safety ? which level of government , state or federal , has the capacity to do the job at hand , taking into account such factors as resources and enforcement powers ? in addition , shifting federal - state responsibilities for oversight of rail transit safety would bring a number of operational challenges . these include finding the appropriate level of fta oversight of state programs and allocating costs between the federal government and the states . the new oversight system to be proposed would potentially involve major changes in the way states interact with fta in overseeing transit safety . the new balance of state and federal responsibilities could take some time for transit agencies to adjust to , especially those that would now be reporting directly to federal officials . adequate staff with needed skills . fta would need to ensure it has adequate qualified staff to oversee safety under the new program , especially in states that opt out of participating in the new program . fta's current safety staff is very small as is the staff devoted to rail transit safety oversight in most state agencies . building the capability within fta , its contractors , and these state agencies to develop and carry out the envisioned program would pose a number of challenges . however , the actions fta has taken in response to our 2006 recommendation to institute a training curriculum for oversight agency staff , would give it a head start on this process . for example , fra may order a locomotive , freight car , or passenger car out of service or may send warning letters to individuals if a safety violation is found , among other enforcement actions . cost . according to fta officials , their estimates of the total cost of the new program the department plans to propose are very preliminary . better estimates of what , if any , costs that states would bear under the new system will also be important before moving forward with this proposal . this could include considering any estimated costs the federal government would incur under various scenarios based on how many states opt out and how many new federal employees or contractors would be required under each scenario to act as trainers , inspectors , and administrative staff .