communicate with banks about basel ii issues . regulatory officials emphasized that they were speaking with bank officials about the development of the bank's basel ii systems , including methodologies and processes . these discussions will continue until after the final rule is issued , and according to regulators , facilitate discovery and qualification work . regulatory officials emphasized that , without a final rule , their work on qualification was preliminary , although they said it did provide useful information about the status of banks' implementation efforts . for example , regulators observed that all core banks had draft implementation plans and have basel ii project management offices . but regulatory officials said that core banks varied in their degree of preparation to date , specifically , in the quality of their data and risk management systems . occ officials said that some banks are more likely than others to make use of the potential 3-year implementation period between becoming a core bank and the first transitional floor period to fully develop their data and risk management systems . u.s. banking regulators have been preparing for basel ii by hiring additional supervisory staff , including examiners , with the necessary quantitative skills and by providing training specific to basel ii . officials told us that although the skills needed to oversee basel ii implementation were similar to the skills needed for all risk management oversight , additional quantitative skills would be necessary . regulatory officials emphasized that , like their supervisory processes , these hiring and training efforts were part of their evolving human capital plans and coincided with increased oversight of banks' models - based risk management approaches . therefore , officials said , the specific impact of basel ii on human capital efforts was difficult to quantify . regulatory officials stated that they had been building the skill sets required to oversee economic capital models as their responsibilities in this area increased and added that many of these efforts would be under way even in the absence of basel ii . and while several regulatory officials noted that they had hired some staff specifically for basel ii that they would probably not have hired otherwise , they said that not all staff involved in basel ii oversight needed to have specialized skills . more information on our scope and methodology appears in appendix i . the business of banking involves taking and managing a variety of risks . the international accord identifies several broad objectives , and reaching agreement on these goals has been an important part of building consensus among u.s. regulators on how to proceed with basel ii . the international accord's objectives are: safety and soundness . to further strengthen the soundness and stability of the international banking system ; consistency and competitive equity . to maintain sufficient consistency that capital adequacy regulation will not be a significant source of competitive inequality among internationally active banks ; focus on risk management . to promote the adoption of stronger risk management practices by the banking industry ; and capital levels .