other states have developed different mercury permitting approaches . minnesota includes a discharge limit in permits , based on the standard of 1.3 ng / l and implemented through a compliance schedule allowing the facility up to 5 years to meet the limit . according to state officials , if dischargers are unable to meet the limit at the expiration of the compliance schedule , they will be required to apply for a variance on an individual basis . state officials also reported that minnesota recently developed a draft statewide tmdl for mercury as a response to the mercury problem . if the discharger cannot comply they may request a variance . a variance establishes a monthly permit limit , based on the level currently achievable for that individual facility , and includes a required pmp . an annual permit limit of 12 ng / l is included as an annual discharge requirement for all facilities with a variance . according to state officials , indiana's npdes permits for major facilities may contain monitoring requirements for mercury , and some will contain effluent limits that must be achieved after a 3 to 5 year compliance schedule . additionally , indiana developed a streamlined mercury variance rule . this rule establishes a process for dischargers to obtain temporary effluent limits , based on the level of mercury currently in their effluent , and requires dischargers to develop and implement a pmp in conjunction with a mercury variance . wisconsin has not granted variances , but it has granted pmp's for about 20 facilities that are unable to comply with the mercury standard . according to a wisconsin official , the state considers that granting pmps without a limit is in essence a variance . however , it is referred to as an "alternative mercury limitation," and the state official explained that , if it were an official variance , the discharge limit would actually be in the permit , and the variance would be a part of that limit . new york and pennsylvania only recently began using the more sensitive mercury testing method and therefore have yet to address how facilities will be granted variances . to promote a more consistent and shared approach to developing water quality standards among the great lakes states , epa stated in gli that region 5 would develop a gli clearinghouse . as envisioned in gli , this clearinghouse would be a database containing all the information on the criteria and data used by the great lakes states in developing water quality standards . the clearinghouse was to be developed in cooperation with epa headquarters , regions 2 and 3 , and the great lakes states . as envisioned , data included in the clearinghouse could be quickly shared between the states to assist them in developing or updating numeric water quality criteria for toxic chemicals for aquatic life , wildlife , and human health . it could also be used to share data on any new pollutants that might be designated a bcc . when epa developed gli , it assumed that more chemicals would emerge as bccs in the future and require development of additional water quality standards .