dhs did not comment on that recommendation . given the high visibility and national interest in these events , assessing the criteria , keeping nia codes open , and reopening closed codes for the recent disasters to the extent practicable would help ensure visibility over federal disaster contracts . in conclusion , given the circumstances surrounding the 2017 disasters , and the importance of preparedness for future disasters , it is critical to ensure that fema is well - positioned to respond through its use of contracts . our work has shown that without effective planning on the use of contracts , fema may face challenges in quickly providing critical goods and services to survivors following a disaster . further , without effective coordination , fema cannot ensure that local , state , and federal partners have the tools they need to assist in disaster response . moreover , not tracking certain information on a government - wide basis in fpds - ng may result in key users lacking the information necessary to provide oversight of fema's and other agencies' disaster contract actions . implementing our recommendations to update its planning guidance and advance contract strategy ; assess acquisition workforce needs ; improve coordination with state , local , and federal partners ; and improve tracking of disaster contracting actions will help fema overcome key challenges it faces in contracting during a disaster , and improve future response efforts . chairman payne , chairwoman torres small , ranking members king and crenshaw , and members of the subcommittees , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions . if you or your staff have any questions about this statement , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or makm@gao.gov . contacts for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this statement include janet mckelvey ( assistant director ) ; caryn kuebler and meghan perez ( analysts in charge ) ; emily bond ; erin butkowski ; suellen foth ; julia kennon ; sylvia schatz ; lindsay taylor ; and robin wilson . key contributors for the previous work on which this statement is based are listed in the products cited . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . dhs concurred with these two recommendations and identified actions it plans to take to address them . we believe the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . ensuring that there is adequate time to complete acquisition planning activities and identifying the contracting workforce required to execute mission needs can help agencies establish a strong foundation for successful acquisition outcomes . however , our prior work identified challenges fema faced in its acquisition and workforce planning efforts for disaster contracting .