ii. ) as noted below , these 62 cases are not representative of all of the cases the agencies have brought related to illegal robocalling . fcc officials provided us information on six cases — each of which the officials said involved spoofing or a caller's blocking of their caller id information — that the agency brought from april 2011 to september 2018 . for example , one case involved a company that used spoofed robocalls to target elderly and low - income individuals to generate sales of health insurance coverage . ( see fig . fcc , ftc , and doj each enforce different rules or laws related to caller id spoofing . fcc enforces rules prohibiting anyone from causing the transmission of misleading or inaccurate caller id information with the intent to defraud , cause harm , or wrongfully obtain anything of value . caller id spoofing is widespread . many instances of spoofing are legal . for example , spoofing is legally used by professionals such as doctors who want to use their cell phones to return calls to patients but choose to transmit their office number instead . spoofing also often accompanies robocalls — an automated telephone call which delivers a recorded message . certain types of robocalls are illegal , such as robocalls for sales pitches unless companies have consumers' express written permission to call . according to fcc , advancements in technology have made it inexpensive and easy to make robocalls . as telecommunications systems have transitioned from traditional wireline services , to ip networks , the cost of making phone calls has dramatically decreased . ip - based voice services use existing internet connections to send phone calls , which may be cheaper than long distance phone charges associated with traditional phone service . autodialers can be programmed to dial a long list of phone numbers in order to deliver millions of calls in a short period of time . these dialing systems , coupled with ip - based voice services , such as voice over internet protocol ( voip ) , enable telemarketers and scammers to make high volumes of calls from anywhere in the world . ip - based voice services have also made it inexpensive and easy to spoof caller ids . according to an industry stakeholder , historically , the router systems used to spoof calls were physical devices located on site , which could be prohibitively expensive . however , software that is available for free can now be downloaded to enable a computer to function as a router . according to stakeholders , telemarketers and scammers can , with minimal cost , configure a router to display either a single spoofed number or a constantly changing set of numbers , making it appear as though calls originated in the united states even if they did not . fcc also enforces rules requiring telemarketers to transmit caller id information . ftc protects consumers against unfair or deceptive business acts or practices . ftc , similar to fcc , enforces rules requiring telemarketers to transmit their telephone number , and when available , the name of the telemarketer to a consumer's caller id service .