degrees . while acgme and aoa programs are accredited separately , acgme and aoa may also jointly accredit programs , and the organizations are in the process of establishing a single accreditation system . on june 30 , 2020 , aoa is to cease accreditation activities and all gme programs are to be accredited by acgme , and physicians will be able to attend any accredited program regardless of their type of degree . whether in acgme or aoa programs , physicians may pursue gme training within a variety of specialties or subspecialties . initially , physicians go through gme training for a specialty — such as internal medicine , family medicine , pediatrics , anesthesiology , radiology , or general surgery . of the specialties , family medicine , internal medicine , and pediatrics are considered primary care specialties , as they provide comprehensive first contact and continuing care for persons with a broad range of health concerns . completion of training in one of these specialties qualifies a physician to seek initial board certification to practice medicine . some residents , however , may choose to subspecialize and seek additional gme training . for example , a physician who completed an internal medicine gme program may decide to subspecialize in cardiology . ( see fig.1. ) the percentage of residents who later subspecialize varies based on specialty type . for example , according to a 2008 study , among the primary care specialties , 5 percent of family medicine residents end up subspecializing , compared with 55 and 39 percent of internal medicine and pediatric residents , respectively . therefore , a resident training in a primary care specialty may not ultimately practice as a primary care physician . studies of the physician workforce and associated shortages vary in the assumptions they make about physician supply and demand , resulting in different conclusions about the nature and extent of shortages . however , there continue to be shortages of physicians , such as in primary care , and studies have found that rural areas may be more likely to experience shortages . for example , one study reported that while there are about 80 primary care physicians per 100,000 people in the united states , the average in rural areas is 68 per 100,000 . at the federal level , hrsa monitors the supply of and demand for health care professionals and disseminates data about workforce needs and priorities . with regard to primary care physician shortages , hrsa identified 1,401 geographic and 1,485 population hpsas across the united states , as of january 2017 . while these hpsas were located in nearly all 50 states and the district of columbia , the south had the most ( 42 percent ) , and the northeast had the fewest ( 8 percent ) . according to hrsa , 8,583 more primary care physicians would be needed to remove these hpsa designations . in a november 2016 report , hrsa also projected that the need for more primary care physicians is likely to continue , with a shortage of up to 23,640 physicians by 2025 ( while family medicine and internal medicine had projected shortages , nationally , pediatrics did not ) .