yes or no . if yes , answer all slr questions . if no , answer slr 7 and slr 8 . in either case , please also answer b and c below . b ) does your state consider ecosystem conservation during the creation of the state transportation improvement program ? ra9 ) please list the three factors that you consider to be the most important in encouraging your agency to participate in consideration of ecosystem conservation in transportation planning . ra10 ) please list the three factors that you consider the most important in discouraging your agency from participating in consideration of ecosystem conservation in transportation planning . ra11 ) is there anything else you would like to tell us about considering ecosystem conservation in transportation planning ? thank you . to obtain a basic understanding of how transportation planners consider ecosystem conservation in transportation planning and how federal agencies are involved , we discussed transportation laws , regulations , and planning procedures with officials in the following agencies: federal highway administration in headquarters and phoenix , arizona ; u.s . we would like to know about factors that encourage or discourage consideration of ecosystem conservation in the pre - nepa phase . spn7 ) please list the three factors that have been the most important in encouraging your state to consider ecosystem conservation during the pre - nepa phase . spn8 ) similarly , please list the three factors that have been the most important in discouraging your state to consider ecosystem conservation during the pre - nepa phase . is there anything else that you would like to tell us about considering ecosystem conservation in transportation planning ? the american association of state highway transportation officials , association of metropolitan planning organizations , the nature conservancy , international association of fish and wildlife agencies , and defenders of wildlife . at each of these locations , we also obtained and reviewed transportation planning documents . we defined ecosystems as plants and animals and the habitats that support them . we defined planning as activities associated with developing the federally required long - range transportation plan , short - range transportation improvement program , and the nonfederally required project planning that some jurisdictions perform just prior to beginning the environmental review required by the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) , as well as any activities , such as corridor studies , that are performed concurrently with , but independently of , federally mandated transportation planning activities . because federal law already requires that states and local governments meet air and water quality standards , our inquiry did not include identifying whether state departments of transportation and metropolitan planning organizations were considering these issues in transportation planning . to ensure ecosystem diversity among the 12 metropolitan planning organizations in our sample , we divided the nation into quadrants containing a roughly equal number of states . then , to ensure that our sample would reflect the varying extent to which metropolitan planning organizations consider ecosystem conservation in transportation planning , we used the results from our 2002 survey of all metropolitan planning organizations .