undp has no targets . we determined the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this review . we also met with human resources officials from these five organizations to discuss various aspects of the data . we selected these agencies because they represent a range of un agencies with different funding mechanisms and methods for calculating geographic representation . these five agencies together comprise approximately 50 percent of total un organizations' professional staff . to assess factors affecting these organizations' ability to meet the targets , we reviewed un agency documents and interviewed un human resources officials , over 100 americans employed at the five un agencies , and u.s. officials . at unhcr , even its “fast - track” system used to staff emergency situations takes five months , on average . many americans that we interviewed concurred with the report's sentiment , saying that it is difficult to plan a job move when there is a long delay between submitting an application and receiving an offer . in march 2006 , the secretary general proposed cutting the average recruitment time in half . comparatively low or unclear compensation: comparatively low salaries and benefits that were not clearly explained were among the most frequently mentioned deterrents to un employment for americans . american employees we interviewed noted that un salaries , particularly for senior and technical posts , are not comparable with u.s. government and private sector employment . we also discussed u.s. strategies and efforts for increasing u.s. representation with un personnel officials and american employees of un organizations . we also analyzed 22 u.s. agency and u.s. mission web sites to review information that they made available on un employment opportunities . we conducted our work in washington , d.c. , new york ; geneva , switzerland ; vienna , austria ; and paris , france , from august 2005 to july 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . this appendix provides information on the number and percentage of u.s. citizens employed in professional positions at the five un agencies we reviewed . for the three agencies that have geographic targets , we provide information on the number and percentage of u.s. citizens employed in geographic positions as well as in nongeographic positions . for the 2 agencies that do not have geographic targets , we provide information on the number and percentage of u.s. citizens employed in regular and all other professional positions . at two of the three un agencies ( the secretariat and unesco ) with geographic targets , the percentage of geographic positions filled by u.s. citizens is slightly higher than the percentage of nongeographic positions filled by u.s. citizens . the variation is more significant at iaea where u.s. citizens fill 11.5 percent of the geographic positions and 17.1 percent of the nongeographic positions . table 6 shows the number and percentage of u.s. citizens employed in geographic and nongeographic positions at the three un agencies with geographic targets .