gao - 12-176 . develop an online locator tool listing volunteer tax preparation sites — and irs introduced an enhanced volunteer site locator tool in 2012 ; complete an internet strategy that provides a justification for online self - service tools as irs expands its capacity to introduce such tools . in addition to actions we recommended , irs is also studying ways to better communicate with taxpayers and determine which self - service tools would be the most beneficial to taxpayers . we believe the more narrow extensions of information reporting to include services , but not goods , remain important options for improving compliance . additionally , we have identified existing information reporting requirements that could be enhanced . examples include the following: mortgage interest and rental real estate . we recommended requiring information return providers to report the address of a property securing a mortgage , mortgage balances , and an indicator of whether the mortgage is for a current year refinancing when filing mortgage interest statements ( form 1098 ) could help taxpayers comply with and irs enforce rules associated with the mortgage interest deduction . we have reported that collecting the address of the secured property on form 1098 would help taxpayers better understand and irs better enforce requirements for reporting income from rental real estate . higher education expenses . eligible educational institutions are currently required to report information on qualified tuition and related expenses for higher education so that taxpayers can determine the amount of educational tax benefits they can claim . however , the reporting does not always separate eligible from ineligible expenses . we recommended revising the information reporting form could improve the usefulness of reported information . identifying additional third - party reporting opportunities is challenging . considerations include whether third parties exist that have accurate information available in a timely manner , the burden of reporting , and whether irs can enforce the reporting requirement . we have noted , for example , that the reason there is little third - party reporting on sole proprietor expenses is because of the difficulty of identifying third parties that could report on expense like the business use of cars . modernized systems should better position irs to conduct more accurate and faster compliance checks , which benefits taxpayers by detecting errors before interest and penalties accrue . in addition , modernized systems should result in more up - to - date account information , faster refunds , and other benefits , such as clearer notices so that taxpayers can better understand why a return was not accepted by irs . two new , modernized systems irs is implementing include the following: customer account data engine ( cade ) 2 . for the 2012 filing season , irs implemented the first of three phases to introduce modernized tax return processing systems . specifically , irs introduced a modernized taxpayer account database , called cade 2 , and moved the processing of individual taxpayer accounts from a weekly to a daily processing cycle . irs expects that completing this first phase will provide taxpayers with benefits such as faster refunds and notices and updated account information . irs initially expected to implement phase two of cade 2 implementation by 2014 .