cbp agreed with these recommendations and has addressed them . additionally , through mutual recognition arrangements with foreign partners , the security - related practices and programs established by the customs or maritime security administration of one partner are recognized and accepted by the administration of another . both cbp and the coast guard have entered into such arrangements . for example , cbp can expand the reach of its supply chain security programs ( such as c - tpat ) through mutual recognition arrangements . according to the world customs organization , mutual recognition arrangements allow customs administrations to target high - risk shipments more effectively and expedite low - risk shipments by , for example , reducing redundant examinations . as we reported in september 2013 , mutual recognition arrangements may allow the coast guard to allocate resources more efficiently and reduce risks . for example , we further reported that the coast guard signed a memorandum of understanding with the european union that establishes a process for mutually recognizing security inspections of each other's ports . according to dhs documents and coast guard officials in europe , by signing this memorandum of understanding , the coast guard plans to reassign some international port security officials from europe to africa , where certain countries are having more difficulties than others in implementing effective antiterrorism measures in their ports . further , we reported that one trade - off of signing the memorandum of understanding is that coast guard's international port security officials will not have the same opportunities to have face - to - face interactions and share port security information and practices directly with their european union counterparts as in the past . despite this trade - off , coast guard officials stated that entering into such arrangements increases efficiencies and noted that they intend to negotiate additional memorandums of understanding with other foreign governments that have strong port inspection programs . along the coast and in ports , maritime surveillance , interdiction , and security operations are conducted to ensure the security of maritime borders . for example , cbp's office of air and marine provides maritime surveillance and interdiction capabilities . its strategic assumptions include the ability to provide a 24-hour , 7-day a week response to border penetrations anywhere along the u.s. border , with a 1-hour response time for areas designated as high priority . we reported in march 2012 that as of may 2011 , the office of air and marine had placed about half of its air assets on the southwest border region and the remainder in the northern and southeast regions , while marine resources were distributed fairly evenly across the northern , southwest , and southeast regions . thank you for the opportunity to discuss key aspects of a secure maritime border . maritime borders are gateways to our nation's maritime transportation system of ports , waterways , and vessels , which handle billions of dollars of cargo annually . accordingly , maritime borders are critical to our national security . in addition to cbp's office of air and marine interdiction and response activities , the coast guard conducts a number of activities to deter potential threats to the united states' maritime borders .