additionally , the u.s . ( see app . iv for an illustration of how r&d supports all four phases of dhs's acquisition life cycle as defined by amd 102-01 ) . such an update could establish policy and guidance for defining r&d consistently across the department and outline the processes and procedures for overseeing r&d , which would provide more oversight into the r&d investments across the department . s&t has coordinated r&d efforts across dhs to some extent , but the department's r&d efforts are fragmented and overlapping , which increases the risk of unnecessary duplication . how much does dhs invest in r&d and to what extent does it have policies and guidance for defining r&d and overseeing r&d resources and efforts across the department ? to what extent is r&d coordinated within dhs to prevent overlap , fragmentation , and unnecessary duplication across the department ? to determine how much dhs invests in r&d and the extent to which it has policies and guidance for defining r&d and overseeing r&d resources , we reviewed dhs's budget and congressional budget justifications to identify r&d investments reported from fiscal years 2011 through 2013 . to identify dhs's reported r&d budget authority , we analyzed r&d budget authority included in budget submissions to omb from fiscal years 2010 through 2013 . we also analyzed s&t , dndo , and coast guard budgets to identify budget authority for r&d activities in non - r&d budget accounts . further , we analyzed data from the federal procurement data system next generation ( fpds - ng ) to identify dhs r&d - related contracts for fiscal years 2007 through 2011 . we also obtained data from the department of energy's ( doe ) national laboratories from fiscal years 2010 through 2012 to identify how much dhs components obligated for r&d - related work at the national laboratories . we assessed the reliability of the data we used by reconciling it with published data , and interviewing officials responsible for overseeing the relevant data systems about , among other things , applicable quality control procedures to maintain the integrity of the data . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . further , we interviewed s&t , coast guard , and dndo budget officials to determine what portions of their budgets would appropriately capture total r&d activities , as well as dhs budget officials to discuss r&d spending , how dhs oversees r&d funding , and dhs's policies and guidance related to defining , overseeing , and coordinating r&d efforts . we also interviewed other dhs component officials to discuss the extent to which components conducted r&d , captured r&d activities in their budgets , and coordinated with s&t . we compared dhs efforts to develop policies and guidance with gao's standards for internal control in the federal government . to determine the extent to which r&d is coordinated within dhs to prevent overlap , fragmentation , and unnecessary duplication , we reviewed data on about 15,000 federal procurement contract actions coded as r&d in fpds - ng made by dhs components from fiscal years 2007 through 2011 to identify contracts that were overlapping or duplicative of other contracts issued by different components .