security operations ( so ) . dhs provided written comments , which are reproduced in appendix i . this office is to provide risk - based security that includes regulatory compliance and other programs designed to secure transportation . within so , surface transportation security inspectors , known as surface inspectors , conduct a variety of activities to implement tsa's surface transportation security mission . within ppe's surface division , ppe reported allocating six surface program account staff to each surface transportation mode office — mass transit and passenger rail , freight rail , highway and motor carrier , and pipeline — in fiscal years 2017 and 2018 . tsa may realign funds within an appropriation account through reprogramming and also has limited authority to realign funds between appropriation accounts through transfers , pursuant to its appropriations acts and subject to notification provisions . according to tsa officials , tsa reprogrammed or transferred the following surface transportation resources enacted from fiscal years 2017 through 2019: in fiscal year 2018 , tsa reprogramed $5 million from surface programs to mission support activities to address security requirements and increase hiring of transportation security officers . transportation security officers conduct security screening of passengers , baggage , and cargo at airports to prevent any deadly or dangerous objects from being transported onto an aircraft . formalizing planning responsibilities , specifically with i&a , would allow for consistent involvement in the planning process and give analysts more time to prepare intelligence briefings for exercises . also , with surface inspectors performing stakeholder outreach in addition to ppe's primary role for industry engagement , formalizing planning and external outreach roles and responsibilities for so would ensure consistent outreach in the field . we are making the following recommendation to tsa: the tsa administrator should clarify roles and responsibilities for all offices involved in the coordination of surface transportation exercises , including when these offices are to coordinate , as part of the planned revision of the surface division's internal operating procedure for i - step . ( recommendation 1 ) . we conducted this performance audit from february 2019 to november 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the aviation and transportation security act designated tsa as the primary federal agency responsible for security in all modes of transportation . public and private transportation entities have the principal responsibility to carry out safety and security measures for their services . as such , tsa coordinates with these entities to identify vulnerabilities , share intelligence information , and work to mitigate security risks to the transportation modes . see table 1 for examples of the entities tsa works with to secure the various surface transportation modes . tsa's surface programs' program , project , or activity ( surface programs account ) supports tsa programs that are to protect the surface transportation system .