iii ) . the vast majority of projects had been included in the sites' own work plans , such as groundwater remediation at los alamos national laboratory , but some projects also represented work newly transferred from other program offices , such as remediation and demolition of a former weapons facility at oak ridge reservation . in general , projects chosen for recovery act funding fell into four main categories of work: decontaminating and demolishing facilities: for example , decontaminating and demolishing the k - 33 building at the oak ridge reservation . a two - level structure that covers 32 acres ( see fig . 2 ) was constructed in 1954 to process and enrich uranium for use in nuclear weapons . although uranium enrichment operations ceased in 1985 , the building's piping and other equipment were not removed completely until 2005 , and radiological and chemical contamination remains throughout the building . doe had initially selected a different building for demolition , k - 27 , which was also used to process and enrich uranium , but it found unexpectedly high levels of mercury contamination , complicating that cleanup . so in february 2010 , doe decided to instead demolish the k - 33 building — a much larger building but a less - contaminated and less - complex cleanup project — at a cost of $65 million . work began in april 2010 . given the delay in starting the project , site officials expect the project to be completed in 2012 . removing contamination from soil and groundwater: for example , removing and disposing of radioactive and hazardous contaminants from soil and groundwater at the mound site , a former production site for explosives and other weapons' components . production at the site ceased in 1995 . the site's contractor declared the physical completion of environmental cleanup of the site in july 2006 , although a landfill remained , which doe planned to monitor for contamination . congress , however , directed further remediation of the landfill at the site . the project includes excavating and disposing of contaminated soils and backfilling the site . although work began with base funding , the funding was insufficient to complete removal of the contamination . recovery act funding of $19.7 million was applied to the project to complete remaining work , with an expected site closure date of september 2010 . packaging and disposing of transuranic and other wastes: for example , characterizing and packaging transuranic wastes at multiple doe sites for shipment to the department's deep geologic repository for permanent disposal . ( see fig . transuranic wastes are typically discarded rags , tools , equipment , soils , or other solid materials that have been contaminated by radioactive elements , such as plutonium or americium . about 110,000 cubic meters of these wastes were generated mostly after 1970 and then stored at various doe sites . because these wastes remain radioactive for extremely long periods — hundreds of thousands of years in some cases — most are headed for disposal at the waste isolation pilot plant , a deep geologic repository near carlsbad , new mexico , designed for transuranic waste disposal .