resources . according to information provided by the ct bureau , it had provided funding for cve or ctf programming activities to most of the agencies with which we spoke . the program funding for these activities came from the nonproliferation , antiterrorism , demining , and related programs and economic support fund funding accounts . according to information from the ct bureau , from fiscal year 2011 to fiscal year 2014 , it obligated over $11 million to agencies we spoke with for cve programming and over $43 million to agencies we spoke with for ctf programming using interagency agreements or transfers . we found that , in cases where the ct bureau funded u.s. government agencies on cve or ctf programming , the funding mechanism was clear and laid out in the interagency agreements . some agency officials told us that these agreements provide the vehicle whereby funding can be obligated from the ct bureau to their agencies using a standard process . leadership . for cve and to some extent ctf , we found that officials at state and at other u.s. government agencies were generally aware of the agency or individual with leadership responsibility for the particular counterterrorism program . in addition , at the time of our review , officials said that they receive relevant and timely information on cve - related programming from the bureau . officials in state's regional bureaus stated that they are generally aware of when the ct bureau would have the lead on counterterrorism issues versus the regional bureaus . for example , some of these officials said that if a given issue involved policy and cross - cutting counterterrorism areas , the ct bureau would take the lead on meetings and assigning tasks , whereas if the issue was more regional in nature , the regional bureaus would take the lead with support from the ct bureau . we found that while the leadership for the ctf program was generally clear in the past , at the time of our review there was some uncertainty among officials as to whom they should be working with on ctf programming , because of the recent reorganization of the ct bureau . for example , some u.s. government officials said that there had been a dedicated ctf unit within the bureau that dealt with ctf programming and also coordinated the interagency terrorist financing working group . however , with the elimination of the stand - alone ctf unit within the ct bureau , it was not as clear to these officials who was the point of contact for ctf issues . at the time of our review , a few u.s. government agency officials said that it would be beneficial if the ct bureau shared new contact information resulting from the recent reorganization ; however , in the interim , the officials would still reach out to the point of contact that had been previously established for ctf issues . clarity of roles and responsibilities . we found that there was general clarity on the roles and responsibilities of the participants collaborating on cve and ctf counterterrorism programs with the ct bureau .