the impact of more recent mergers is unknown . while we have not performed modeling on mergers that occurred since 2000 , and thus cannot comment on any potential additional effect on wholesale gasoline prices , these mergers would further increase market concentration nationwide since there are now fewer oil companies . our analysis of mergers during the 1990s differs from the approach taken by the ftc in reviewing potential mergers because our analysis was retrospective in nature — looking at actual prices and estimating the impacts of individual mergers on those prices — while ftc's review of mergers takes place necessarily before the mergers . going forward , we believe that , in light of our findings , both forward looking and retrospective analysis of the effects of mergers on gasoline prices are necessary to ensure that consumers are protected from anticompetitive forces . ( 3 ) what effects have mergers had on market concentration and wholesale gasoline prices ? to address these questions , we relied on previous gao reports on gasoline prices and other aspects of the petroleum industry , including ( 1 ) a 2005 gao primer on gasoline prices , ( 2 ) a 2005 gao report on the proliferation of special gasoline blends , and ( 3 ) a 2004 gao report on mergers in the u.s. petroleum industry . we also collected updated data from a number of sources that we deemed reliable . this work was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in summary we found the following: crude oil prices are the fundamental determinant of gasoline prices . a number of other factors also affect gasoline prices including ( 1 ) refinery capacity in the united states , which has not expanded at the same pace as demand for gasoline in recent years ; ( 2 ) gasoline inventories maintained by refiners or marketers of gasoline , which have seen a general downward trend in recent years ; and ( 3 ) regulatory factors , such as national air quality standards , that have induced some states to switch to special gasoline blends that have been linked to higher gasoline prices . finally , the structure of the gasoline market can play a role in determining prices . for example , mergers raise concerns about potential anticompetitive effects because mergers could result in greater market power for the merged companies , potentially allowing them to increase prices above competitive levels . the 1990s saw a wave of merger activity in which over 2600 mergers occurred involving all three segments of the u.s. petroleum industry — almost 85 percent of the mergers occurred in the upstream segment ( exploration and production ) , while the downstream segment ( refining and marketing of petroleum ) accounted for about 13 percent , and the midstream segment ( transportation ) accounted for about 2 percent . since 2000 , we found that at least 8 additional mergers have occurred , involving different segments of the industry . this wave of mergers contributed to increases in market concentration in the refining and marketing segments of the u.s. petroleum industry .