gao - 13-432 . washington , d.c.: april 26 , 2013 . missile defense: opportunity exists to strengthen acquisitions by reducing concurrency . gao - 12-486 . washington , d.c.: april 20 , 2012 . the army did not agree with the analysis because it was not done in accordance with army regulations . dod agreed with our recommendation to complete a joint estimate of the long - term operating and support costs for the two aegis ashore sites and update the estimates after key program decisions are made . however , dod did not set a deadline for completing the estimate , such as before introducing these capabilities in europe — in late fiscal year 2015 and 2018 — as we also recommended . we noted in the report that the operating and support costs will likely be significant and that the navy will be responsible for all aegis ashore operating and support costs at the two planned sites beginning in fiscal year 2018 . the lack of a joint estimate of the long - term operating and support costs will make it difficult for the navy to accurately budget for these costs and can limit decision makers' ability to identify the resources that will be needed over the long term to support dod's planned investment in aegis ashore . therefore , we believe that dod should set a deadline for completing this estimate in order to meet the intent of our recommendation . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics , the commanders of the u.s. strategic command and u.s. european command , the secretaries of the army and navy , the director of the missile defense agency , and the secretary of state . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 404 ) 679-1816 or pendletonj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix v . during our review of the department of defense's ( dod ) implementation of the european phased adaptive approach ( epaa ) , we examined relevant documentation and met with representatives from numerous agencies and offices . to assess the extent to which dod has identified and planned to resolve implementation issues before deploying ballistic missile defense ( bmd ) capabilities to europe , we reviewed the u.s. strategic command document titled ballistic missile defense system ( bmds ) warfighter capability acceptance . this document describes the goal of the warfighter acceptance process , which is , in essence , to ensure that capabilities can be used as intended when they are delivered , and culminates in formal acceptance of bmd capabilities by u.s. strategic command .