ii. ) although most of the exercises we analyzed included the participation of either regional operations centers or tactical units , dod officials at several organizations stated that more training focused on integrating those two tiers is necessary in order to achieve realistic training as identified in dod policy . officials also identified the need for an affordable , scalable , distributed , and fully integrated training capability that would allow for more integrating training with live participants within and across the tiers . to address this need , officials indicated dod is planning a more robust missile mission training capability to enable integrating training through the tiers , but officials said this capability is early in development and , at this time , does not include tactical - level bmds elements . gao's guide for assessing training programs states that a training program should include the development of an overall training strategy and an organization that is held accountable for achieving training goals . additionally , dod officials stated that increased frequency of integrating training would be beneficial but there are no clear requirements for how much integrating training would be sufficient . however , dod has not developed such a training strategy for the holistic bmds that specifies clear requirements and standards for integrating training because dod has not clearly designated an entity to be responsible for integrating ballistic missile defense training across and among combatant commands and services and provided the entity with the authority to do so . individual combatant commands and services have training responsibilities within their own organizations but generally do not establish training requirements for other organizations . table 3 below shows training responsibilities of various dod organizations . the training responsibilities of these dod organizations do not clearly identify an organization with responsibility for integrating ballistic missile defense training across and among tiers . for example , although u.s. strategic command is responsible for synchronizing planning for missile defense , officials explained that the command is only responsible for synchronizing planning for operations and it does not have the responsibility or authority for integrating ballistic missile defense training . u.s. joint forces command is designated as the joint force trainer , but officials explained their role is to support combatant commands' joint training by providing the technical capabilities for different organizations to train together , not to set training requirements for any particular mission , such as ballistic missile defense . mda provides initial training for new and upgraded elements , most of the training for the ground - based midcourse defense element and all training for the command , control battle management and communications element . mda is not responsible for developing training requirements for other dod organizations . in addition , joint staff guidance for joint training charges the chairman with responsibility for formulating policies for joint training and requires the development of training plans , but officials said the training policy generally does not include setting training requirements for any particular mission . dod recognizes the need for a cross - cutting group to examine bmds training issues , but its latest effort is structured differently from other groups created to establish joint training requirements and as a result may not be as effective .