interior agreed with these recommendations . we also found that indian affairs is not providing schools with needed support in addressing deficiencies or consistently monitoring whether they have established safety committees , which are required by indian affairs . in particular , according to indian affairs information , one - third or less of the 113 schools inspected in fiscal year 2014 had abatement plans in place , as of june 2015 . interior requires that schools put in place such plans for any deficiencies inspectors identify . because such plans are required to include time frames , steps , and priorities for abatement , they are an initial step in demonstrating how schools will address deficiencies identified in both annual safety and health and boiler inspection reports . among the 16 schools we visited , several schools had not abated high - risk deficiencies within the time frames required by indian affairs . indian affairs requires schools to abate high - risk deficiencies within 1 to 15 days , but we found that inspections of some schools identified serious unabated deficiencies that repeated from one year to the next year . for example , we reviewed inspection documents for two schools and found numerous examples of serious “repeat” deficiencies — those that were identified in the prior year's inspection and should have been corrected soon afterward but were not . one school's report identified 12 repeat deficiencies that were assigned interior's highest risk assessment category , which represents an immediate threat to students' and staff safety and health and require correction within a day . examples include fire doors that did not close properly ; fire alarm systems that were turned off ; and obstructions that hindered access / egress to building corridors , exits , and elevators . another school's inspection report showed over 160 serious hazards that should have been corrected within 15 days , including missing fire extinguishers , and exit signs and emergency lights that did not work . besides these repeat deficiencies , we also found that some schools we visited took significantly longer than indian affairs' required time frames to abate high - risk deficiencies . for example , at one school , 7 of the school's 11 boilers failed inspection in 2015 due to various high - risk deficiencies , including elevated levels of carbon monoxide and a natural gas leak ( see fig . four of the 7 boilers that failed inspection were located in a student dormitory . without more systemic monitoring , indian affairs is not in a position to know whether schools have fulfilled this important requirement . to ensure that all bie schools are positioned to address safety and health problems with their facilities and provide student environments that are free from hazards , we recommended that interior ( 1 ) develop a plan to build schools' capacity to promptly address safety and health problems with facilities and ( 2 ) consistently monitor whether schools have established required safety committees . interior agreed with these recommendations . in conclusion , because indian affairs has neither conducted required annual inspections for bie schools nationwide nor provided updated guidance and tools to its safety inspectors , it lacks complete and accurate safety and health information on school facilities .