remaining gaps . to determine whether well - defined requirements for naval surface fire to determine whether well - defined requirements for naval surface fire support have been established , we analyzed documentation on the stated support have been established , we analyzed documentation on the stated needs and operational concepts for ship - based fire support including needs and operational concepts for ship - based fire support including doctrinal publications and capabilities documents . to supplement our doctrinal publications and capabilities documents . to supplement our analysis , we held discussions with a number of marine corps and navy offices including those responsible for creating requirements , such as the marine corps combat development command and the chief of naval operations's surface warfare division . to assess the navy's progress in developing and fielding systems to meet these requirements , we held discussions and reviewed documents at the program offices responsible for acquiring the extended range munition , the zumwalt class destroyer , and other weapon systems . we also drew from our prior work on these systems . in analyzing whether the systems selected meet requirements for naval surface fire support , we reviewed reports and documentation produced by or in cooperation with the navy and marine corps , such as the joint fires in support of expeditionary operations in the littorals initial capabilities document , as well as the capabilities development documents for the systems themselves . to supplement this information and address the actions taken to close remaining gaps , we met with officials from joint and service organizations in the requirements community . for more information on the methodology used in this report see appendix i . we conducted our analysis from february 2006 to november 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the marine corps has been developing new concepts for expeditionary operations that are characterized by an increase in mobility , flexibility , and depth of operations . to successfully conduct these operations , the marine corps relies on a “fires triad” composed of land - based artillery and mortars , attack planes and helicopters , and sea - based surface ships to destroy or suppress enemy forces . figure 1 shows the fires triad concept . the systems within the fires triad are considered complementary . for example , while surface ships provide the majority of supporting fires for ground forces during the early phases of expeditionary operations , land - based artillery and mortars assume a greater role in later phases as more of these assets are placed ashore . some legs of the triad offer capabilities others cannot . the guns of artillery and surface ships are more capable of providing volume of fire — large amounts of sustained fire to suppress or destroy a target — while aircraft are used for long - range precision strikes or attacks on moving targets . regardless of each system's capabilities or contributions , all components of the triad are considered necessary for success . the sea - based portion of the triad is referred to as naval surface fire support and is traditionally provided by the guns and missiles onboard navy surface ships .