authorizes flood control projects . authorizes flood control activities . protects shores of publicly owned property from hurricane and storm damage . mitigates shoreline erosion damage caused by federal navigation projects . department of agriculture's natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) nrcs / watershed protection and flood prevention program provides funding for projects that control erosion and prevent flooding . limited to watersheds that are less than 250,000 acres . provides assistance where there is some imminent threat — usually from erosion caused by river flooding . provides technical assistance to communities and individuals to solve natural resource problems , including reducing erosion , improving air and water quality , and maintaining or restoring wetlands and habitat . provides assistance to protect and develop the economies of communities . this assistance could involve building erosion or flood control structures to protect village commercial structures , such as canneries . the workgroup updated those recommendations in march 2009 . dcced is responsible for coordinating and directing state agencies in providing relocation assistance to villages . as we reported in 2003 , there is no single federal agency responsible for managing and funding flooding and erosion programs in alaska . instead , the corps and nrcs administer key programs for constructing flooding and erosion control projects to protect threatened villages from further damage , and other federal agencies operate programs that can address the consequences of flooding and erosion by , for example , repairing roads or rebuilding airport runways . in 2003 , congressional committees acknowledged the impacts on alaskan villages due to climate change and directed the corps to assess the erosion threat and estimate relocation costs for 7 coastal villages — bethel , dillingham , kaktovik , kivalina , newtok , shishmaref , and unalakleet . the corps completed the alaska village erosion technical assistance program assessment in april 2006 , and estimated that the villages of kivalina , newtok , and shishmaref have 10 years to 15 years before their current locations are lost to erosion , and that the cost to relocate these villages ranged from between $80 million and $200 million each . in 2004 , a congressional committee directed the corps to conduct an alaska erosion baseline study . in addition , the corps was provided with authority “to carry out , at full federal expense , structural and non - structural projects for storm damage prevention and reduction , coastal erosion , and ice and glacial damage in alaska , including relocation of affected communities and construction of replacement facilities.” however , this authority was repealed in march 2009 . the extent to which additional villages may need to relocate as the impacts of climate change increase and of how federal agencies in collaboration with state agencies can assist the villages in their relocation efforts was discussed in an october 11 , 2007 , congressional field hearing . testimony was provided by representatives from the corps ; fema ; the state of alaska's division of homeland security and emergency management ; and the villages of kivalina , newtok , shishmaref , and unalakleet .