and these are only the reported attacks . the director of cert / cc has estimated that as much as 80 percent of actual security incidents go unreported , in most cases because ( 1 ) there were no indications of penetration or attack , ( 2 ) the organization was unable to recognize that its systems had been penetrated , or ( 3 ) the organization was reluctant to report the attack . figure 2 shows the number of incidents reported to the cert / cc from 1995 through 2003 . according to cert / cc , about 95 percent of all network intrusions could be avoided by keeping systems up to date with appropriate patches ; however , such patches are often not quickly or correctly applied . icat links users to publicly available vulnerability databases and patch sites , thus enabling them to find and fix vulnerabilities existing on their systems . it is based on common vulnerabilities and exposures ( commonly referred to as cve ) naming standards . these are standardized names for vulnerabilities and other information security exposures , compiled in an effort to make it easier to share data across separate vulnerability databases and tools . cve compatibility is increasingly being incorporated into various security products . in addition , a variety of internet mailing lists provides a database of vulnerabilities and serves as a forum for announcing and discussing vulnerabilities , including information on how to fix them . for example , one vendor - provided list monitors thousands of products to maintain a vulnerability database and also provides security alerts . the sysadmin , audit , network , security ( sans ) institute maintains lists of the top 20 most critical internet security vulnerabilities , commonly known as the sans top twenty , which includes step - by - step instructions and references to additional information on how to remediate vulnerabilities . in march of this year , the open source vulnerability database ( osvdb ) — a vendor - neutral database operated by security industry volunteers and supported by digital defense , inc. , and winterforce — was made available at no cost to the public . this database aims to be a comprehensive , single source for providing detailed , current , and accurate information for all known vulnerabilities . as of june 1 , this database contained information on about 3,000 reported and reviewed vulnerabilities . in addition , vendors such as microsoft and cisco provide software updates on their products , including notices of known vulnerabilities and their corresponding patches ; they also provide software options for automatically downloading and installing patches . finally , vendors of patch management tools and services , discussed later , offer central databases of the latest patches , incidents , and methods for mitigating risks before a patch can be deployed or has been released . according to fedcirc officials , the federal government has on occasion taken additional steps to assist agencies in mitigating known vulnerabilities through patch management . the worms were variants of the bagle and netsky viruses .