we also conducted tests of the data themselves . we used analytic software to compare the data provided by participating agencies with the data maintained by sba . we focused our review on data fields considered critical by sba officials , such as the awarding agency , the date of award , the award recipient , the amount of the award , and the purpose of the award . we also reviewed data fields related to sbir program goals , such as gender and socio - economic status of the recipient , and data on the number of employees at the recipient firm . we used gao's data reliability guidance to identify key attributes of data quality that facilitate program evaluation . these attributes include completeness , accuracy , and consistency in format . finally , we reviewed internal quality control procedures . we determined that the data are sufficiently reliable for our purpose , which is to report on sba's efforts to ensure consistency and completeness of the data it receives . to determine the extent to which the government - use database requirements have been implemented , we interviewed sba officials , and reviewed related documentation , such as minutes from meetings of sba and sbir program directors , and overviews of the existing and planned data systems . in addition , we attended a demonstration of the proposed internet interface for the government - use section and interviewed the current contractor assisting sba about implementation progress . we also reviewed a contractor - prepared analysis of the functional and data requirements for the integration of the public - and government - use sections of the tech - net database . at each of the eight participating agencies , we interviewed sbir officials regarding the extent to which sba had consulted them in the development of the government - use database . to determine the extent to which participating agencies have developed and implemented techniques to evaluate commercialization success of sbir projects , we reviewed agencies' documentation about their commercialization assistance and monitoring efforts . specifically , we reviewed surveys that agencies had administered to award recipients , resulting reports on survey results , and anecdotal descriptions of commercialization success . we also reviewed provisions in sbir legislation , relevant legislative histories , and sba's policy directive regarding commercialization of sbir - funded projects , as well as past gao reports . in addition , we interviewed officials at each of the eight participating agencies to obtain information on the specific commercialization outcomes they monitor , the history of each agency's data collection efforts , and the agencies' experience in obtaining such information from current and past award recipients . we conducted our work from april 2006 through september 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the following are gao's comments on the small business administration's ( sba ) letter dated october 6 , 2006 . usda publishes the success stories on its web site and in an agency newsletter . about 2,500 people receive the newsletter and usda makes copies of the success stories available at sbir conferences . according to usda officials , in the future they hope to gather data more systematically and conduct site visits to the sbir firms .