gao - 11-229 . face challenges in reconstituting its work force . according to doe , contractor , and former doe officials we spoke with , it could take years for doe to assemble the right mix of experts to restart work on the license application . are there countervailing considerations that would outweigh those interests ? the secretary also described the steps doe had taken to inform residents and others . specifically , doe held meetings in the vicinity of the prospective site to inform the residents of the site's consideration as a repository and receive their comments , as directed by nwpa . the secretary added that doe went beyond nwpa's requirements for providing notice and information prior to the selection of yucca mountain . he concluded that the yucca mountain site was qualified as the site for the repository and accordingly recommended the site to the president . since the secretary's recommendation was made , the nation's inventory of commercial spent nuclear fuel has continued to grow . the nation currently has about 70,000 metric tons of commercial spent nuclear fuel stored at 75 sites in 33 states ( see fig . this inventory is expected to more than double by 2055 — assuming that the nation's current reactors continue to produce spent nuclear fuel at the same rate and that no new reactors are brought online , and that some decline in the generation of spent fuel takes place as reactors are retired . although some elements of spent nuclear fuel cool and decay quickly , becoming less dangerous , others remain dangerous to human health and the environment for tens of thousands of years . most commercial spent nuclear fuel is stored at operating reactor sites ; it is immersed in pools of water designed to cool and isolate it from the environment . without a nuclear waste repository to move the spent nuclear fuel to , the racks in the pools holding spent fuel have been rearranged to allow for more dense storage of the spent fuel . even with this rearrangement , spent nuclear fuel pools are reaching their capacities . as reactor operators have run out of space in their spent nuclear fuel pools , they have turned increasingly to dry cask storage systems that generally consist of stainless steel canisters placed inside larger stainless steel or concrete casks . a dry storage facility typically consists of security and safety mechanisms , such as a defensive perimeter with intrusion detection devices and radiation monitors surrounding a concrete pad with the dry storage casks emplaced on it . regulatory requirements for radiation exposure for this type of facility are significantly different from those of a repository . for example , spent fuel need only be stored safely for the life of the storage facility , currently 40 years , which is in contrast to the 1 million year period for which safe storage must be demonstrated under the environmental protection agency regulation promulgated for the yucca mountain repository . in august 2012 , we reported that reactors at nine sites have been retired and that seven of these sites have completely removed spent fuel from their pools , as well as removing all infrastructure except that needed to safeguard the spent fuel .