offering hiv tests to veterans . officials from three vamcs in our review told us that providers often use clinical reminders that were developed and implemented by the vamc or associated visn to prompt them to offer hiv tests to veterans . ( see fig . according to these officials , clinical reminders are used to prompt providers to offer a one - time hiv test to veterans who have not been tested . they can also be used to facilitate providers' identification of veterans who are at higher risk for acquiring hiv and subsequently prompt them to offer these veterans an hiv test on an annual , rather than a one - time , basis . for example , officials at two of these three vamcs indicated that the reminders include prompts for determining if veterans are at higher risk of acquiring hiv or fields to document identified risk factors . one of these officials told us that the recurrence of these clinical reminders can subsequently be increased or decreased to prompt providers to offer an hiv test to veterans who are at higher risk of acquiring hiv on a more or less frequent basis , depending on the risk factors identified over time . if staff cannot reach the veterans by phone , officials at these two vamcs indicated that they send letters to the veterans asking them to contact their providers to obtain their test results . further , officials at three vamcs stated that staff send letters to veterans to inform them of negative hiv test results within the required 14 day time frame . perspectives obtained from vamc and visn officials cannot be generalized . we took additional steps to address each objective . to describe approaches that vamcs have used to facilitate each stage of hiv screening , we interviewed hhrc officials and officials at the five selected vamcs — including primary care providers , infectious disease providers , and laboratory staff — and their four associated visns to understand how these providers determine if veterans should be offered an hiv test , obtain veterans' consent to be tested , and order the most current recommended test ( stage one ) ; communicate hiv test results to veterans within established time frames ( stage two ) ; and ensure that newly diagnosed veterans are promptly linked to hiv care ( stage three ) . we identified approaches that were reported by officials from more than one of the five selected vamcs , and also reviewed vamc policies that describe facility - specific approaches . to determine the extent to which vha monitors hiv screening , we interviewed hhrc officials regarding the collection and dissemination of data on hiv testing rates and the availability of the most current recommended hiv test at vamcs ( stage one ) and vamcs' timeliness in linking newly diagnosed veterans to hiv care ( stage three ) , as well as vamcs' use of this data to make related improvements as needed .