there has been growth in the private security industry in iraq . in our 2005 report , we reported that the department of defense ( dod ) estimated at least 60 private security providers were working in iraq with perhaps as many as 25,000 employees . in march 2006 , the director of the private security company association of iraq estimated that approximately 181 private security companies were working in iraq with just over 48,000 employees . today , my testimony will address some of the issues we raised in our 2005 report as well our preliminary observations from an ongoing engagement on the processes used to screen private security providers . specifically , my testimony today will address the extent to which coordination between the u.s. military and private security providers has improved since our 2005 report , the ability of private security providers and dod to conduct comprehensive background screenings of employees , and the extent to which u.s. or international standards exist for establishing private security provider and employee qualifications . my testimony is based on our july 2005 report , a may 2006 visit to iraq , and our preliminary observations from an ongoing engagement requested by this subcommittee on the effectiveness of the processes used to screen contractor employees in the u.s. central command's area of responsibility , which includes iraq . to obtain our preliminary observations on the effectiveness of the processes used to screen contractor employees in iraq , we have reviewed relevant documents such as contracts , as well as dod and governmentwide policies ; met with dod officials both in the united states and iraq , and interviewed contractors providing services to deployed forces in iraq as well as professional background screeners in the united states and india . this work is being done in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . according to officials from one of the private security providers we spoke with , their iraqi subcontractor claims to have a screening process , and the provider trusts the company to provide qualified individuals . one company we spoke with told us that they rely on local tribal leaders to screen their employees . finally , the iraqi ministry of the interior also screens iraqi private security employees as part of the registration and licensing process . privacy laws: privacy laws may also make it difficult to complete accurate screenings on those who live outside of the united states . according to officials from background screening firms , some countries do not permit criminal background searches of their citizens or limit the type of information that can be released to a third party . in other countries , criminal information cannot be given to third parties and is only released to the applicant who can then determine whether to release the information . according to screening company officials , there are often issues related to the authenticity of documents provided by applicants . dod conducts biometric screening of most non - u.s. private security provider employees needing access to installations in iraq ; however , the value of the screening process is limited because the databases used to screen the applicants have little international biometric data .