swap prices . several market participants also suggested interest rate and asset swaps could be used to estimate spreads on treasury frns . we reviewed results of simulations of frn spreads published by one market participant , and found the estimates from this model usually to be within our own estimates for the frn spread . theoretically derived formula . we explored modifying the formulas used in don smith's “negative duration: the odd case of gmac's floating - rate note” to derive a theoretically correct spread price . this approach predicted frn spreads comparatively very close to zero and which generally lie within the costs predicted by the maturity - and reset - based models . this pricing model did not incorporate the pricing consequences of the mismatch between the reset rate and the maturity of the index , and so does not fully capture the pricing risks faced by the frn . because interest rate environments vary substantially over time , we compared the relative costs of the frns in various interest rate environments . the different environments , as used in our analysis and discussed in our report , are described below ( see table 2 ) . to determine the trend of 13-week yields over a two year period , we estimated a linear time trend on the first difference of weekly yields ( where t is an index of the number of weeks since the start of the two - year window ) : this is essentially equivalent to fitting a second degree polynomial to the yields , allowing us to capture changes in direction of the interest rate trend ( i.e. , peaks and troughs ) as well as the slope of a linear trend . the estimated curves were used in classifying the interest rate environments . the cut - offs for assigning an interest rate trend to a category of rising or falling — versus steady — were based on our professional judgment . other approaches — such as using traditional statistical significance tests — conflate volatility with assessment of the presence of a trend and therefore are not appropriate for this determination . we were able to use a data - derived approach to assign 2-year periods to our volatility categories . we use the rmse statistic as an aggregate measure of the weekly yields' total deviation from the trend . we then used a k - mean cluster analysis to divide the sample into four volatility groups: low , moderate , high , and extreme . using the maturity - and reset - based models , we estimated what the spread would be for frns auctioned on the same day as actual 2-year fixed - rate notes from january 1980 to march 2012 , resulting in 387 simulated frns . we then applied these estimated spreads to the actual weekly 13-week bill auctions from january 1980 to march 2014 , and calculated what the total interest cost would have been for each simulated frn during this period . like the actual 2-year frn , we used a floor of zero for the daily interest accrual of our simulated frns .