we made no changes in response to these comments . blm also provided other technical comments which we addressed in appendix ii . we will send copies of this report to the secretaries of the navy and the interior , the appropriate congressional committees , and other interested members of congress . we also will make copies available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 3841 . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . to determine the navy's annual revenues from the geothermal facility at china lake , we reviewed the contract between the navy and the power plant operator to identify all the forms of revenue to be paid to the navy . we obtained and reviewed annual data prepared by the navy's geothermal program office on revenues from ( 1 ) royalties on the sale of electricity , ( 2 ) payments toward the base's electricity bill , and ( 3 ) payments for conserving electricity use at the base . we obtained revenue data for calendar years 1987 , the first year the navy collected geothermal revenues , through 2003 , the most recent year for which complete data are available . we assessed the reliability of the navy's revenue data by ( 1 ) comparing the annual revenues the navy reported and the revenue the power plant operator reported it had paid to the navy and ( 2 ) interviewing navy officials knowledgeable about the data . the navy has not spent all its geothermal revenues from china lake . as of december 31 , 2003 , the navy had about $14.7 million in unspent geothermal revenues . according to the navy's energy program manager , the navy carries over about $4 to $5 million from year to year to pay for expenses in the first month of the fiscal year . in addition , the navy carries over funds that it was unable to obligate to programs before the end of the fiscal year . between october 1 , 1989 , and december 31 , 2003 , the navy spent about $56.6 million , or about the remaining one - third of its expenditures from geothermal revenues , on the geothermal program office at china lake . this office spent , on average , about $2.4 million annually to manage geothermal operations at china lake and about $1.6 million to develop new geothermal resources at other military locations , for a total annual budget of about $4 million . the navy's geothermal resource management activities include ( 1 ) monitoring key aspects of the china lake geothermal reservoir , ( 2 ) overseeing the activities of the power plant operator , and ( 3 ) preserving historic and natural resources . complete information on the scope and methodology of our review can be found in appendix i . the process of geothermal energy development begins with identifying a likely source of geothermal energy through exploration .