each well is sampled quarterly . after four years of quarterly sampling and monitoring , army officials said the plume is stable and contained , which means it is isolated underground and not expected to move . further , officials said there is no indication that perchlorate has migrated outside the identified plume . under its rcra closure permit with the state of new mexico , the army must continue monitoring the groundwater for up to 20 years . three of the seven installations we visited tested for perchlorate under the safe drinking water act's unregulated contaminant monitoring regulation program . edwards air force base , in california , sampled twice in 2002 and reported that none of the 12 chemicals listed on the epa list of unregulated contaminants , including perchlorate , were detected in any of the groundwater samples collected from drinking water wells . ( under the regulation , epa required surface water systems to be sampled quarterly and groundwater systems to be sampled semiannually for one consecutive 12-month period. ) redstone arsenal , in alabama , sampled quarterly for a 12-month period beginning june 2001 . two water intake sites were sampled ( a drinking water source and a drinking water and industrial water source ) , both along the tennessee river . redstone arsenal reported that perchlorate was not detected above the epa sampling level of 4 parts per billion . nearby huntsville , alabama , also sampled for perchlorate and detected no contamination , a redstone arsenal official said . finally , although the requirements of the unregulated contaminant monitoring regulation did not apply to the naval air weapons station , china lake , in california , because its water supply system was too small , installation officials volunteered to sample for perchlorate and other unregulated contaminants . accordingly , in october 2003 , officials at china lake sampled 10 drinking water wells for perchlorate and other contaminants , but perchlorate was not detected . according to information provided by dod and officials at the installations we visited , the services were generally not cleaning up known perchlorate contamination . dod officials explained that perchlorate is not a regulated contaminant and , therefore , there is no requirement to clean up perchlorate contamination . however , officials at aberdeen proving ground are not cleaning up the perchlorate detected in city wells . instead , both the city of aberdeen and the installation sample finished water and production wells on an alternating monthly schedule: finished water is sampled weekly , four production wells are sampled twice a month , and the remaining eight production wells are sampled monthly . recent sampling has detected contamination below the epa interim assessment guidance of 4 parts per billion , but in some cases , well samples have been above the maryland department of the environment public health advisory for perchlorate , which is 1 part per billion for drinking water . in the event a sample is found to be above the maryland state advisory limit , the city of aberdeen blends well water without perchlorate with well water containing perchlorate to lower the concentration level to below 1 part per billion .