what is the rationale for accepting the risk ? what alternate strategies are being considered or implemented ? what opportunities are in the future to implement the necessary level of protection ? for example , some possible rationales for risk acceptance are: physical site or structural limitations , historical or architectural integrity , impact on an adjacent structure , and funding priorities . executive branch agencies , with the exception of certain intelligence - related exemptions , are required to comply with the isc's policies and recommendations . the isc is required to develop a strategy for ensuring compliance with its standards ; however , we previously found that the isc did not formally monitor agencies' compliance with isc standards , in part , because it lacks the staff and resources to conduct monitoring . currently , in place of a formal monitoring program , isc officials hold quarterly meetings and participate in isc's working groups along with their member agencies . isc officials said that the information sharing that occurs through these channels helps them achieve a basic understanding of whether and how member agencies use the standards . this approach , however , does not provide a systematic assessment of isc member agencies' use of the standards , and provides no information on non - member agencies' physical security practices . the isc stated in its 2012 to 2017 action plan that it plans to establish protocols and processes for monitoring and testing compliance with its standards by fiscal year 2014 . we previously recommended that dhs direct isc to conduct outreach to executive branch agencies to clarify how its standards are to be used , and develop and disseminate guidance on management practices for resource allocation as a supplement to the isc's existing physical - security standards . according to isc officials , as of september 2014 , the isc has created a compliance working group and is in the beginning stages of developing a standard for ensuring compliance with its established policies . gao , federal facility security: additional actions needed to help agencies comply with risk assessment methodology standards , gao - 14-86 ( washington , d.c.: mar . fps and usms face challenges in effectively informing the visiting public about what items are prohibited from being brought into gsa buildings as lists of prohibited items vary among the buildings and among tenants in multi - tenant buildings . based on various factors , such as the composition of federal tenants , and in the case of courthouses , decisions by judicial districts , each gsa building may have a unique list of prohibited items that , according to fps and usms officials , can cause some confusion to the visiting public . facility security committees and court security committees have broad latitude in determining which items , in addition to those specifically prohibited by law ( i.e. , illegal items ) , can be prohibited from their facilities . these additional items may not necessarily be “illegal.” in addition , some items may be admissible for some individuals , while not for others .