( see fig . all of these components of retirement income have been affected by the major regulatory , labor market , and demographic changes that have taken place in the last 40 years . legislative changes have expanded the pension and personal saving options available to workers . the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) of 1974 provided certain minimum standards and broad new protections of employee benefits plans , including provisions for individual retirement accounts ( ira ) . subsequent legislation revised some provisions of erisa , further expanding the possibilities for workers to have access to pension income in retirement and established new types of employer - sponsored pension plans , such as 401 ( k ) plans . legislative changes have also focused on the financing problems of social security . likewise , increases in life expectancy may also require increased saving in order to provide for a greater number of years in retirement or might induce people to work longer . for households headed by a 25- to 34-year old , overall debt levels increase across the generations . ( see fig . the median level of debt for the baby boom is 38 percent greater than that for the pre - baby boom generation while generation x's median level of debt is 146 percent greater than that of the pre - baby boom generation and 78 percent greater than that of the baby boom . the percentage of households with debt changed very little , however , remaining at roughly 83-84 percent across the generations . thus , those households that go into debt are going into debt more deeply with each new generation . the increase in debt levels between the baby boom and generation x was due largely to increases in housing debt . the median value of housing debt increased between the baby boom and generation x by 61 percent . the percentage of households with housing debt changed very little between these two generations , however , remaining at roughly 40 percent . the amount of debt carried by a household will affect the value of its net worth . for households headed by a 25- to 34-year old , the percentage of households with positive net worth and the median value of positive net worth increased between the pre - baby boom and generation x ; however , the median value of negative net worth is also much higher for generation x . ( see fig . the median value of net worth for households with positive net worth increased by 60 percent between the pre - baby boom and the two younger generations . the percentage of households with negative net worth is smaller for the two younger generations than for current retirees when they were young . however , the median value of net worth for households with negative net worth is about four times larger for generation x than for the baby boom or the pre - baby boom .