12866 or major under cra . we found that required steps in irs's guidance process , as outlined in the ccdm , were not always documented in the sample of eight guidance products that we reviewed . thus , it was difficult to determine whether policies and procedures were followed . our sample included two guidance products issued in 2015 from each of the four non - regulatory guidance types ( revenue rulings , revenue procedures , notices , and announcements ) . each of the eight products we selected concerned a different tax issue . as recommended by federal internal control standards , clear and complete documentation of key decisions would help management ensure that drafting teams follow all required steps before issuing final guidance . the key phases were not fully documented in four of the eight irs guidance case files that we reviewed . for example , four of the eight case files we reviewed were missing a background information note ( bin ) . this internal document provides a record of clearance at each stage , pertinent background information , the identification of risks , and any significant issues raised during coordination and circulation . in the case files that were missing bins , we found some documentation of information typically contained in the bin elsewhere in the case files , such as approvals and clearance prior to publication . irs also told us that they use a case management information system to track approvals of guidance projects . of the four case files that included bins , only one had a complete bin . in instances of missing or incomplete bins , it was not possible to verify that all steps listed as required by the ccdm were followed from the case file alone . for example , some case files contained copies of emails noting that various irs or treasury officials had approved moving draft guidance to the next stage , or clearing the guidance for final publication . however , the checklist of required approvals on the bin was incomplete , making it difficult to determine whether required approvals were received . complete documentation of approvals at various stages is an internal control activity that can help drafting teams , managers , and reviewers track and monitor guidance projects . the eight case files that we reviewed also did not consistently document discussions of whether the final guidance should be reported to us and congress as a rule , and whether the guidance could be considered major under cra . the ccdm says that all revenue rulings and revenue procedures will be treated as rules that must be reported to gao and congress . however , one of the two revenue procedures that we reviewed was not submitted for cra review . irs told us that the failure to notify us and congress was an oversight due to the revenue procedure being managed by personnel not familiar with irs's usual requirements . unlike for revenue procedures and revenue rulings , the ccdm states that generally notices and announcements are not required to be submitted for cra review , but sometimes should be , on a case - by - case basis .