approach . supervisors at one location objected to the s.m.a.r.t . approach , particularly the “specific” portion , because they felt that job objectives needed to be broad enough to allow employees to discuss any accomplishments they make if they complete additional job activities or other tasks that might arise during the year . supervisors at two locations discussed how the work they did was nebulous and unpredictable , which made it challenging to develop job objectives that not only reflected the nature of their work but that they could exceed . similarly , supervisors at another location expressed concerns that employees' job objectives may not reflect the work they do by the end of the performance management cycle because of constant changes within their organization . ( 2 ) how do dod civilian personnel perceive nsps , and what actions has dod taken to address these perceptions ? for our first objective , we reviewed the safeguards specified in section 9902 ( b ) ( 7 ) of title 5 , u.s. code , for the nsps performance management system , as well as other safeguards we have previously identified as key for performance management systems . we also obtained and analyzed regulations , guidance , and other documentation provided by officials in dod and the nsps program offices of the four components — the army , the air force , the navy , and the fourth estate — and interviewed knowledgeable officials in all of these offices to obtain a comprehensive understanding of their efforts to implement the nsps performance management system and the safeguards as well as the processes , procedures , and controls used for monitoring and overseeing implementation of the system . in addition , we visited eight dod organizations — two for each component — located outside the continental united states to assess the extent to which the department has implemented safeguards for nsps . because our 2008 review focused on assessing implementation of nsps and the safeguards at locations that were geographically distributed throughout the united states , we focused our efforts for this review on visiting locations outside the continental united states . during our site visits we reviewed documents , such as pay pool business rules , and met with the performance review authority , pay pool managers , pay pool panel members , rating officials , the nsps program manager or transition team , and dod civilian employees under nsps to obtain their perspectives on the extent to which the safeguards had been implemented . the organizations we visited were selected based on a number of factors , such as the presence of a large number or concentrated group of civilian employees under nsps . for our second objective , we obtained and analyzed the results of dod's may 2006 , november 2006 , may 2007 , and february 2008 status of forces survey of civilian employees , which gauge employee attitudes toward nsps , among other things . we used these data to identify indications of movement or trends in employee perceptions .