it is the largest investigative arm of dhs . federal law enforcement training center — prepare federal , state , local , and international law enforcement professionals to fulfill their responsibilities safely and proficiently , ensuring that training is accomplished in the most cost - effective manner . emergency preparedness and response — ensure that our nation is prepared for incidents — whether natural disasters or terrorist assaults — and oversees the federal government's national response and recovery strategy . unless dhs performs periodic risk assessments of its information systems , it will not have assurance that appropriate controls over potential threats have been identified to reduce or eliminate the associated risk . the purpose of an information system security plan is to provide an overview of the security requirements of the system and describe the controls that are in place or planned for meeting those requirements . the information security plan also delineates the responsibilities and expected behavior of all individuals who access the system . details on our scope and methodology are included in appendix i . we performed our review at dhs facilities in the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area , denver , colorado , and at our headquarters in washington , d.c. , from july 2004 through may 2005 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . to address the challenge of responding to current and potential threats to homeland security — one of the federal government's most significant challenges — congress passed , and the president signed , the homeland security act of 2002 . this act mandated the merger of 22 federal agencies and organizations into dhs . not since the creation of the department of defense in 1947 has the federal government undertaken a transformation of this magnitude . in march 2003 , dhs assumed operational control of about 209,000 civilian and military positions from these 22 federal agencies and organizations . each of these agencies and organizations brought with it management challenges , distinct missions , unique information technology infrastructures and systems , and its own policies and procedures . because of the importance of the department's operations and the challenges associated with creating the federal government's third largest department , we designated the implementation and transformation of dhs as a high - risk area in january 2003 . dhs's mission , in part , is to prevent and deter terrorist attacks within the united states , reduce the vulnerability of the united states to terrorism , and to minimize the damage , and assist in the recovery , from terrorist attacks that do occur . this is an exceedingly complex mission that requires coordinated and focused effort from the federal government , state and local governments , the private sector , and the american people . the department of homeland security appropriations act of 2005 , provided $28.9 billion in net discretionary spending for dhs to carry out its mission . to accomplish its mission , the homeland security act of 2002 established five under secretaries with responsibilities over directorates for management , science and technology , information analysis and infrastructure protection , border and transportation security , and emergency preparedness . each directorate is responsible for its specific homeland security mission area .