the standards include the following . about 62 percent of the standards , in areas such as fire protection and emergency services and airfield operations , were based on existing osd and military service policies and requirements . about 13 percent of the standards , in areas such as custodial services and grounds maintenance and landscaping , were based on commercial industry standards or guidance from other federal agencies . about 25 percent of the standards , in areas such as installation chaplain services and legal support , were based on the judgment of military subject matter experts . according to dod , the standards determined by military subject matter experts were in areas that were not covered by dod policy or other requirements and did not have comparable commercial standards . to determine standards for these areas , the subject matter experts generally reviewed the practices of each military department and reached agreement on the service levels needed that in their judgment would best meet installation mission and personnel requirements . judgment was used to decide the standard level of service in view of mission , facility , personnel , and quality of life factors . also , because costs generally increase as the level of service increases , some of these decisions also involved the consideration of trade - offs between alternative levels of service and affordability . officials at osd and each of the military services stated that the new common standards called for service levels that were very close to each military service's existing installation support standards or practices . however , the officials also noted that because installation support had not been fully funded in the past , military installations normally did not provide support at the levels called for by all of their existing standards . the following examples illustrate a few of the installation support function definitions and standards that dod established for joint basing , and appendix iii provides a list of the 47 defined installation support functions and the number of standards developed for each area . information technology services management was defined to include the personnel , contracts , and equipment necessary to plan , manage , coordinate , and execute the delivery of services including fixed and wireless voice , data , and video services . twenty - six standards were established to define the expected level of service for this support function . for example , each joint base is to ( 1 ) maintain 99.99 percent telephone dial tone availability , ( 2 ) provide wireless local mobile radio service for 100 percent of the base's populated area and 85 percent of the total base area , ( 3 ) respond within 90 minutes to critical circuit outages 99 percent of the time , and ( 4 ) resolve 95 percent of nonmission critical trouble calls within 4 days . installation law enforcement operations was defined to include the personnel , contracts , and support equipment necessary to enforce federal , state , and military law ; investigate crimes ; apprehend and detain suspects ; manage traffic ; and detect and prevent crime . five standards were established to define the expected level of service for this support function .