this was not our intention . our recommendation was intended to provide decisionmakers with better information on the potential long - term costs and schedules for this effort to enable them to weigh the merits of individual projects and make related funding decisions . we believe it is reasonable for state to prepare a detailed plan over a 5-year or longer period . as noted in our report , leading organizations not only rank projects by priority , but they also provide more detailed cost estimates and other information in plans covering 5- , 6- , or 10-year periods . state already has the foundation to adopt this best practice . we share state's view that precision in planning estimates becomes less practical and important for the later years of the overall program . however , we believe that it is reasonable to expect notional estimates for the program's later years so that decisionmakers have better information on the overall cost and duration of the program . we have modified our recommendation accordingly . to determine the status of the 10 priority embassy and consulate projects , we met with project managers in state's office of foreign buildings operations and officials that oversee the work of the office . in addition to obtaining overall information on the status of the construction effort , such as state's quarterly internal reports on its progress in implementing the emergency security supplemental program , we obtained detailed information on the history and status of the 10 priority projects for replacement identified by the department shortly after the bombings of the two embassies in africa . those priority posts were kampala , uganda ; doha , qatar ; tunis , tunisia ; dar es salaam , tanzania ; nairobi , kenya ; istanbul , turkey ; zagreb , croatia ; são paulo and rio de janeiro , brazil ; and luanda , angola . we also met with a representative of j.a . jones construction co. , which is the contractor responsible for building the new embassy complexes in nairobi , dar es salaam , and zagreb . issues discussed included cost and implementation challenges facing those projects as well as potential options for reducing the time to construct new embassies . to assess state's plans for the overall program , we met with senior state officials to discuss their vision for the program , their method for establishing project priorities , and their approach to requesting funding . we also examined state's requests for appropriations in fiscal years 1999-2001 and the supporting material . we received briefings on state's ongoing studies to identify program requirements , alternatives , and obstacles . we also identified leading best practices in capital planning decision - making that could be applied to state's construction program . to identify steps state is taking to improve the management of the office of foreign buildings operations and the efficiency of its construction processes , we received briefings from the office on its initiatives and plans . we conducted our review from march through november 2000 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of state and interested congressional committees . we will make copies available to others upon request .