, once per quarter or less . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of homeland security , the tsa administrator , and other interested parties . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . to what extent does fams ensure that incumbent air marshals are mission ready ? this report is a public version of the prior sensitive report that we provided to you . tsa deemed some of the information in the report as sensitive security information , which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits this information , such as specific numbers of air marshals and specific types of training that air marshals reported needed to be added to fams's training curriculum to address changes in air marshals' responsibilities . although the information provided in this report is more limited in scope in that it excludes such information , it addresses the same questions as the sensitive report and the methodology used for both reports is the same . to address the first objective , we reviewed tsa guidance and other relevant documents describing tsa's processes for evaluating the existing curriculum and developing new courses for air marshal candidates and incumbent air marshals , and interviewed senior office of training and development ( otd ) officials responsible for these efforts . we also analyzed documentation on the results of training curriculum assessments otd conducted to identify recommendations made to improve training and the extent to which otd implemented the recommendations . otd conducted these assessments from may 2007 through april 2014 . we then compared otd's training development and evaluation processes to key principles identified in dhs guidance on training evaluation , and gao's prior work on training and development . we also obtained the available response rates for surveys that otd conducted of famtp graduates and their supervisors on the effectiveness of famtp courses for calendar years 2009 through 2011 — the last three full years that fams hired air marshals . in addition , we met with senior otd officials to discuss the actions that had been taken to improve these response rates , and compared these actions to office of management and budget ( omb ) standards and guidance for conducting surveys . further , we visited the tsa training center ( tsatc ) in atlantic city , new jersey and 7 of 22 fams field offices , which we selected to reflect a range in size ( as determined by the number of air marshals assigned to the office ) and geographic dispersion . at tsatc , we interviewed tsatc management and training instructors and toured the facility . at the field offices , we interviewed field office management , supervisory federal air marshals ( sfam ) , air marshals , and training instructors to obtain their views on the current training curriculum . the results of these interviews cannot be generalized to all field offices , but provide insight into the extent to which tsa is addressing air marshals' training needs and ensuring their mission readiness .