somalia . in baydhaba , we found that the price of key cereal commodities increased significantly in mid - 2011 ( see fig . by september 2011 , the un had declared famine in seven regions in somalia , including baydhaba . in november 2011 , usaid signed a grant agreement with its implementing partner to fund a cash - for - work project . by that time , however , the prices of these key cereal commodities had declined from their peaks earlier in 2011 . usaid's implementing partner provided $72 per household each month during the period when prices of these key cereal commodities declined . the partner then increased the amount to $96 per household each month in june 2013 . our analysis also found that the price of red sorghum and white maize increased significantly in 2014 ( also shown in fig . from april to july 2014 , the price of red sorghum increased by 77 percent and the price of white maize by 37 percent , large increases compared with historical price trends . however , the implementing partner did not adjust the transfer rate during this period . the implementing partner cautioned that adjusting the transfer rate should be done in context of the wage rate in the labor market , the general volatility of commodity markets in somalia , and food being only a part of the beneficiaries' expenditure basket . the implementing partner stated that starting in late february 2015 it would be testing a new methodology intended to establish the transfer rate at the subregional level based on the cost of commodities , the wage rate in the labor market , the available budget , and an assessment of the implications of adjusting the transfer rate by examining short - and long - term trends . once established , the transfer rate would remain for approximately 2 to 3 months , comprising a round of distributions . jordan and kenya . in jordan , we analyzed data from jordan's department of statistics and found that the price of food in jordan did not change significantly after an implementing partner started its project in july 2012 . in kenya , the implementing partner established the transfer rate based on the value of the standard food basket ; it reviewed prices every month and would change transfer amounts only in response to price fluctuations , in either direction , of more than 10 percent . in taita taveta , the site we visited in kenya , the implementing partner informed us that the transfer value had not been adjusted since june 2013 because retail food prices had not changed more than 10 percent . usaid does not provide guidance to partners on when and how to modify programs in response to changing market conditions according to usaid officials , usaid does not have a standard for identifying significant price changes , since the definition of significance is specific to each country and region . in addition , we did not find guidance addressing modifications in response to changing market conditions in the aps for international emergency food assistance . this lack of guidance has resulted in inconsistent responses to changing market conditions among different cash and voucher projects funded by usaid .