for our recommendation , i.e. the three pilot programs are summarized below . further information on each program , as well as dod's current personal property program , is provided in appendix ii . the remaining pilot program did not give a cost per pound , stating only that its maximum coverage rate was $72,000 . dod has reported that , historically , approximately 35 percent of all moves result in loss or damage claims . a 1997 military traffic management command survey of 3,000 moves revealed that while 65 percent of shipments had loss or damage , only 35 percent resulted in claims being filed . dod pays approximately $100 million a year in claims but recovers only 60 to 65 percent of the amounts paid to military personnel from the moving industry . these figures understate the actual loss and damage , since all military personnel do not file claims , apparently because the process takes a long time and reimbursement rates do not always cover the losses . dod incurs these losses due to the structure of its current program . the military claims offices assist service members by arranging to pay their claims and then submitting the claims to the respective movers for reimbursement . as indicated above , dod receives only partial reimbursement from the moving industry . if the recommendation is implemented , dod expects to reduce a substantial portion of the estimated $100 million it currently pays in claims each year to service members and eliminate much of the 35 to 40 percent in losses it incurs from settling claims with the moving industry because service members will be settling claims directly with their carriers . dod also expects additional savings because fewer demands would be placed on military claims officials to manage the claims process . dod believes that these savings will help offset the higher costs of providing full replacement value to service members for any loss and damage incurred during the shipment and storage of their personal property . our work has shown that another long - standing problem with the current personal property program is the poor quality of moving services provided to military personnel . the high number of loss and damage claims that military personnel file underscores this problem . according to the two pre - evaluation surveys cited in the transportation command's evaluation , around 55 to 65 percent of respondents reported suffering some loss or damage of household goods during a recent move . moreover , in the pre - evaluation survey conducted by the transportation command , the top four factors identified by service members as being of greatest importance to them in the moving process were the quality of packing , the care in handling personal property , the condition of their property upon receipt at the end of the move , and the receipt of fair payment for any losses or damages they suffered . in individual comments obtained during the pre - evaluation survey , the transportation command reported that some service members also cited the lack of professionalism and quality of customer service on behalf of moving crews as a concern . the problem stems primarily from the current program placing greater emphasis on costs ( i.e.