fha has taken actions in response to some of our recommendations . for example , fha agreed to consider incorporating a variable for down - payment assistance in its mortgage scorecard . to more accurately assess subsidy costs , an fha contractor is considering the specific variables that we recommended fha include in its annual actuarial review and incorporated the source of down payment in the 2005 actuarial review of the fund . fha also has agreed to improve its oversight of down - payment assistance lending , including modifying its information systems to document assistance from seller - funded nonprofits . while these actions represent improvements in fha's risk management , additional improvements will be important if fha is to successfully implement some of the program changes hud has proposed . accordingly , consideration of this proposal should include serious deliberation of the associated risks and the capacity of fha to mitigate them . congress established fha in 1934 under the national housing act ( p.l . 73- 479 ) to broaden homeownership , shore up and protect lending institutions , and stimulate employment in the building industry . fha's single - family program insures private lenders against losses ( up to almost 100 percent of the loan amount ) from borrower defaults on mortgages that meet fha criteria . in 2004 , more than three - quarters of the loans that fha insured went to first - time homebuyers , and more than one - third of these loans went to minorities . from 2001 through 2005 , fha insured about 5 million mortgages with a total value of about $590 billion . fha's loan performance models did not include key variables that help estimate loan performance , such as credit scores , and as of september 2005 , the source of down payment . the major factors underlying the surge in prepayment activity that also contributed to the reestimate were declining interest rates and rapid appreciation of housing prices . these trends created incentives and opportunities for borrowers to refinance using conventional loans . to more reliably estimate program costs , we recommended that fha study and report on how variables found to influence credit risk , such as payment - to - income ratios , credit scores , and down - payment assistance would affect the forecasting ability of its loan performance models . we also recommended that when changing the definitions of key variables , fha report the impact of such changes on the models' forecasting ability . in response , fha indicated , among other things , that its contractor was considering the specific variables that we had recommended fha include in its annual actuarial review and had incorporated the source of down - payment assistance in the 2005 actuarial review of the fund . if congress authorized fha to insure mortgages with smaller or no down payments , practices used by other mortgage institutions could help fha to design and implement these new products . in a february 2005 report , we identified steps that mortgage institutions take when introducing new products .