( see app . ii for the list of all school lenders in school year 2003 – 2004. ) the school lenders told fsa that they were in compliance with this regulation and provided information on their servicing costs and interest rates paid for lines of credit . to what extent have schools participated in ffelp as lenders and what are their characteristics ? how have schools structured their lending operations and what are the benefits for schools and borrowers ? what statutory and regulatory safeguards exist to protect the interests of taxpayers and borrowers ? to assess the extent to which schools have participated in ffelp as lenders , we analyzed data from education's information systems on school lenders' loan volume in each school year from 1993 – 1994 to 2003 – 2004 , which we converted to real 2003 dollars ; the amount of loans made by other ffelp lenders for students attending these schools ; and characteristics of school lenders , such as whether they are private or public schools . we also interviewed 12 other lenders , including secondary markets ; 2 state - designated guaranty agencies , which perform a variety of administrative functions on behalf of the federal government in the ffelp ; and related higher education and financial aid associations . we also interviewed officials of all schools that were lenders in school year 2003 – 2004 or planning to lend in 2004 – 2005 , to gather information on what type of lender purchased their loans . to assess existing safeguards for borrowers and taxpayers , we reviewed the hea , related regulations , guidance issued by education , and court decisions . we also interviewed officials in education's fsa , office of general counsel , office of inspector general , and office of postsecondary education . see appendix i for a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology . we conducted our work from december 2003 to december 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in fiscal year 2004 , students received over $84 billion in federal loans to finance postsecondary education . the major federal loans include stafford subsidized and unsubsidized loans , which are available to both undergraduate and graduate students — the federal government pays the interest on behalf of subsidized loan borrowers while students are in school and parent loans for undergraduate students ( plus ) , which are made to parents on behalf of undergraduate students . students can also receive consolidation loans , which allow them to combine multiple federal student loans into a single loan and to make one monthly payment . in fiscal year 2004 , about $65 billion was disbursed through ffelp and about $19 billion was disbursed through fdlp . since ffelp ( originally called the guaranteed student loan program ) was created in the hea of 1965 , the student loan market has changed significantly . first , there has been a dramatic growth in student loan volume , with more students relying on private loans , which are not part of ffelp , than at any point in the past .