gao - 11-621 . washington , d.c.: june 20 , 2011 . defense management: perspectives on the involvement of the combatant commands in the development of joint requirements . gao - 11-527r . washington , d.c.: may 20 , 2011 . other stakeholders have also assessed arctic capability gaps . examples of these efforts include the following: u.s. northern command initiated a commander's estimate for the arctic in december 2010 that , according to officials , will establish the commander's intent and missions in the arctic and identify capability shortfalls . in addition , northern command identified two arctic - specific capability gaps ( communications and maritime domain awareness ) in its fiscal years 2013 through 2017 integrated priority list , which defines the combatant command's highest - priority capability gaps for the near - term , including shortfalls that may adversely affect missions . u.s. european command completed an arctic strategic assessment in april 2011 that , among other things , identified arctic capability gaps in the areas of environmental protection , maritime domain awareness , cooperative development of environmental awareness technology , sharing of environmental data , and lessons learned on infrastructure development . in addition , it recommended that the command conduct a more detailed mission analysis for potential arctic missions , complete a detailed capability estimate for arctic operations , and work in conjunction with northern command and the departments of the navy and air force to conduct a comprehensive capabilities - based assessment for the arctic . dod and dhs established the capabilities assessment working group ( working group ) in may 2011 to identify shared arctic capability gaps as well as opportunities and approaches to overcome them , to include making recommendations for near - term investments . the working group was directed by its terms of reference to focus on four primary capability areas when identifying potential collaborative efforts to enhance arctic capabilities , including near - term investments . those capability areas include maritime domain awareness , communications , infrastructure , and presence . the working group was also directed to identify overlaps and redundancies in established and emerging dod and dhs arctic requirements . as the advocate for arctic capabilities , northern command was assigned lead responsibility for dod in the working group , while the coast guard was assigned lead responsibility for dhs . the establishment of the working group — which , among other things , is to identify opportunities for bi - departmental action to close arctic capability gaps and issue recommendations for near - term investments — helps to ensure that collaboration between the coast guard and dod is taking place to identify near - term capabilities needed to support current planning and operations . although the working group is developing a paper with its recommendations , officials indicated that additional assessments would be required to address those recommendations . u.s. navy completed its first arctic capabilities - based assessment in september 2011 and is developing a second capabilities - based assessment focused on observing , mapping , and environmental prediction capabilities in the arctic , which officials expect to be completed in the spring of 2012 .