this concludes my prepared testimony . i would be happy to respond to any questions that members of the subcommittees may have . for questions regarding this testimony , please call richard m. stana at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or stanar@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . other key contributors to this statement were susan quinlan , assistant director ; deborah davis , assistant director ; jeanette espínola ; karen febey ; michael parr ; jamelyn payan ; david perkins ; jeremy rothgerber ; and leslie sarapu . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we expect to issue a report on this effort in spring 2008 . finally , as mandated in the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 , we are examining dhs's fiscal year 2008 expenditure plan for the sbi program and also expect to report to congress in spring 2008 . as noted earlier in this statement , border patrol agents have had difficulties using the laptops mounted into agent vehicles to provide them with cop information . however , according to border patrol agents , project 28 has provided them with improved capabilities over their previous equipment , which included items such as cameras and unattended ground sensors that were only linked to nearby border patrol units , not into a centralized command and control center . in addition , border patrol officials we spoke with at the tucson sector noted that project 28 has helped its agents become more familiar with the types of technological capabilities they are integrating into their operations now and in the future . as we reported in october 2007 , the border patrol's tucson sector was developing a plan to integrate sbinet into its operating procedures . elements of sbi will be carried out by several organizations within dhs . one component is the u.s. customs and border protection's ( cbp ) sbi program office which is responsible for developing a comprehensive border protection system using people , technology , known as sbinet , and tactical infrastructure — fencing , roads , and lighting . the current focus of sbi is on the southwest border areas between the ports of entry that cbp has designated as having the highest need for enhanced border security because of serious vulnerabilities . we also visited the tucson border patrol sector — a site where sbinet technology and fencing deployment was under way at the time of our review . we performed our work from november 2007 through february 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the work to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our objectives .