we agreed with these concerns . therefore , instead of surveying contractors , we opted to conduct semi - structured interviews with a wide variety of davis - bacon stakeholders . also , in order to solicit opinions directly from contractors but not interfere with labor's ongoing efforts , we interviewed a small number of individual contractors in states that had been surveyed less recently but where the results of those wage surveys had been published . given that it had been a few years since labor sent wage survey forms to these contractors , we believed we would obtain better information through personal interviews than a survey . we conducted semi - structured interviews with approximately 30 representatives from academia , contractor associations , unions , and individual contractors . our semi - structured interview protocol allowed us to ask questions of numerous organizations and individuals , offering each interviewee the opportunity to respond to the same general set of questions , but also allowed for flexibility in asking follow - up questions and , in limited circumstances , for the omission of questions when appropriate . for example , we did not ask representatives from academia about filling out the survey form or attending pre - survey briefings because they would typically not be involved in these activities . in our findings , we noted cases in which we did not ask all stakeholders a particular question . to select representatives from academia , we conducted a literature review to identify studies that reviewed or evaluated the davis - bacon wage survey process . to obtain opinions from both unionized and nonunionized contractors , we interviewed representatives from the national organizations of the associated builders and contractors , inc. ( abc ) and the associated general contractors of america ( agc ) . to obtain views from construction unions , we interviewed representatives from the afl - cio and the international brotherhood of electrical workers ( ibew ) . we selected ibew because it has one of the largest memberships among construction industry unions and electricians are considered a key class for all four of labor's construction types . to obtain a state - level perspective from contractors' associations and unions , we interviewed representatives from state abc and agc chapters , as well as ibew locals in arizona , north carolina , and west virginia . we chose these three states because they had been surveyed in 2009 or 2010 by different labor regional offices . in addition , because arizona , north carolina , and west virginia have low to medium levels of workers represented by unions , according to the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) , we interviewed representatives from abc and agc in new york , the state with the highest level of unionization . we also interviewed individual contractors in new york and florida . we chose new york and florida because they had been surveyed fairly recently and represented diversity in geography and the percentage of all workers represented by unions . to select contractors , we requested labor data including the lists of contacts who had been sent wage survey forms and who had returned them .