facilities management . many of the facilities at nnsa sites are decades old and in poor condition . for fiscal year 2003 , nnsa required each nuclear weapons site to develop a 10-year comprehensive site plan for facilities management that incorporated nnsa's strategic goals . the main objective of the plans is to restore , rebuild , and revitalize the physical infrastructure of the nuclear weapons complex . two of nnsa's specific goals are to stabilize the deferred maintenance backlog by the end of fiscal year 2005 and to reduce the amount of deferred maintenance to within industry standards by the end of fiscal year 2009 . nuclear safety . doe has always required that the contractors responsible for a nuclear facility analyze the facility , the work to be performed , and the associated hazards . contractors use this information to identify the conditions , safe boundaries , and hazard controls necessary to protect workers , the public , and the environment from adverse consequences . finally , the contractors document the safety requirements and operating procedures for each facility , referred to as the safety basis . although doe included these steps in an order for contractors to follow , the laboratories had not consistently done a thorough and quality analysis of their nuclear facilities . in january 2001 , doe finalized a revised nuclear safety rule , requiring that contractors responsible for nuclear facilities establish and maintain a safety basis . contractors may be subject to civil penalties for failing to comply with this requirement . this revised rule strengthened nnsa's ability to hold contractors accountable for the safety of nuclear facilities in addition to incorporating new agencywide requirements into the two contracts , nnsa established new contract mechanisms and performance measures to help ensure that the laboratories put in place management improvements for mission support activities . these measurements have changed over time . project management . in october 2000 , doe approved order 413.3 , which set agency wide standards for managing projects , including nnsa projects . the order is intended to help ensure that projects are delivered on schedule and within budget and are fully capable of meeting mission requirements as well as environmental , safety , and health standards . it requires that all projects costing more than $5 million go through five decision checkpoints , such as approving mission need and approving the start of operations . at each checkpoint , nnsa must make a formal determination to allow the project to proceed . laboratory officials explained that they had given immediate priority to fixing business system problems rather than measuring and sustaining improved business results . furthermore , the associate director for administration concluded that good performance measures would take considerable time to develop and that implementing corrective actions was a higher priority . however , by waiting to focus on results and costs later , the laboratory increases its risk that the initiative may not fully address existing problems or be the most cost - effective approach to reducing its internal control vulnerabilities to appropriate levels .