such as california and texas , did not . during our initial interviews with dhs and doj , officials expressed difficulty in responding to our request for cve - related training materials , in part because agency officials were not clear on which training should be considered cve - related . see generally pub . 111-84 , div . e , 123 stat . see also 18 u.s.c . § 249. and explicitly emphasize the importance of community engagement in cve efforts while recognizing that such engagement should focus on a full range of community concerns , and not just on issues such as national security . we also met with officials from the department of defense ( dod ) and office of the director of national intelligence ( odni ) who possess knowledge about cve - related training and who are involved in interagency efforts related to cve . more specifically , we met with officials from the components and offices listed in table 3 . further , the implementation plan has assigned doj responsibility for supporting national cve - related training efforts . however , because doj has not identified what topics it thinks should be addressed by cve - related training , it is difficult to identify which of doj's current training is related to cve — either directly or indirectly , which also makes it difficult to determine whether and how doj is fulfilling its training responsibilities per the cve national strategy . if departments are unclear regarding what constitutes cve - related training , they will also have difficulty accounting for their cve - related training responsibilities . by not identifying and communicating cve - related training topics to its components , doj is not able to demonstrate how it is fulfilling its cve - related training responsibilities and ensure that it is carrying out its responsibilities as established in the cve national strategy implementation plan . we also interviewed individuals with expertise in cve , such as academic researchers who have published on cve - related topics and researchers from organizations that study cve - related topics , to obtain their views on topics cve - related training should address and identify potential training programs to include in our review . they included individuals from the georgetown university prince alwaleed bin talal center for muslim - christian understanding , the rand corporation , the foundation for defense of democracies , the international centre for the study of radicalisation , and the national consortium for the study of terrorism and responses to terrorism . we selected these individuals based on the depth of their experience with , and knowledge of , cve ; the relevance of their publications ; referrals from other practitioners ; and to develop a sample that represented various sectors ( eg , academic , advocacy , etc. ) they provided valuable insight even though the perspectives they offered are not generalizable . the state administrative agencies that we surveyed are responsible for managing dhs grant awards to states and the district of columbia that are eligible for cve - related training and ensuring that grant recipients comply with grant requirements .