mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the committee may have at this time . for further information about this testimony , please contact me , frank rusco , at 202-512-3841 or ruscof@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . refineries that process heavy oil cannot operate at normal capacity if they run lighter oils . for instance , doe's december 2005 study found that the types of oil currently stored in the spr would not be fully compatible with 36 of the 74 refineries considered vulnerable to supply disruptions . doe estimated that if these 36 refineries had to use spr oil , u.s. refining throughput would decrease by 735,000 barrels per day , or 5 percent , substantially reducing the effectiveness of the spr during an oil disruption , especially if the disruption involved heavy oil . to improve the compatibility of spr oil with refineries in the united states , the doe study concluded that the spr should contain about 10 percent heavy oil . however , our august 2006 report found that doe may have underestimated how much heavy oil should be in the spr to maximize compatibility with refiners . we also found doe may have underestimated the potential impact of heavy oil disruptions on gasoline production . several refiners who process heavy oil told us that they would be unable to maintain normal levels of gasoline production if forced to rely on spr oil as currently constituted . the 60.7 million barrels of oil that interior transferred to doe from fiscal year 2004 to 2005 accounted for 58 percent of all the royalty - in - kind oil that interior collected during that time . while interior reports to congress each year on the financial performance of its royalty - in - kind program , these reports have not included a measure of the cost - effectiveness of using royalty oil to fill the spr . because the spr has reached sufficient size to address near - term supply disruptions , decisions about future fill practices can be made in a more flexible , cost - effective manner without unduly hurting our ability to respond to such disruptions . with oil prices recently exceeding $100 a barrel , there should be greater interest in finding ways to reduce fill costs . if it is to reach its goal of filling the expanded spr by 2018 , doe will have to , in some combination , purchase or receive through royalty - in - kind transfers roughly 300 million barrels of oil . our work shows that substantial cost savings could be achieved through increased purchasing of heavy oil , a dollar - cost - averaging purchasing strategy , more flexibility in the timing of oil purchases and deliveries , and greater attention paid to the opportunity costs of filling the spr with royalty oil .