this report does not include any recommendations . we provided a draft of this report to the secretaries of labor and education for review and comment . both agencies provided technical comments which we incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretaries of labor and education , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or gurkinc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . this report examines the implementation of the workforce innovation and opportunity act ( wioa ) youth program in states and local workforce areas with respect to the new requirements that 75 percent of youth funds be expended on out - of - school youth and 20 percent of youth funds be expended on work experiences . in particular , this report examines: ( 1 ) what is known about states' and local areas' progress in meeting the wioa spending requirements for serving out - of - school youth and providing youth with work experiences ; ( 2 ) how local areas are addressing wioa's emphasis on serving out - of - school youth , and any challenges they have encountered ; and ( 3 ) how local areas are addressing wioa's emphasis on youth work experiences and any challenges they have encountered . to answer all of our research objectives we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and guidance . we also employed other methods to answer our audit objectives , as described below . to address our first objective , we analyzed department of labor ( dol ) state - level wioa youth program expenditure data from program year ( py ) 2015 and py2016 , the most recent data available , for the 50 states and the district of columbia . we also analyzed wia state level expenditure data from py2012 through py2014 . these data include the funds allotted to each state , minus the governors' reserve for statewide activities , which can be up to 15 percent of the total allotment . in addition , the data include funds spent by the states on out - of - school youth , and for py2015 and py2016 , funds spent on work experiences . to determine whether states appeared to be on track to meet wioa spending requirements , we considered the percentage of their overall funds they had spent , as well as the percentage of their expended funds that were spent on out - of - school youth and work experiences . our analysis should not be used to make conclusions about legal compliance with wioa requirements .