the drivers were valued at $644,000 each . even though the fleet of b - 1b aircraft is being reduced , the center was retaining the drivers because the oklahoma city air logistics center , responsible for management of the b - 1b aircraft , had requested that the parts be retained to support the aircraft until the year 2040 when the air force expects to remove the last of the aircraft from its inventory . however , no code was entered into the inventory system that would recategorize the inventory as contingency retention stock . inventory held for foreign military sales . nevertheless , we identified items that had letters justifying their retention dating back to 2001 for which no code had been entered . because the air force is retaining inventory that it has categorized as potential reutilization and / or disposal materiel , the value of this inventory is significantly understated in the supply system inventory report , a key inventory management report prepared annually . inventory is reported at approximately 2 percent of its latest acquisition cost in these reports , and the $277 million inventory that we identified for our analysis is valued in the reports at approximately $6 million . the large number of items with no demands during operation enduring freedom and through the initial phases of operation iraqi freedom indicates that further attention to dod's inventory retention policies may be merited . however , because we have initiated a separate review of these policies , we are not at this time making recommendations regarding the retention of inventory exceeding current operating requirements that had no demands . while the ineffective and inefficient inventory management practices we identified do not necessarily lead to the accumulation of inventory exceeding current operating requirements , they can affect whether the warfighter is receiving the right items at the right time . for example , the military components are using estimated storage costs to make key management decisions even though more accurate storage cost data are available from dla . while army and navy officials have said that their estimates provide sufficient accuracy , we believe that using more accurate data is a better business practice . according to the item manager responsible for receiver transmitters used on the e - 3 aircraft , the items were no longer used by the air force . the center had 87 receiver transmitters , valued at about $410,000 each , that were categorized as potential reutilization and / or disposal materiel and were being retained for foreign military sales . warner robins officials explained that it could take up to 3 months for an item manager to input the code after receiving the request to retain the inventory . until the services and dla determine whether it would be beneficial to use the more accurate storage cost data in their computations instead of using estimated storage costs and include that data in their decision - making models as appropriate , they risk having critical items in short supply when they are needed .