urns . hhs has determined that methylene chloride can e reasonaly anticipated to e a cancer - causing chemical . uid which occurs naturally in crude oil and in the tolu tree . it is also produced in the process of making gasoline and other fuels from crude oil and making coke from coal . toluene may affect the nervous system . low to moderate levels can cause tiredness , confusion , weakness , drunken - type actions , memory loss , nausea , loss of appetite , and hearing and color vision loss . inhaling high levels of toluene in a short time can result in feelings of light - headedness , dizziness , or sleepiness . it can also cause unconsciousness , and even death . high levels of toluene may affect kidneys . studies in humans and animals generally indicate that toluene does not cause cancer . stance that does not occur naturally . it can e formed when other sustances such as trichloroethane , tce , and pce are roken down . breathing high levels of vinyl chloride for short periods of time can cause dizziness , sleepiness , and unconsciousness and at extremely high levels can cause death . breathing vinyl chloride for long periods of time can result in permanent liver damage , immune reactions , nerve damage , and liver cancer . hhs has determined that vinyl chloride is a known carcinogen . well tt - 23 is also referred to as “tt - new well” in marine corps documents . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . see app . i for the levels of all vocs that were detected in the wells prior to their removal from service in 1984 and 1985 . in addition , while base officials were waiting for sampling results from january 1985 of samples collected from wells serving hadnot point , water from this system was provided to a third water system for about 2 weeks . in late january 1985 , a fuel line break caused gasoline to leak into the holcomb boulevard water treatment plant . during the approximately 2-week period the treatment plant was shut down , water from the hadnot point system was pumped into the holcomb boulevard water lines . former camp lejeune environmental officials said that they used water from the hadnot point water system because it was the only water system interconnected with the holcomb boulevard water system , and because they believed the water from the hadnot point water system was no longer contaminated . prior to restarting the holcomb boulevard water system , samples of treated water were tested and no gasoline was detected in any of these samples . however , the samples were found to contain various levels of tce ; these results were attributed to the use of water from the hadnot point water system .