they have yet to do so . in addition , usda commented that the usda inspector general did not find systematic problems associated with oversight of humane handling at slaughter facilities that process cull cows . however , the inspector general did conclude that there is inherent vulnerability at the other plants in the scope of its audit , and that inhumane handling could occur and not be detected by fsis inspectors due to lack of continuous surveillance . usda commented that gao has closed the 2004 recommendation that fsis periodically assess whether the level of resources dedicated to humane handling and slaughter activities is sufficient . we recognize that fsis has taken actions in response to a number of recommendations made in the 2004 report and have documented implementation of these recommendations . however , with regard to periodic assessment , we closed this recommendation because enough time had passed that we considered it unlikely to be implemented . as our report states , fsis has yet to demonstrate that it has been implemented . based on our current work , we continue to believe that periodic assessment is needed , and we make a recommendation to that effect . we modified our report to include the recent approval of usda's direct - hire authority and noted that usda has raised some concerns . we modified our report to include the concern about veterinary schools and enhanced the chart to include the concern for salary . the following are gao's comments on the department of health and human services' letter dated january 14 , 2009 . hhs commented that a premise of our report is that the control of zoonotic diseases is solely dependent on the capacity of the veterinarian workforce . our report does not state this . the scope of this report , as described in the introduction , was to review the sufficiency of the federal veterinarian workforce . our report does not identify the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) as having too few veterinarians to control the 2003 west nile virus outbreak while also adequately carrying out other routine activities . however , cdc officials we interviewed who were involved with the 2003 monkeypox outbreak in wisconsin told us there were too few veterinarians during this outbreak . we modified our report to reflect the new information about the difficulty the national institutes of health has recruiting veterinarians . our report states conclusions from the fda advisory committee report: that fda “cannot fulfill its mission” because its scientific workforce has remained static while its workload has increased , and that fda's center for veterinary medicine ( cvm ) is “in a state of crisis.” we discussed with an author of the advisory committee report how that report's findings specifically related to veterinarians . consequently , our report also states that an author of the fda advisory committee report told us that veterinarians enter fda employment lacking necessary skills and experience to examine the wide variety of veterinary products that require fda approval and that fda needs to better train its veterinarians to review the many diverse products under its jurisdiction .