prior approval of premium airfare . federal regulations require that agencies must specifically authorize and approve other than coach - class airfare and set forth allowable circumstances in which noncoach airfare may be used . doj travel policy requires specific justifications for using travel above coach class . we found that division travelers rarely used premium - class travel during the period of our review . to test the extent to which controls over premium - class travel were functioning from october 2011 through june 2013 , we reviewed selected travel vouchers we identified as potentially including premium travel based on high transportation expenses or airfare tickets potentially above standard contract fares . out of the 40 travel vouchers we reviewed with potential premium travel , we found two instances where the trip included airfare above coach class . in one case , the traveler flew to seattle , washington , from washington , d.c. , in february 2012 and took first - class flights on two of the three legs of the trip . the traveler was a manager in the division and his travel voucher documents did not include evidence of prior approval for the premium class travel or explanation for the need for first class tickets . when asked about this trip , division officials reported that this was a no - cost upgrade to first class using the traveler's frequent flier miles , which is why the authorization document did not designate the trip as including premium travel . however , travel documents showed that the cost of the airfare was $1,043 whereas the contract rate for a roundtrip flight from washington , d.c. , to seattle in fiscal year 2012 was $464 – indicating that the government paid an additional $579 for the airfare . in the other instance of premium travel , the traveler tried to obtain approval for a first - class airfare from the division travel group and reported that the tickets were obtained due to a mix up with travel dates that necessitated a last - minute change to the tickets . the traveler reported that the first - class tickets were the cheapest available at the time of the ticket change . however , the traveler did not obtain approval for the first - class tickets prior to the flight . in addition , for 3 of the 40 trips we reviewed , the travel voucher documents had missing or illegible receipts making it impractical to determine whether premium travel occurred . division travel officials stated that the travel process in place at the time of our review relied on the traveler reporting any premium travel , and reported that their new travel system has the ability to identify premium travel by automatically retrieving airfare information from the reservation and entering it into the authorization . travelers may also manually select premium travel in e2 . selection of premium travel in e2 is designed to result in special routing for authorization approval . our review of documentation and consultation with gao travel experts familiar with the e2 travel system corroborated division officials' observations .