two comment letters were submitted . based on our review , we do not believe this effort was a sound process for developing measures to assess the effectiveness of the program . during subsequent discussions we held with agency staff about this issue , they stated that they have initiated a new effort to address this issue . however , because the agency has not evaluated the hubzone program's benefits , sba continues to lack key information that could help it better manage the program and inform the congress of its results . madam chairwoman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to answer any questions at this time . for further information on this testimony , please contact william b. shear at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or shearw@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included paige smith ( assistant director ) , triana bash , tania calhoun , julia kennon , and terence lam . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we recommended that sba formalize its 60-day goal and adhere to it . the agency has formalized a specific time frame for decertifying firms , but it is not clear whether staff are adhering to the policy . however , the agency has not conducted more frequent site visits to verify the information firms submit . sba officials stated that they do plan to conduct site visits of all hubzone firms that received a contract in fiscal year 2007 during fiscal year 2009 . as of march 2009 , sba conducted 7 site visits of those firms . because of sba's limited progress , ineligible firms may still be able to participate in the hubzone program and receive federal contracts based on their hubzone certification . in our june 2008 report , we noted that sba did not follow its own policy of recertifying all firms every 3 years . we found that sba failed to recertify 4,655 of the 11,370 firms ( more than 40 percent ) that had been in the program for more than 3 years . of the 4,655 firms that should have been recertified , 689 had been in the program for more than 6 years . according to hubzone program officials , the agency lacked sufficient staff to complete the recertifications . as a result of the backlog , the periods during which some firms went unmonitored and reviewed for eligibility were longer than sba policy allowed , increasing the risk that ineligible firms were participating in the program . we recommended that sba establish a specific time frame for eliminating the backlog of recertifications and take the necessary steps to ensure that recertifications were completed in a more timely fashion in the future . in response to our recommendation , sba temporarily obtained additional staff for the hubzone program and eliminated the backlog by september 30 , 2008 .