attorneys . eousa provides each u.s. attorney and the 94 u.s . attorneys offices general executive assistance and direction , policy development , administrative management and oversight , operational support , and coordination with other components of doj and other federal agencies . according to 5 c.f.r . the assistant director also said that there are plans to revise the psn part of ears to include an evaluation of gun - crime data that is to be reported to the attorney general twice yearly , but there are no similar plans to revise the weed and seed part of ears . staff in u.s . attorneys offices can be delegated responsibility to lead or work with community organizations that receive weed and seed grant funds , but these staff are not required to file disclosure forms . attorneys participated on the weed and seed steering committee , while in others , assistant u.s . attorneys or lecc coordinators were delegated responsibility for working with weed and seed committees , and according to one report , “run” the weed and seed program . none of the ears reports addressed any involvement with the psn program because when the reviews were completed , psn had not been implemented . our work in the 10 districts also showed that 9 of the districts had active weed and seed sites in place , and in some districts , new weed and seed sites were under consideration . among the districts that had active weed and seed sites , some of the u.s . these forms might reveal relationships that could be actual or potential conflicts of interest . 2634.904 , each officer or employee whose position is classified at gs - 15 or below or at a rate of pay that is less than 120 percent of the minimum rate of pay for gs - 15 , is required to file a confidential financial disclosure report if the agency concludes that the duties and responsibilities of the employee's position require the employee to: participate personally and substantially through decision or exercise of judgment , in taking a government action regarding contracting or procurement ; administering or monitoring grants , subsidies , licenses , or other federal conferred financial or operational benefits ; regulating or auditing any nonfederal entity ; or other activities in which the final decision or action will have a direct and substantial economic effect on the interests or nonfederal entity or avoid involvement in a real or apparent conflict of interest , and to carry out the purpose behind any statute , executive order , rule , or regulation applicable or administered by that employee . according to 5 c.f.r . 2634.901 , these reports are designed to ( 1 ) assist an agency in administering its ethics program and counseling its employees and ( 2 ) facilitate the review of possible conflicts of interest to guarantee the efficient and honest operation of the government . during our review , we examined the most recent summary of ears reports dated between june 1997 and april 2000 , for the 10 u.s . attorneys offices we visited . in some of these districts , u.s .