we provided a draft of this report to hhs . ( see table 3. ) in its written comments , hhs described the context surrounding the development of the simp and the progress fda has made regarding its medical product review activities under its four user fee programs . it noted the importance of coordinating and integrating the activities that are common among fda's medical product centers . in agreeing with our recommendation , hhs indicated that fda has already started a process to identify key crosscutting themes for the medical products centers , which it will then use to develop an overarching strategic planning framework to guide the work of these centers . we encourage fda to use leading practices to ensure this framework has measurable goals and objectives . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from its date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of health and human services . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or crossem@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . for another initiative , cder met its overall hiring objectives , but did not measure the number of selections made as a result of the initiative itself . finally , cder's alumni network initiative was never implemented , and thus fda did not put in a place a mechanism to assess its effectiveness . to assess the effectiveness of the one retention initiative in the simp , cdrh officials told us they measure the number of full - time equivalent staff supporting mdufa activities , changes in staff - to - manager ratios , and survey results . cdrh's total full - time equivalent staff supporting mdufa increased from 1,133 in fiscal year 2013 to 1,293 in fiscal year 2015 . at the same time , cdrh reduced the staff - to - manager ratio in its two offices with medical device review responsibilities . cdrh also analyzes changes in federal employee viewpoint survey responses to assess its efforts to provide a better workplace for its employees . from 2011 to 2014 , cdrh observed positive changes for three of six critical indicators it identified for providing recognition and all six critical indicators it identified for performance evaluation . of the 11 training initiatives , cber , cder , and cdrh officials each identified mechanisms to assess the effectiveness of 7 initiatives . specifically , each center indicated that it uses participant surveys to assess effectiveness . cber also delivers a test at the conclusion of some , but not all , of the programs included in its training initiative.furthermore , as described in the simp , cdrh conducts an audit process for its reviewer certification program through which new reviewers are evaluated by an experienced reviewer .