our review confirmed that this did occur . we found , however , that these payments were made in error by the corps and did not indicate any improper behavior on the contractor's part . specifically , on december 6 , 2006 , the corps received one invoice requesting payment for three drive units and three pumps valued at about $2.2 million because they were complete , and mwi believed that they could be delivered if the corps wanted them at that time . on the same day , the corps notified mwi that it could not pay for the pumps and drive units until they were actually delivered . we found no instance of this occurring . rather , our review of the files indicate that , for most of the contract modifications , there was extensive back and forth discussion , usually by e - mail , between personnel from the corps and mwi . these discussions focused on the causes of and solutions to technical issues , as well as the costs of corrective actions . while each of the modifications was unique , modification no . 2 is illustrative of many of the contract modifications we reviewed . specifically , shortly after award of the contract , the corps determined that it needed the capability to control the pumps from a remote location , since in the event of a hurricane the operator would be required to seek shelter in a control booth . the chief of engineering from the corps prepared a request to modify the contract to require master pump control panels . the request contained detailed specifications of what was required and estimated that the additional cost would be $150,000 . the contracting officer sent the request to mwi and asked for a cost proposal . mwi replied through an e - mail that repeated the specifications provided to it by the corps and offered a price of $188,699 . the corps requested additional support for the price , and mwi responded with a copy of the quote it had received from its supplier , pricing for mwi's markup , and the additional work mwi would perform . a corps engineer reviewed this information and informed the contracting office that mwi's proposed price was reasonable . the corps issued a contract modification with the specifications it developed at the price quoted by mwi . as was the case for a number of modifications , there was no contemporaneous price reasonableness document signed by the contracting officer ; rather , an undated “after the fact” memorandum concluding that mwi's price for the modification was reasonable was added to the file . as of october 31 , 2007 , the corps had paid the contractor about $30.5 million of the $33 million contract for the 40 hydraulic pumping systems and has plans for reconciling mistaken payments it made . the corps made payments to the contractor only after receiving invoices from the contractor for delivered items and services . in most cases , the corps only paid 80 percent of each invoice and held the other 20 percent as retained funds in order to ensure the contractor was not overpaid and that any performance issues were addressed .