appraisal subcommittee . asc has responsibility for monitoring the implementation of title xi by the private , state , and federal entities discussed previously . among other things , asc is responsible for ( 1 ) monitoring and reviewing the practices , procedures , activities , and organizational structure of the appraisal foundation — including making grants to the foundation in amounts that it deems appropriate to help defray costs associated with its title xi activities ; ( 2 ) monitoring the requirements established by the states and their appraiser regulatory agencies for the certification and licensing of appraisers ; ( 3 ) monitoring the requirements established by the federal financial institutions regulators regarding appraisal standards for federally related transactions and determinations of which federally related transactions will require the services of state - licensed or - certified appraisers ; and ( 4 ) maintaining a national registry of state - licensed and - certified appraisers who may perform appraisals in connection with federally related transactions . among other responsibilities and authorities , the dodd - frank act requires asc to implement a national appraiser complaint hotline and provides asc with limited rulemaking authority . asc provides an annual report to congress on its activities and financial status in the preceding year . for fiscal year 2010 , asc reported total expenses ( including grants to the appraisal foundation ) of approximately $3.6 million . some 20 years after the passage of title xi , questions remain about oversight of the appraisal industry and the quality of appraisals . federal financial institutions regulators . title xi places responsibility for regulating appraisals and “evaluations” performed in conjunction with federally related transactions with the federal reserve , fdic , occ , and ncua . to meet this responsibility , these financial institution regulators have established requirements for appraisals and evaluations through regulations and have jointly issued interagency appraisal and evaluation guidelines . among other things , appraisals for federally related transactions must , at a minimum , provide an estimate of market value , conform to uspap , be in writing , and contain sufficient information and analysis to support the institution's decision to engage in the transaction . by regulation , loans that qualify for sale to a u.s. government agency or u.s. government - sponsored agency and loans that are wholly or partially insured or guaranteed by such agencies are exempt from the appraisal requirements . in addition , loans that involve residential real estate transactions in which the appraisal conforms to fannie mae or freddie mac appraisal standards are exempt from these appraisal requirements . under authority granted by title xi , the federal regulators also have adopted regulations that exempt federally related transactions of $250,000 or less from appraisal requirements , meaning that the services of a licensed or certified appraiser are not required ( although an evaluation must be performed ) . the regulations provide a similar appraisal exemption for real estate - secured business loans of $1 million or less that are not dependent on the sale of , or rental income derived from , real estate as the primary source of repayment .