we provided a draft of this report to sec . sec staff provided technical comments , which we incorporated , as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to sec , interested congressional committees and members , and others . these advisers could then be reexamined through sec's oversight examinations . as required by the dodd - frank act , sec is taking steps to assume responsibility for registering and overseeing certain investment advisers to private funds . however , in its section 914 study , sec staff concluded that the agency likely will not have sufficient capacity to effectively examine registered investment advisers , including private fund advisers , with adequate frequency . a private fund adviser sro is one of several options that could be implemented to help address sec's examination capacity challenges . however , doing so would involve trade - offs , including lessening sec's capacity challenges versus increasing potential regulatory gaps , inconsistencies , and duplication in the oversight of registered investment advisers . as recommended by sec staff in its recent study , other options to address sec's capacity challenges include creating an sro to examine all registered investment advisers or imposing user fees on advisers to fund sec examinations . like the private fund adviser sro option , these two options would involve trade - offs that would have to be considered . the report also is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . the division of enforcement investigates and prosecutes violations of securities laws or regulations . securities sros include national securities exchanges and securities associations registered with sec , such as the new york stock exchange and finra . sros are primarily responsible for establishing the standards under which their members conduct business ; monitoring the way that business is conducted ; bringing disciplinary actions against their members for violating applicable federal statutes , sec rules , and their own rules ; and referring potential violations of nonmembers to sec . sec oversees sros , in part by periodically inspecting them and by approving their rule proposals . at the time that the system of self - regulation was created , congress , regulators , and market participants recognized that this structure possessed inherent conflicts of interest because of the dual role of sros as both market operators and regulators . nevertheless , congress adopted self - regulation of the securities markets to prevent excessive government involvement in market operations , which could hinder competition and market innovation . congress also concluded that self - regulation with federal oversight would be more efficient and less costly to taxpayers . for similar purposes , congress created a self - regulatory structure for the futures markets . nfa is a futures sro registered with cftc as a national futures association . section 914 of title ix of the dodd - frank act required sec to study the need for enhanced examination and enforcement resources for investment advisers .