title 38 u.s.c. , sections 8161-69 , provides the department of veterans affairs the authority to leverage its property into needed facilities , services , or resources . veterans affairs can lease underutilized property for up to 75 years in return for cash or in - kind consideration . veterans affairs has used its enhanced - use leasing authority to lease space for children's centers , offices , parking garages , health centers , residential lodging , and other purposes . for example , in texas , veterans affairs leased unused land to a developer on its medical campus . the developer constructed a veterans affairs regional office building as well as other buildings and rented space to commercial businesses . according to veterans affairs , the project saved $6 million on construction , $10 million in operating costs , and produced annual revenue for veterans affairs through revenue sharing with the developer . in indiana , veterans affairs leased underutilized land and facilities to the state to use as a psychiatric care facility . veterans affairs estimates it obtained $15.7 million in financial benefits and $5 million per year in operational savings . the lease revenue that veterans affairs receives from both sites funds veterans programs . veterans affairs enhanced - use leasing authority has been in effect since 1991 and has been extended four times to a current expiration of december 31 , 2011 . to date , veterans affairs has approved 16 projects , and 11 have been completed . according to veterans affairs officials , these projects have been successful and the department's experiences could provide a framework for the department of defense's expanded leasing efforts . in addition , veterans affairs has studied over 100 initiatives , of which more than 50 are “in development. the army has four projects under consideration using the expanded leasing authority that it believes will reduce base operating costs , including picatinney arsenal , rock island arsenal , yuma proving grounds , and walter reed army medical center . the army proposed leasing four buildings for joint military and commercial use as laboratories , light manufacturing , education / training , and administrative facilities at picatinney arsenal . on july 2 , 2001 , picatinney arsenal signed a conditional lease with a developer . the installation and developer are currently drafting their business and leasing plan for approval by the department of the army . at rock island arsenal , the army has identified 14 buildings to lease under a joint use agreement , which would allow a private sector developer to market the facilities . rock island arsenal is currently developing its notice of availability to lease , which serves as the basis for selecting a developer . at yuma proving ground , the army is seeking a private - sector developer to construct a hot weather test complex . yuma proving ground is currently drafting a report of availability . as in - kind consideration , yuma proving ground would also be able to use the test track for mission requirements .