( see fig . cbp has a process in place to collect delinquent ad / cv duty debt but estimates that a significant portion of debt is likely uncollectible . when the final duty rate exceeds the initial estimated duty rate , importers are billed for the additional duties owed . when importers fail to pay their bills , cbp takes several steps to collect . first , if the importer can be located , cbp contacts the importer and attempts to secure payment . if necessary , cbp takes steps to obtain valid contact information for the importer . next , if the entry is secured by a bond , cbp will collect from the surety that issued the bond . if the surety has paid and the importer is not responsive , then cbp investigates to determine whether the importer responsible for paying the bill has domestic assets or a clear successor entity and refers the bill to the office of chief counsel , if appropriate . the amount of the bill that remains unpaid after cbp has exhausted all efforts to collect from the importer and the surety is considered uncollectible . according to cbp officials , once cbp has taken all measures to collect and determined that a bill is uncollectible , cbp terminates collection action . in its performance and accountability report for fiscal year 2015 , cbp reported that about $1.6 billion of ad / cv duty debt was uncollectible . as noted earlier , cbp has reported that the length of time between the entry of a product and the issuance of a bill for additional duties poses a challenge to collecting ad / cv duties owed , indicating that the more time that elapses before payment , the more difficult it is to collect . our analysis of cbp data on ad / cv duty bills for entries occurring in fiscal years 2001 through 2014 shows that , of the approximately 41,000 unpaid bills , the average age was about 4 years , and the median age was 4.5 years . in addition , 977 unpaid bills were issued between 10 and 13 years ago ; based on cbp's reporting on challenges to collection , then , it seems that cbp would have an extremely low likelihood of collecting those bills . figure 9 shows the distribution of delinquent ad / cv duty bills by age . once cbp has exhausted its collection efforts , the next step is for cbp staff to prepare the bill for write - off by documenting what was found during the investigation of the debt and submitting this documentation to the office of chief counsel and the chief financial officer for review and approval . cbp provides staff guidance on steps and documentation required to prepare an unpaid bill for write - off but does not set specific time frames for writing off uncollectible debt . while cbp staff may begin the write - off process for uncollectible bills as they are identified , according to agency officials , preparing bills for write - off is generally a lower priority than pursuing debt considered collectible . as a result , cbp does not consistently write off bills .