revenues and expenditures by fiscal year . we used information on revenues and expenditures contained in the department's financial accounting systems . we interviewed doj officials regarding information in the financial accounting systems to discuss trends and anomalies in the revenues and expenditures over this 9-year period . as part of our review we also determined the extent to which doj has processes in place to ensure transparency when carrying over funds for the next fiscal year . we reviewed information on unobligated and excess unobligated balances from doj's annual congressional budget justifications to congress , available through doj's public website and also contained in the aff's financial accounting systems.extent to which the congressional budget justifications outlined the processes for carrying over funds for the next fiscal year . to what extent has doj established controls to help ensure that the equitable sharing program is implemented in accordance with established doj guidance ? ยง 881 ( e ) ( 1 ) ( a ) and ( e ) ( 3 ) , 18 u.s.c . ยง 981 ( e ) ( 2 ) authorize the attorney general to share federally forfeited property with participating state and local law enforcement agencies . we also reviewed prior gao reports on the importance of transparency in federal budget submissions to congress . we interviewed doj officials from the asset forfeiture management staff responsible for oversight of the aff regarding their processes for carrying over funds at the end of the fiscal year . further , we analyzed data on the aff's excess unobligated balances from fiscal years 2003 through 2011 , and interviewed officials about how excess unobligated balances have been used since 2003 , including how these balances have been used to cover the cost of annual rescissions over this time period . specifically , we assessed the to assess the reliability of doj's financial accounting system for providing revenues , expenditures , and excess unobligated balances data , we reviewed relevant documentation and conducted interviews with knowledgeable doj agency officials to understand how doj collects , categorizes , and tabulates the information and the actions it takes to ensure its consistency , accuracy , and completeness . we determined information on the financial accounting system provided by doj to be sufficiently reliable for presenting the total revenues , expenditures , and excess unobligated balances for fiscal years 2003 through 2011 . to determine the extent to which doj has established controls to help ensure that the equitable sharing program is implemented in accordance with established guidance , we analyzed the most current guidance provided to doj agencies , including the 2009 guide to equitable sharing for state and local law enforcement agencies and the 2008 asset forfeiture policy manual , which is also provided to all doj agencies . in the course of our review , doj officials informed us that they are in the process of updating the 2008 asset forfeiture policy manual and provided us with a copy of the revised chapter on equitable sharing , which we also analyzed . we interviewed officials from doj's asset forfeiture management staff responsible for managing the aff , and officials from the asset forfeiture and money laundering section responsible for establishing the policies and procedures of the fund .