we discussed the contents of this testimony with sba . we conducted our work between august 2006 and september 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the wbc program is administered through the office of women's business ownership ( owbo ) in sba's office of entrepreneurial development ( oed ) . the program was established by the women's business ownership act of 1988 to provide long - term training , counseling , networking , and mentoring to women who own businesses or are potential entrepreneurs after congress found that existing business assistance programs for small business owners were not addressing women's needs . in fiscal year 2007 , the sbdc program received $87 million to make awards to 63 lead sbdcs throughout the united states . the score program was founded in 1964 as a nonprofit organization . under the small business act , as amended , score is sponsored by and may receive appropriations through sba . the score program is designed to provide free expert advice to prospective and existing small businesses in all aspects of business formation , advancement , and problem solving . score counselors are volunteers who assist clients through a web site , score chapter offices , sba district offices , and other establishments . in fiscal year 2007 , the score program received $5 million to support its activities and currently has 389 chapters throughout the united states . recent legislation addresses concerns about long - term funding for wbcs , but prior to this legislation , the funding structure had been in flux since the program's inception in 1988 . in establishing the wbc program in 1988 , congress authorized sba to help private nonprofit organizations conduct projects that benefit small business concerns owned and controlled by women . the 1988 act allowed for demonstration projects that terminated in 1991 . several wbcs that we spoke with expressed concern about the funding term limits and pointed out that the sbdc and score programs do not have the same limits , even though sba also administers those programs . some wbcs in both the regular and sustainability programs also said that they were concerned about their ability to continue operations after losing sba support . each state and u.s. territory has a lead organization that sponsors and manages the sbdc program . the lead organization coordinates program services offered to small businesses through a network of centers and satellite locations in each state that are located at colleges , universities , community colleges , vocational schools , chambers of commerce and economic development corporations . however , in 1991 , congress authorized sba to make awards for 3- year projects , and in 1997 congress authorized sba to make awards to wbcs for 5-year projects . in its 1999 reauthorization of the wbc program , as noted earlier , congress added 5-year sustainability funding for wbcs that successfully completed 5-year projects to provide additional time for the centers to become self - sustaining . because the wbc program is a competitive discretionary award program , wbcs in the program compete annually for the maximum award amount but continue to receive sba funds as long as their performance is satisfactory .