we incorporated this information into the report . hhs also thought that we overstated the differences between ccdf and tanf in the impact of state flexibility on coverage rates so we changed that section of the report . with regard to tanf , hhs raised the concern that increasing coverage rates may conflict with other tanf program goals and consequently , coverage rates are not an appropriate performance measure for the tanf program . we recognize that increasing the coverage rate is not an explicit goal of tanf and believe this concern is consistent with the report's conclusion that increasing program access may not be feasible or desirable for some programs . nevertheless , we continue to believe that including program participation and coverage rates in key program reports can help inform policymakers and program administrators at all levels of government and assist them making budgetary and programmatic decisions . in its discussion of schip and medicaid , hhs indicated that the report reinforced the agency's approach to promoting both access and integrity . the department noted that cms is working to improve its coverage rate estimates for schip and meanwhile , it continues to measure progress toward increasing coverage among children under 200 percent of poverty , a proxy for the program coverage rate . hhs also highlighted several other issues that we believe are already sufficiently discussed in the report . these include the fact that not all those eligible and not participating need program services ; that some programs allow states considerable flexibility in implementing programs and determining eligibility ; that participation or coverage rates can be challenging to estimate accurately ; and that uncertainties and limitations surrounding participation and coverage rate estimates should be made clear to users of this information . hhs also reiterated some of the limitations of our cost estimates and our head start coverage rate estimates . agency officials also provided technical comments , which we incorporated in the report where appropriate . department of housing and urban development officials provided us with technical comments , which we incorporated in the report where appropriate . the internal revenue service agreed with our conclusions and recommendation . the irs recognizes the interactions between efforts to improve program access and those intended to improve program integrity , and as part of their efforts to utilize a balanced approach that emphasizes both goals , the irs has recently established the eitc participation rate as a gpra measure . as it moves forward in developing the eitc participation rate , the irs plans to take steps to quantify errors that may result from estimating these participation rates to help users better understand the accuracy of the data and ensure that estimates will be comparable over time . agency officials also provided technical comments , which we incorporated in the report where appropriate . the social security administration agreed with our conclusions and recommendation . the agency noted that it has considered the feasibility of estimating participation rates in the past and has calculated participation rates among the elderly . however , the agency also noted that limitations of the national survey data make such estimates challenging for the ssi program . the agency agreed that estimating participation rates on a regular basis could provide an important management tool .