the remaining 41 written requests were declined . of these 41 , fda referred 9 written requests to fnih for funding and fnih had not funded any of those studies as of december 2005 . drug sponsors completed pediatric drug studies for 59 of the 173 accepted written requests — studies for the remaining 114 written requests were ongoing — and fda made pediatric exclusivity determinations for 55 of those through december 2005 . of those 55 written requests , 52 ( 95 percent ) resulted in fda granting pediatric exclusivity . figure 2 shows the status of written requests issued under bpca for the study of on - patent drugs , from january 2002 through december 2005 . drugs were studied under bpca for their safety and effectiveness in treating children for a wide range of diseases , including some that are common — such as asthma and allergies — and serious or life threatening in children — such as cancer , hiv , and hypertension . we found that the drugs studied under bpca represented more than 17 broad categories of disease . the category that had the most drugs studied under bpca was cancer , with 28 drugs . in addition , there were 26 drugs studied for neurological and psychiatric disorders , 19 for endocrine and metabolic disorders , 18 related to cardiovascular disease — including drugs related to hypertension — and 17 related to viral infections . this market exclusivity is known as pediatric exclusivity . when a drug has market exclusivity , it is protected from competition for a limited period ; for example , the food and drug administration ( fda ) is prohibited from approving a generic copy for marketing . fda referred 9 of these 41 written requests ( 22 percent ) to fnih for funding , but as of december 2005 , fnih had not funded the study of any of these drugs . nih has estimated that the cost of studying these 9 drugs would exceed $43 million , but fnih had raised only $4.13 million for pediatric drug studies under bpca . few off - patent drugs identified by nih as in need of study for pediatric use have been studied . by 2005 , nih had identified 40 off - patent drugs that it believed should be studied for pediatric use . through 2005 , fda issued written requests for 16 of these drugs . all but 1 of these written requests were declined by drug sponsors . nih funded pediatric drug studies for 7 of the remaining 15 written requests declined by drug sponsors through december 2005 . nih provided several reasons why it has not pursued the study of some off - patent drugs that drug sponsors declined to study . concerns about the incidence of the disease that the drugs were developed to treat , the feasibility of study design , drug safety , and changes in the drugs' patent status have caused the agency to reconsider the merit of studying some of the drugs it identified as important for study in children . for example , in one case nih issued a request for proposals to study a drug but received no responses .