( app . iv highlights some key impacts of funding shortfalls and redesignations on bos and s / rm activities and locations we visited. ) such problems adversely affect efforts to maintain facilities , provide base support services , and conduct mission training , but the overall impact is often difficult to gauge in the short term . we found similar , though less pronounced , funding redesignations in the navy , marine corps , and air force . available data show differences between the amounts the army projected as required for bos and the amounts included in budget requests , the congressionally designated amounts as adjusted by the army , and the amounts that were actually obligated for each fiscal year from 2001 through 2004 . congress gave the army increasing funds for bos in some fiscal years , but these funds were less than the amounts projected by the army as being required and less than the amounts that were actually obligated . as shown in figure 1 , fiscal year 2004 data showed a spike in projected requirements due at least in part to the army's use of a model that projected requirements at a higher level of service than was previously used in projecting budget requirements . obligations were higher than funds initially provided , with funds being moved to bos from other accounts , such as s / rm , to permit this increase . at the same time , funding turbulence across bos and facility sustainment accounts was exacerbated in fiscal year 2004 as the army withheld funds that otherwise would have been designated to fund bos and s / rm , to help pay for the global war on terrorism , although some funding was restored toward the end of the fiscal year . such turbulence occurring during the year makes it difficult to execute planned programs effectively and , as noted later , resulted in the army's underexecuting its s / rm program in fiscal year 2004 . the data show that bos funding provided by congress increased in fiscal year 2002 , remained stable in fiscal year 2003 , and declined in fiscal year 2004 . they also show that bos obligations increased , particularly in 2003 and 2004 , and that the army routinely obligates more for bos services than adjusted congressionally designated amounts , through redesignations of funds from other accounts . for example , in fiscal year 2004 , the army's request for bos funding — $5.756 billion — was about 65 percent of the amount it projected as being needed to provide traditional levels of bos services . according to army officials , while congressionally designated amounts as adjusted by the army — $6.009 billion — were somewhat more than they requested , during the year they nevertheless had to reduce bos programs because they did not have sufficient funds to pay for traditional levels of bos services since they had to temporarily move some bos funds to pay for the global war on terrorism .