in considering the provisions of h.r . 1495 , it will be important to consider the cost , benefit , and timing of actions needed to implement the proposed requirements . 1495 , if enacted , may result in duplication of certain past and current efforts , especially with regard to inventorying and auditing the gold reserves of the united states . nevertheless , gao would be capable of carrying out the required review of the results of the secretary of the treasury's actions called for by the bill , should it be enacted . gao's review would include visits to the facilities at which the gold reserves of the united states are held to selectively observe the inventorying and auditing of the gold reserves and examinations of various documentation supporting the required assay , inventory , and audit . 1495 also provides for gao to prepare and transmit to the congress , not later than 9 months after enactment of the act , a report of gao's findings from such review together with the results of the assay , inventory , audit , and analysis conducted by the secretary of the treasury . according to treasury officials , because of the enormous quantity of gold that would need to be inventoried and assayed , there is uncertainty regarding the ability of treasury to complete such actions within the 6-month period provided in h.r . 234-1 was subsequently canceled . according to the treasury oig , about 92 percent of the united states government - owned gold had been audited by either gao or the committee for continuing audits as of september 30 , 1986 . more recently , the gold reserves of the united states have been presented in various financial reports and have therefore been subject to various audit efforts . for example , while the deep storage gold reserves are a primary focus of the audit of the mint's custodial schedule , which is audited by the treasury oig , the deep storage gold reserves are also within the scope of the audit of the mint's financial statements , which are audited by independent public accountants . also , as a bureau within treasury , the balances and activity of the mint are included on treasury's departmentwide financial statements , which are required by law to annually be prepared , audited , and submitted to the congress and the director of the office of management and budget . specifically , 31 u.s.c . ยง3515 ( b ) requires that the financial statements of covered executive agencies , of which treasury is one , include the overall financial position of the offices , bureaus , and activities covered by the statements , including the assets and liabilities thereof ; and the results of operations of those offices , bureaus , and activities . the inspector general act of 1978 , as amended , ( ig act ) created offices of inspector general at major federal departments , including the treasury oig , to provide independent audits and investigations ; promote economy , efficiency , and effectiveness ; and prevent and detect fraud , waste , and abuse in the respective department's programs and operations .