ii for more details about each of these initiatives ) . the global initiatives may support covered companies' efforts to minimize the risk of conflict minerals entering their supply chains and to identify the source of their conflict minerals across conflict minerals supply chains and around the world , while the in - region sourcing initiatives may support responsible sourcing of conflict minerals from central africa and the identification of specific mines of origin for those minerals . to support companies' efforts to conduct due diligence of their conflict minerals supply chains , which span the globe , oecd developed the oecd due diligence guidance for responsible supply chains of minerals from conflict - affected and high - risk areas ( hereafter referred to as oecd due diligence guidance ) . intense stakeholder interest and input . sec officials said that responding to intense public and stakeholder interest and input on the rule has contributed to delays . according to agency officials , the original comment period on the proposed rule closed on january 31 , 2011 , but at the request of a wide range of external stakeholders the commission extended the comment period to march 2 , 2011 . officials also noted that , in response to requests from some external stakeholders , the sec hosted a roundtable on the conflict minerals disclosure rule and the commission re - opened the comment period until november 1 , 2011 . sec officials further noted that the commission continues to receive comment letters and cited the over 400 distinct comment letters that it has received . in addition , sec officials said that the approximately 140 meetings between the agency and external stakeholders , the complicated and technical nature of the issues in these letters and discussions , and the effort required to consider and address these issues in rule making , has also contributed to delays . heavy rule - making workload . sec officials noted that commissioners have a heavy workload , given that they produce many rules in addition to the conflict minerals disclosure rule . in april 2012 , the sec chairman testified that under the dodd - frank act , sec is mandated to write almost 100 rules , while on average the commission might normally write about 20 rules in a given year . rigorous economic analysis in rule - making process . to support their rule making , sec officials said that they are working closely with sec economists and legal experts to develop rigorous economic analysis , which is a complex and time - consuming process . in her april 2012 testimony statement , the sec chairman noted that the agency considers economic analysis to be a critical element in the rule - making process . sec officials also noted that some of the delays in finalizing a disclosure rule have been necessary to make sure the final rule appropriately addresses significant cost concerns raised by external stakeholders .