programs are not repeated . to determine goes - r status and plans , we reviewed program documents to determine goes - r status and plans , we reviewed program documents on the planned acquisition schedules , cost estimates , and system on the planned acquisition schedules , cost estimates , and system requirements , and interviewed program officials . to assess the program requirements , and interviewed program officials . to assess the program office's actions to address lessons learned from past satellite programs , we office's actions to address lessons learned from past satellite programs , we analyzed lessons learned from past satellite programs — including a prior analyzed lessons learned from past satellite programs — including a prior goes satellite series ( called goes i - m ) , the national polar - orbiting operational environmental satellite system ( npoess ) , and selected military satellite programs . we analyzed program management documents , including data on a critical instrument's development , to determine and evaluate plans for addressing past lessons . we also interviewed program officials from noaa and nasa . we conducted our work at noaa and nasa offices in the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area between december 2005 and august 2006 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . appendix i contains further details on our objectives , scope , and methodology . since the 1960s , geostationary and polar - orbiting environmental satellites have been used by the united states to provide meteorological data for weather observation , research , and forecasting . noaa's national environmental satellite data and information service ( nesdis ) is responsible for managing the civilian geostationary and polar - orbiting satellite systems as two separate programs , called goes and the polar operational environmental satellites , respectively . unlike polar - orbiting satellites , which constantly circle the earth in a relatively low polar orbit , geostationary satellites can maintain a constant view of the earth from a high orbit of about 22,300 miles in space . noaa operates goes as a two - satellite system that is primarily focused on the united states ( see fig . these satellites are uniquely positioned to provide timely environmental data to meteorologists and their audiences on the earth's atmosphere , its surface , cloud cover , and the space environment . they also observe the development of hazardous weather , such as hurricanes and severe thunderstorms , and track their movement and intensity to reduce or avoid major losses of property and life . furthermore , the satellites' ability to provide broad , continuously updated coverage of atmospheric conditions over land and oceans is important to noaa's weather forecasting operations . to provide continuous satellite coverage , noaa acquires several satellites at a time as part of a series and launches new satellites every few years . three satellites — goes - 11 , goes - 12 , and goes - 13 — are currently in orbit . both goes - 11 and goes - 12 are operational satellites , while goes - 13 is in an on - orbit storage mode . it is a backup for the other two satellites should they experience any degradation in service .