chapter 75 . such actions could include , but are not limited to , instances of misconduct . the efficiency of the service standard provides managers with maximum flexibility to pursue adverse actions whether the impetus was a conduct issue , a failure to perform , or something else . activities that may be considered misconduct can vary from agency to agency . according to agency officials and subject - matter experts we interviewed , examples of misconduct include time and attendance infractions ; physical aggression toward an employee ; improper use of a government - issued credit card ; misuse of government equipment ( such as viewing pornography or use of public position for private gain ; and behavior that affects national security . it should be noted that the law differentiates misconduct from substandard performance . poor performance can generally be described as an employee's inability to carry out work responsibilities , while misconduct can be described as an employee , willfully or otherwise , violating stated policies or norms . in certain cases , however , employee performance and misconduct can overlap , combining the two issues . sleeping on the job , for example , is both a failure to abide by norms of conduct an agency would expect of an employee on duty and a failure to perform . our prior work on poor performers found that adverse actions , including suspensions , demotions , and removals , take time to resolve and because of a lack of internal support , concerns over litigation and other factors , supervisors may be hesitant to initiate required procedures outlined in the united states code ( hereinafter u.s.c. ) supervisors can address misconduct through alternative discipline approaches which can shorten the timeline and eliminate costly litigation if the employee decides to appeal an adverse action . when used under the right circumstances , alternative discipline may be more efficient and effective than traditional discipline . you asked us to examine the process for addressing misconduct and to identify any challenges to removing employees for misconduct . our objectives were to ( 1 ) describe the process that agencies are required to follow in responding to employee misconduct in the federal service ; ( 2 ) identify alternative approaches to the formal legal process that agencies can use to respond to misconduct , and assess what factors affect agencies' responses ; ( 3 ) describe trends in removals and other adverse actions resulting from misconduct ; and ( 4 ) identify key practices agencies can use to help them better prevent and address misconduct . to address the first objective , we reviewed relevant sections of title 5 chapter 75 of the u.s.c . ( hereinafter chapter 75 ) which contains the statutory process for taking such adverse actions as are necessary to promote the efficiency of the service , which would include adverse actions to address misconduct . we also reviewed opm regulations implementing chapter 75 adverse action procedures and describing employee grievance and appeal rights . additionally , we reviewed 5 u.s.c .