these seven components are described below . basic research includes scientific efforts and experimentation directed toward increasing knowledge and understanding in the fields of physical , engineering , environmental , social , and life sciences related to long - term national needs . applied research includes efforts directed toward solving specific problems with a view toward developing and evaluating the feasibility of proposed solutions . advanced development includes efforts directed toward projects that have moved into the development of hardware and software for field experiments and tests , such as acceptance testing . operational test and evaluation verifies that new systems are operationally effective , supportable , and suitable before deployment . operational integration is the process employed to enable successful transition of viable technologies and systems to the field environment . regarding the etps , we analyzed the functional requirements for the system , contracts with general electric and smiths detection , and test reports for acceptance tests , regression tests , and operational tests . we also reviewed etp deployment schedules and documentation on operational availability and mean time between critical failure , and interviewed tsa officials about the reasons that the etp deployment was halted . we also compared the etp test approach used by s&t and tsa to the acquisition management system ( ams ) guidance and knowledge - based acquisition best practices . we also interviewed tsa and s&t officials to obtain information on current investments in the research , development , and deployment of checkpoint technologies , and conducted site visits to the transportation security laboratory in atlantic city , new jersey , and tyndall air force base , florida , to observe testing of new checkpoint technologies . we visited the tsl because that is where s&t tests and evaluates technologies , including checkpoint screening technologies . we visited tyndall air force base because technologies to detect bottled liquids explosives were being tested there . additionally , we analyzed tsa's passenger screening standard operating procedures and interviewed various tsa headquarters officials , 29 federal security directors , 1 deputy federal security director , and 5 assistant federal security directors for screening , and visited nine airports where the etps had been or were to be deployed or new checkpoint screening technologies were undergoing pilot testing . we chose these officials because they are the senior official at the airport in charge of security and manage tsa's role in deploying new technologies at the airport . we selected these nine locations based on the technologies that had been deployed or were being tested , their geography , size , and proximity to research and development laboratories . of the nine airports we visited , the etps had been or were to be deployed to seven of them , and other new checkpoint screening technologies were undergoing pilot demonstrations or testing at two of them . we visited four airports on the east coast , and three airports on the west coast , and two airports located in the west and southwestern regions of the united states . to determine whether the etp's requirements had been tested prior to procuring and deploying them , we selected a non - probability sample of 8 out of the 157 total requirements .