guidance . contract management challenges related to the management of the service level agreement ( sla ) and / or tasks and services that the ssp provides for the customer agency or the ssp should be providing but are not in the sla . other challenges ( specify in box below ) 8 . what were the specific challenge ( s ) with your agency's data act submissions identified in question 7 , and how did your ssp play a role ? if your agency used multiple ssps , please specify to which provider the challenge ( s ) was related . what steps , if any , has your agency taken to address these challenge ( s ) ? b . what steps , if any , remain to be taken by your agency to address these challenge ( s ) ? c. what steps , if any , are you aware of that your ssp has taken to address these challenge ( s ) ? d. what steps , if any , remain to be taken by your ssp to address these challenge ( s ) ? summary included in report 9 . what management or oversight practices has your agency found to be useful in working with your ssp on data act submissions ? what internal control processes and activities does your agency use to provide assurance over the quality of data submitted to the treasury broker and displayed on usaspending.gov ? internal control processes and activities: reconcile data files to other agency data and sources ( eg , sf 133 , gtas ) review ssp's statement on standards for attestation engagements no . 18 / service and organization controls ( soc ) reports to identify any internal control deficiencies . ( describe internal control deficiencies related to data act submissions , if any , in box below ) implement complementary controls to address ssp control deficiencies identified in the soc report . ( describe controls implemented , if any , in box below ) review / verify agency data displayed on usaspending.gov incorporate the results of a - 123 reviews that have an impact on data act other internal control processes or activities ( specify in box below ) 11 . what additional tools or guidance , if any , are needed from omb , treasury , or others to assist with your agency's use of the ssp or data act submission ? data act: as reporting deadline nears , challenges remain that will affect data quality . gao - 17-496 . washington , d.c.: april 28 , 2017 . data act: office of inspector general reports help identify agencies' implementation challenges . gao - 17-460 . washington , d.c.: april 26 , 2017 . data act: implementation progresses but challenges remain . gao - 17-282t . washington , d.c.: december 8 , 2016 . data act: omb and treasury have issued additional guidance and have improved pilot design but implementation challenges remain . gao - 17-156 . washington , d.c.: december 8 , 2016 . data act: initial observations on technical implementation . gao - 16-824r . washington , d.c.: august 3 , 2016 . data act: improvements needed in reviewing agency implementation plans and monitoring progress . gao - 16-698 .