this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittees may have . for questions about this statement , please contact randolph c. hite at ( 202 ) 512-3439 or hiter@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include deborah davis , assistant director ; david alexander ; rebecca alvarez ; carl barden ; sylvia bascopé ; tisha derricotte ; neil doherty ; nancy glover ; dan gordon ; cheryl dottermusch ; thomas j. johnson ; kaelin p. kuhn ; jason t. lee ; jeremy manion ; taylor matheson ; lee mccracken ; jamelyn payan ; karen richey ; karl w.d . seifert ; matt snyder ; sushmita srikanth ; jennifer stavros - turner ; stacey l. steele ; karen talley ; and juan tapia - videla . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . dhs largely agreed with our recommendations . more importantly , since receiving these recommendations in a draft of our report in march 2010 , the secretary of homeland security has taken action to limit the department's near - term investment in sbinet pending its completion of an analysis of alternative investment options . this and other planned actions are consistent with the intent of our recommendations . managed by dhs's customs and border protection ( cbp ) , sbinet is intended to strengthen cbp's ability to detect , identify , classify , track , and respond to illegal breaches at and between ports of entry . the sbi program executive office , which is organizationally within cbp , is responsible for managing key acquisition functions associated with sbinet , such as requirements management and risk management . within the executive office , the sbinet system program office ( spo ) is responsible for managing the day - to - day development and deployment of sbinet . in september 2006 , cbp awarded a 3-year contract to the boeing company for sbi , with three additional 1-year options . cbp is acquiring sbinet incrementally in a series of discrete units of capabilities , referred to as “blocks.” each block is to deliver one or more system capabilities from a subset of the total system requirements . the first block , known as block 1 , is to include a mix of surveillance technologies ( eg , cameras , radars , and sensors ) and c3i technologies that are to produce a common operating picture — a uniform presentation of activities within specific areas along the border . block 1 is to be initially deployed within the tucson sector to the tucson border patrol station ( tus - 1 ) and to the ajo border patrol station ( ajo - 1 ) . as of may 2010 , the tus - 1 system is scheduled for government acceptance in september 2010 , with ajo - 1 acceptance in november 2010 .