the building is currently used to store plutonium . after the design basis threat was changed in october 2004 , srs was forced once again to reevaluate its storage plans . because the new design basis threat substantially increased the potential threat that srs must defend against , building 105-k and building 235-f would need extensive and expensive upgrades to comply with the new requirements . srs estimated the total cost of this additional security at over $300 million . srs further estimated that it could save more than $120 million by not using building 235-f for storage and therefore decided in april 2005 to consolidate plutonium storage in building 105-k . doe cannot consolidate its excess plutonium at srs for several reasons . first , doe has not completed a plan to process the plutonium into a form for permanent disposition , as required by the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2002 . doe proposed two facilities at srs to process its surplus plutonium into a form for permanent disposition: a mixed oxide fuel fabrication facility to convert plutonium into fuel rods for use in nuclear power plants and a plutonium immobilization plant where plutonium would be mixed with ceramics , the mixture placed in large canisters , and the canisters then filled with high - level radioactive waste . the canisters would then be permanently disposed of at yucca mountain . in 2002 , citing budgetary constraints , doe cancelled the plutonium immobilization plant , eliminating the pathway to process its most heavily contaminated plutonium into a form suitable for permanent disposition . section 3155 of the act provides that if doe decides not to construct either of two proposed plutonium disposition facilities at srs , doe is prohibited from shipping plutonium to srs until a plan to process the material for permanent disposition is developed and submitted to the congress . plutonium is very hazardous to human health and the environment . inhaling a few micrograms creates a long - term risk of lung , liver , and bone cancer and inhaling larger doses can cause immediate lung injuries and death . in certain forms , plutonium can spontaneously combust in the presence of oxygen at temperatures above room temperature . because of these hazards , plutonium must be stabilized and packaged appropriately to minimize the risk of accidental release . in addition , facilities storing plutonium must be properly equipped with safety systems that prevent it from escaping into the surrounding air , land , or water in the event a storage container is breached . nevertheless , srs's july 2004 plutonium storage plan stated that hanford would cut the fuel rods and package the plutonium in approximately 1,000 doe standard storage containers before shipping the material to srs . although building 105-k has space to store the fuel rods intact , several steps would be necessary before doe could ship the fuel rods from hanford to srs . first , there is currently no department of transportation - certified shipping container that could be used to package and ship the fuel rods .