part 106 . in this report , we discuss the 57 facilities regulated for security in accordance with part 106 because they met or exceeded these criteria at some point from 2008 through 2010 . we refer to these facilities as “ocs facilities.” the second type of offshore energy infrastructure is called a deepwater port . deepwater ports fall under a different set of regulations than ocs facilities . deepwater ports are fixed or floating manmade structures used or intended for use as a port or terminal for the transportation , storage , or handling of oil or natural gas to any state and include the transportation of oil or natural gas from the united states's ocs . there are currently four licensed deepwater ports — two in the gulf of mexico and two in massachusetts bay . unlike ocs facilities , which are involved in the production of oil or natural gas , deepwater ports enable tankers to offload oil or liquefied natural gas for transport to land by underwater pipelines . in partnership with the coast guard , owners and operators of offshore energy infrastructure also play a key role in securing ocs facilities and deepwater ports . for example , working in conjunction with appropriate coast guard personnel , owners and operators are responsible for assessing risks and implementing security measures at their facilities . they may assess risks by identifying the vulnerabilities of their facilities to possible attack scenarios and , in so doing they identify ways to mitigate vulnerabilities in and around their facilities . owners and operators also have security officers that are responsible for carrying out appropriate security measures . given the role that the coast guard plays in ensuring the security of ocs facilities and deepwater ports , we were asked to address the following three questions:  what has the coast guard done to ensure the security of ocs facilities , and what additional actions , if any , are needed ?  what has the coast guard done to ensure the security of deepwater ports , and what additional actions , if any , are needed ?  what limitations in oversight authority , if any , does the coast guard face in ensuring the security of offshore energy infrastructure ? this report supplements our august 2011 testimony that focused on coast guard risk assessments of ocs facilities and deepwater ports . in this report , we focus on coast guard security inspections of ocs facilities and deepwater ports . to address all three objectives in this report , we interviewed officials in coast guard headquarters in washington , d.c. , and district offices in new orleans , louisiana , and boston , massachusetts , about offshore energy infrastructure security because officials in these offices are responsible for ensuring the security of ocs facilities or deepwater ports . in addition , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and coast guard guidelines for ensuring the security of ocs facilities and deepwater ports . for those action items from nle 2009 that had not been addressed , we followed up with coast guard and dhs officials responsible for tracking such action items to verify the status of the action items .