gao - 02-298 . washington , d.c.: march 5 , 2002 . a new report is not required . for example , dod could return to its former practice of using annual selected acquisition reports to inform congress about the potential cost of production if cost reduction plans do not offset cost growth as planned . this information was included in these reports from 1996 to 1998 . in addition , the president's budget submission could be used as a vehicle to provide congress with updated information about the quantity of aircraft dod believes can be acquired under the existing production cost limitation . finally , requests to reprogram pip investment funds could be expanded to include this information along with justification for pip reprogramming . to identify the f / a - 22 production cost growth , we examined documents related to the joint estimating team's review completed in january 1997 and received clarification on some review conclusions from the f / a - 22 program office . we also reviewed documentation and discussed with program officials the results of the 2001 f / a - 22 defense acquisition board's review that estimated $5.4 billion more in production cost growth . to evaluate the planned effectiveness of cost reduction plans designed to offset production cost growth , we assessed the reliability of a contractor's and the air force's database on cost reduction plans to ensure that the data were complete , sufficient , and relevant to our work . we reviewed information from this database on implemented and not yet implemented cost reduction plans . we compared estimated cost reduction plan offsets from fiscal years 2000 and 2002 to determine current versus planned estimated offsets for f / a - 22 production lots . we also analyzed cost information from the air force to determine the amount of planned and actual funding invested in pips designed to offset estimated cost growth by improving production processes . to identify areas where additional production cost growth has occurred and may occur , we reviewed several aspects of the f / a - 22 program that were likely to contribute to future cost growth . we examined previous and current osd and air force production cost estimates , expected delays in the f / a - 22 program's completion of operational testing , aircraft unit price estimates and controls , and funding for support costs . to evaluate the degree to which dod has informed congress about the potential cost of f / a - 22 production , we examined the content of recent official documentation ( selected acquisition reports and president's budgets ) provided to congress and compared them with required content and content that would be expected considering the congressionally imposed f / a - 22 production cost limitation . in performing our work , we obtained information or interviewed officials from the office of the secretary of defense , washington d.c. ; the f / a - 22 program office , wright - patterson air force base , ohio ; and the defense contract management agency , marietta , georgia . we performed our work from march 2002 through february 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .