macário . "critical factors for development of airport cities. transportation research record: journal of the transportation research board , no . sheffi , yossi , logistics clusters: delivering value and driving growth , boston , ma: mit press , 2012 . stock , gregory n. ; noel p. greis , and john d. kasarda . “logistics , strategy and structure: a conceptual framework.” international journal of operations & production management , vol . vastag , gyula ; john d. kasarda , and tonya boone . “logistical support for manufacturing agility in global markets.” international journal of operations & production management , vol . vespermann , jan ; andreas wald . "long - term perspectives of intermodal integration at airports. journal of airport management , vol.4 , no . yeung , j.h.y. , waiman cheung , michael ka - yiu fung , xiande zhao , and min zhang , “the air cargo and express industry in hong kong: economic contribution and competitiveness.” international journal of shipping and transport logistics , vol . ( see fig . at some airports , terminals used by specific airlines are also financed and built through agreements between the airlines and the airports . we attempted to identify critics of airport - centric development in each airport region , but we were generally unable to identify critics . we conducted our interviews using a semi - structured approach that allowed our interviewees to respond to provide the information that was most relevant for their airport and region in each of several broad areas . these areas included: challenges interviewees had experienced in their development efforts ; ways they had or might address those challenges ; the likely success of their development efforts ; factors that might facilitate or hinder development ; any lessons learned or advice the interviewees identified for others interested in such development efforts ; their assessment of the impact of the considerations for their initiative ; and illustrative examples of how their development efforts had proceeded . this approach permitted stakeholders at each site to tailor information based on their own experiences , but does not allow for generalizations about how the considerations may impact on the progress of all airport - centric developments or whether such development should be considered at any given locality . to understand the level of development planned and efforts underway , we also reviewed available plans related to the airport - centric development efforts including project plans and airport master plans . based on our literature review and the interviews we conducted with experts , agency officials , and stakeholders , we identified the following factors considered by stakeholders at selected u.s. airports and regions when pursuing airport - centric development: 1 ) development at the airport , 2 ) air and surface connectivity , 3 ) funding sources for development , ( 4 ) development in the region , and ( 5 ) collaboration among stakeholders . in this report , we use these 5 factors to discuss how these considerations generally relate to airport - centric developments and provide our observations about how particular localities applied these considerations .