we disagree . the primary focus of our work was implementation of awg as authorized by the dcia . we accurately stated that none of the nine cfo act agencies we surveyed were using awg as authorized by dcia and all but one agency indicated that they intend to do so . despite this , we clearly state in this report , as education noted in its response , that education has effectively used wage garnishment under authority similar to dcia's since 1993 to collect delinquent student loans . according to education , such efforts have dramatically increased collections on delinquent student loans . we made this point at the beginning of our report , as well as in the body of our report and in a separate subsection that is titled “education's use of wage garnishment under separate authority has increased debt collections.” 2 . as stated in this report , education has been using awg under separate authority , to garnish up to 10 percent of debtors' disposable pay and plans to implement awg under dcia authority in fiscal year 2002 . while we acknowledge that education has had to consider the additional requirements to smoothly transition to the dcia process , other agencies have also had to develop the necessary procedural and programmatic changes for implementing awg . as such , we stated in this report that the eight agencies we surveyed that are planning to implement awg under dcia authority , including education , gave various reasons for the delay in its implementation , including the need to complete the necessary systems changes . although ssa provided us copies of their written implementation plan and project scope agreement , we do not consider either document to be a comprehensive written awg implementation plan . the one - page written implementation plan that was provided to us did not address ( 1 ) which debts would be subject to awg , ( 2 ) which age categories of debts would be subject to awg , and ( 3 ) what would be the minimum debt amount subject to awg . also , the plan did not clearly describe how and by whom hearings would be conducted or clearly indicate when ssa could fully implement awg . although ssa provided us its project scope agreement , it only documented the scope of software changes that are needed to implement awg . we have revised our report to reflect that responsibilities for addressing our recommendations at sba reside with the associate deputy administrator for capital access . we understood that the survey and implementation plan submitted by hud covered the agency as a whole . the intent of our comment was to address our concern that hud's departmentwide implementation plan only specifies the use of awg for certain debts referred to fms for cross - servicing and did not make it clear whether awg would be applicable to all other programs and related delinquent debts administered by the agency that are not referred to fms for cross - servicing . we have revised our report to reflect hud's expected implementation date of fiscal year 2002 . hhs suggested that the report highlight that it will utilize awg in - house and through fms .