( recommendation 1 ) . the monograph describes vista in terms of modules . for modules identified , including vista modules , information such as the associated business functions , va systems inventory identification number , and a link to the va document library for additional technical information are provided . the va systems inventory is a database maintained by oit that identifies current it systems at the department , including systems and interfaces related to vista . for systems identified , the database includes information such as the system name , the system status ( i.e. , active , in development , or inactive ) , and related system interfaces . the va document library is an online resource for accessing documentation ( i.e. contracts – contract costs for vista evolution included vha's obligations associated with workload management , change management , clinical requirements , and clinical interoperability . these vista - related costs totaled approximately $202.8 million . intergovernmental personnel acts – intergovernmental personnel acts are agreements for the temporary assignment of personnel between the federal , state , and local governments ; colleges and universities ; indian tribal governments ; federally funded research and development centers ; and other eligible organizations . these costs accounted for vha's need to use outside experts from approved entities for limited periods of time to work on vista evolution assignments . the total vista - related costs were approximately $2.4 million . however , we were not able to determine the reliability of the costs in this category for a variety of reasons , including that source data were not well documented . in addition , va officials were not clear regarding how the total amounts in each category should be divided between oit and vha . given this confusion , we were not able to determine if the costs were fully accurate or credible . oit personnel ( pay and administrative ) – according to ehrm officials , oit does not track labor costs by program . instead , the department provided estimations of the amount of salaries paid to oit government staff working on activities such as vista evolution , program management , and overall support of vista and related applications . oit personnel costs were estimated by the ehrm program office to be approximately $544 million total during fiscal years 2015 through 2017 . however , we were not able to determine the reliability of costs in this category because assumptions made for estimating the personnel and salary costs were not well documented and could not be verified . in addition , va omitted certain vista costs from the total costs identified for fiscal years 2015 , 2016 , and 2017 . specifically , va omitted the following costs: additional hosting – oit officials stated that additional costs related to hosting health data by an outside vendor , as well as hosting backup vista instances at each of the medical center sites , should also be included in the total costs for vista ; however , va omitted these costs from the total for fiscal years 2015 through 2017 .