, capabilities and costs ) . ( see fig . 3 for the five itim stages of maturity. ) this framework is grounded in our research of it investment management practices of leading private and public sector organizations . functionally reviews and validates program information and certification packages for tier 1-4 . the framework can be used to assess the maturity of an agency's investment management processes and as a tool for organizational improvement . the overriding purpose of the framework is to encourage investment selection and control and to evaluate processes that promote business value and mission performance , reduce risk , and increase accountability and transparency . we have used the framework in several of our evaluations , and a number of agencies have adopted it . itim's five maturity stages represent the steps toward achieving stable and mature processes for managing it investments . each stage builds on the lower stages ; the successful attainment of each stage leads to improvement in the organization's ability to manage its investments . with the exception of the first stage , each maturity stage is composed of “critical processes” that must be implemented and institutionalized in order for the organization to achieve that stage . dod is a massive and complex organization . to illustrate , the department reported that its fiscal year 2006 operations involved approximately $1.4 trillion in assets and $2.0 trillion in liabilities , more than 2.9 million military and civilian personnel , and $581 billion in net cost of operations . organizationally , the department includes the office of the secretary of defense , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , the military departments , numerous defense agencies and field activities , and various unified combatant commands that are responsible for either specific geographic regions or specific functions . figure 1 provides a simplified depiction of dod's organizational structure . in support of its military operations , dod performs an assortment of interrelated and interdependent business functions , including logistics management , procurement , health care management , and financial management . as we have previously reported , the systems environment that supports these business functions is overly complex and error prone , and is characterized by ( 1 ) little standardization across the department , ( 2 ) multiple systems performing the same tasks , ( 3 ) the same data stored in multiple systems , and ( 4 ) the need for data to be entered manually into multiple systems . air force is a major component of dod . its mission is to deliver options for the defense of the united states and its global interests in air , space , and cyberspace . air force relies extensively on it to fulfill these competencies effectively and to meet its organizational mission . it has 909 business systems ; of these systems , 832 ( 91 percent ) are in operations and maintenance .