ii ) . the first three standards deal with countries' efforts to enact laws to prohibit severe forms of trafficking and prescribe penalties for trafficking . the fourth standard , as detailed by state , relates to government efforts to implement those laws and includes 12 criteria that can be used to assess these efforts . for example , criteria for the fourth minimum standard include whether a country's government has achieved appreciable progress in eliminating trafficking — including prosecuting traffickers , protecting victims , and preventing trafficking — compared to efforts from the previous year and whether a country's government has taken steps to protect and provide assistance , such as counseling and shelter , to victims . the office to monitor and combat trafficking in persons ( trafficking office ) was established in accordance with the tvpa of 2000 . the office is headed by an ambassador - at - large and is organized into four sections: reports and political affairs , international programs , public engagement , and resource management and planning . the reports and political affairs section prepares the congressionally mandated trafficking in persons report annually . other parts of state , including regional bureaus , which cover geographic regions , and functional bureaus , which cover global issues such as refugees and human rights , also have input into the report . the report ranks countries into one of four categories , or tiers , based on the secretary of state's assessment of foreign governments' compliance with the four minimum standards for eliminating human trafficking . according to dod and usaid officials , the agencies review the recommendations , coordinate the input of the related agency offices and components affected , and respond to state as to whether they agree or disagree with the recommendations on waivers . the trafficking office incorporates input from other entities at state and the other relevant agencies into a memo to the secretary of state with recommendations . the secretary transmits recommendations to the president , who makes the final determinations on funding restrictions and waivers and submits the list to congress . in 2015 , 21 of the 23 countries ranked as tier 3 received a full or partial waiver . thirteen were granted full waivers , and 8 were granted partial waivers . for example , thailand received a full waiver of the tvpa restriction on nonhumanitarian , nontrade - related foreign assistance . south sudan received a partial waiver to allow for nonhumanitarian , nontrade related assistance otherwise restricted under the act , except for funding for foreign military sales , foreign military financing , and excess defense articles , which was restricted as a result of its placement in tier 3 . north korea and iran were not granted any waivers on funding restrictions . however , the assistance the united states has provided to these governments , if any , would be limited , so little funding would be restricted as a result . state has made improvements to the trafficking in persons report but does not explicitly explain the basis for certain countries' tier rankings or , where relevant , why countries' tier rankings changed .