on the military base . mission statement we prepare our students for college through a rigorous arts - infused program . military - connected student enrollment sy 11-12: 82 ( 50% ) mission statement to provide children with the academic foundation and ambition to earn a college degree . these options are described below .  traditional public schools: approximately 160 traditional public schools operated by local school districts are located on military bases in the united states . according to dod , 94 percent of students attending public schools on military bases are military - connected children . traditional public schools are generally open to all students in the geographic area they serve .  dod - operated schools: although the majority of dod schools are located overseas , 64 dod schools currently operate on military bases in the united states , and these domestic dod schools enroll about 28,000 students . dod schools — open only to eligible dependents of active duty military and dod civilians who reside on military installations — constitute a separate school system administered by the department of defense education activity ( dodea ) . domestic dod schools were established to educate military children in communities where the local schools were deemed unable to provide a suitable education , among other reasons . dod school systems depend almost entirely on federal funds , unlike public schools , which are funded primarily with local and state taxes and for which federal funding constitutes a small portion of total resources . as we noted in an earlier study , questions have been raised periodically concerning the continuing need for dod schools . dod has commissioned various studies since the 1980s exploring the possibility of transferring dod schools to local school districts , and over the years , dod has transferred some dod schools to local public school districts .  charter schools: charter schools are a relatively new option for students . these schools are public schools created to achieve a number of goals , including encouraging innovation in public education , providing an alternative to poor performing schools , and giving families an additional educational option to traditional public schools . charter schools operate with more autonomy than traditional public schools in exchange for agreeing to improve student achievement , an agreement that is formalized in a contract or charter with the school's authorizing body . a school's charter defines the specific academic goals and outlines school finances and other aspects of operation . charter schools provide students and parents with increased educational options . however , research has found considerable variability in charter school performance on student achievement . enrollment and interest in charter schools has grown rapidly in the past few years . according to the national center for education statistics , the number of students enrolled in public charter schools more than quadrupled , from 0.3 million to 1.6 million students between school years 1999-2000 and 2009-2010 , while the percentage of all public schools that were public charter schools increased from 2 to 5 percent . in the 2009- 2010 school year , about 5,000 charter schools operated in 40 states and the district of columbia . meanwhile parental interest in this public school option has also grown .