these aircraft component manufacturers were identified by prime contractors . we conducted this performance audit from september 2012 to july 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the contact named above , john neumann , acting director ; james kim ; beth reed fritts ; tana davis ; keo vongvanith ; julia kennon ; marie ahearn ; roxanna sun ; danielle greene ; namita bhatia sabharwal ; and amy abramowitz made key contributions to the report . in addition , there are other exceptions to the specialty metals domestic source restriction that allow dod to procure items containing specialty metals , including titanium in aircraft or aircraft components , from manufacturers in qualifying and non - qualifying countries . for example , one such exception , known as the domestic non - availability exception , waives the specialty metals domestic source restriction when dod makes a determination that specialty metals , including titanium in aircraft or aircraft components , are not available in the united states in the required form and at a reasonable price . other exceptions waive the specialty metals domestic source restriction for purchases outside the united states in support of combat operations or purchases in support of contingency operations . the commercial aerospace industry is the largest consumer of titanium metals in the world . dod estimates that the aerospace industry accounts for 60 to 75 percent of the u.s. market , with military and dod business accounting for up to 15 percent of the aerospace industry . titanium metals are important metals in the aircraft industry , in part because they are lightweight , strong , and corrosion resistant , making them common for use in structural airframe and jet engine components . in an airframe , titanium may be used in bulkheads , tail sections , landing gears , wing supports , and fasteners . in engines , titanium may be used in blades , rotating discs , rings , and casings . additional information about our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . in 1941 , congress enacted the berry amendment , a domestic source restriction , which required that certain items procured for defense purposes be grown or produced in the united states . specialty metals , including titanium and titanium alloys , were added to the berry amendment in the early 1970s , generally requiring dod and its contractors to procure specialty metals produced or melted in the united states unless an exception applied allowing specialty metals from foreign countries .