these reported families are referred to as the tanf or welfare caseload . typically , these families are receiving monthly cash payments . the surveyed states varied in their ability to provide data on low - income families receiving tanf / moe - funded services . states were able to provide these data for families receiving subsidized child care . however , only 11 states were able to provide these data for at least one tanf / moe - funded service other than child care . figure 4 shows the data we obtained from states on child care . to show how the number of these families compares to the tanf caseload , each state's count is shown as a percentage of the state's tanf caseload . although officials from all surveyed states said the states were providing tanf / moe - funded services other than child care to low - income families who are not in the tanf caseload , they usually did not have data on the number of these families . only 11 states were able to provide data on at least one service other than child care . figure 5 shows the data we obtained from states . to show how the number of these families compares to the tanf caseload , each state's count is shown as a percentage of the state's tanf caseload . table 2 shows the services included for each state in figure 5 . this shift reflects two key features of reform . first , many states have increased spending to engage more welfare families in work or work - related activities and to provide more intensive services for some of these families . second , many states have increased their efforts to provide services to low - income families not receiving welfare . services for these families include child care , case management , and job retention and advancement services for families who have recently left welfare for employment and for other low - income working families . in addition , some states provide a broad range of services to some low - income families , including family literacy and after school activities and substance abuse prevention services . while states have the flexibility under tanf to use their federal and state welfare - related funds to provide services to families not receiving monthly cash assistance , these families are not reflected in caseload data reported by states to hhs . as a result , tanf caseload data regularly used by program administrators and policymakers do not provide a complete picture of the number of families receiving benefits and services through tanf . in the 25 states that we studied , we estimated that — at a minimum — 830,000 families received a service funded at least in part with federal or state welfare funds in addition to the 1.8 million families who received cash assistance . these were either for a month in 2001 or a monthly average for 2001 . for our comparison with tanf caseload , we used the tanf caseload count for the same time period covered by the data on service recipients .