with the program . over the next few months , it will be important for all of the agency partners to have a voice in the final decision on how to proceed . once this decision is made , it will be important t move quickly to implement the decision in agency budgets and contracts . further , as the project continues , it will be critical to ensure that the management issues of the past will not be repeated . this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . if you have any questions regarding this testimony , please contact david powner at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or by e - mail at pownerd@gao.gov . individuals making contributions to this testimony include colleen phillips ( assistant director ) , carol cha , barbara collier , neil doherty , kathleen s. lovett , and karen talley . arranted . management problems at multiple levels — continuing oversight of program and executive management is w subcontractor , contractor , project office , and executive oversight — led to npoess recent cost and schedule overruns . as th e program implements a new management structure and increased contractor oversight , it will be important to measure and report on the progres of these changes so as to not repeat past problems . s in summary , in november 2005 , we reported that npoess was “a program in crisis” because of technical problems on critical sensor escalating costs , poor management at multiple levels , and the lack of a decision on how to proceed with the program . today , the program is still troubled , and its future direction is not yet know the program office and contractor are addressing problems on the critical sensors and have adopted strategies that are expected to reduce risks on these sensors . additionally , the program office is working to address management challenges by increasing program office skills and staffing , increasing contractor oversight , and restructuring the program office to allow for more timely and authoritative decisions . further , the nunn - mccurdy certificatio n in june 2006 is expected to result in a firm decision on how to proceedn . our objectives were to determine the national polar - orbiting operational environmental satellite system's ( npoess ) current status and plans , and to discuss considerations in moving the program forward . to accomplish these objectives , we focused our review on the integrated program office , the organization responsible for the overall npoess program . we also interviewed officials from the department of defense ( dod ) , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , and noaa's national weather service and national environmental satellite data and information service to determine plans for the program . to identify schedule and cost changes related to npoess's status we reviewed program office data and interviewed program officials . we compared changes in npoess cost and schedule estimates to prior cost and schedule estimates as reported in our july 2002 , july 2003 , and november 2005 testimonies and in our september 2004 report .