it also generally agreed to our conclusions . copies of this report will also be sent to the ferc chairman , the cftc chairman , the doe secretary , and other interested parties . we will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge at gao's web site at http: www.gao.gov . questions about this report should be directed to me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix viii . in our study of the natural gas market , we addressed ( 1 ) the factors that influence price volatility and , in particular , the high prices that occurred during the winter of 2000-2001 ; ( 2 ) the federal government's role in ensuring that natural gas prices are determined in a competitive and informed marketplace ; and ( 3 ) choices available to gas utility companies that want to mitigate the effects of future price spikes on their residential gas customers . to address these objectives , we reviewed pertinent documents and obtained information and views from a wide range of officials in both government and the private sector . our review encompassed the entire natural gas market from the wellhead , where gas is produced and first valued , to the end - user . we obtained information and views from federal , state , and local agencies and from natural gas industry officials through a variety of means , including interviews and surveys . we interviewed analysts from the department of energy's energy information administration ( eia ) , the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) , the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) , the new york mercantile exchange ( nymex ) , companies involved in over - the - counter gas markets , such as the intercontinental exchange , and state utility regulatory commissions , to obtain their views on the factors that influence natural gas prices . we also discussed natural gas prices with representatives from various industry organizations , including the american gas association ( aga ) , the american public gas association ( apga ) , the national association of regulatory utility commissioners ( naruc ) , the national association of state utility consumer advocates , the natural gas supply association , the independent petroleum association of america , and the interstate natural gas association of america . finally , we spoke with various individuals who work in the natural gas industry , including experts working at production companies , gas marketing companies , and gas utilities . in addition to our interviews , we obtained and analyzed natural gas price data supplied by the eia , data resources , incorporated ( dri ) , and nymex . we achieved a 100-percent response rate . a detailed description of our objectives , scope , and methodology is contained in appendix i. appendixes ii and iii provide details on the gas utility companies' responses to our surveys . appendix iv contains the state regulatory agency survey and appendix v provides details on the state regulatory agencies' responses to our survey . natural gas is a crucial source of energy in the united states .