gao - 08-528sp . furthermore , we reviewed relevant law , public comments , fcc proposed and final rules , and various industry and private sector documents . this report does not contain all of the results from the survey . the survey and a more complete tabulation of the results can be viewed by accessing the following link: http: / / www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? we interviewed fcc officials as well as a wide variety of industry and other private sector stakeholders with an interest in the transition , such as broadcasters , manufacturers , and industry advocacy groups . appendix i contains a more detailed discussion of our objectives , scope , and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from april 2007 through april 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . digital television transition: increased federal planning and risk management could further facilitate the dtv transition . the dtv transition has been in progress for over two decades . washington , d.c.: november 19 , 2007 . with a firm date established in law , all full - power television broadcasters will cease broadcasting their analog signal by february 17 , 2009 . there are numerous benefits to transitioning to digital - only broadcast signals , such as enabling better quality television picture and sound reception and using the radiofrequency spectrum more efficiently than analog transmission . washington , d.c.: october 17 , 2007 . with traditional analog technology , pictures and sounds are converted into “waveform” electrical signals for transmission through the radiofrequency spectrum , while digital technology converts these pictures and sounds into a stream of digits consisting of zeros and ones for transmission . while the digital signal disperses over distances , a digital receiver can adjust and recreate the missing zeros and ones from the digital transmission , thus making the digital picture and sound near perfect until significant fading occurs , at which point no picture can be seen . washington , d.c.: september 19 , 2007 . to facilitate the digital transition , congress and fcc temporarily provided each eligible full - power television station ( both commercial and noncommercial educational stations , including public stations ) with additional spectrum so they could begin broadcasting a digital signal . this companion , or paired , digital channel simulcasts the analog program content in digital format . assignment of the paired digital channel began in 1997 with the hopes that operating this digital channel would help stations learn about broadcasting a digital signal , in addition to raising consumer interest and understanding about the digital transition . the paired digital channel was intended to be used for a limited period until all stations were assigned a final digital broadcast station and were able to broadcast on their final digital channel . fcc completed the digital channel assignment for most stations in august 2007 .