armies . the defense coordinating officers , along with their 40-person training staff , served part - time as defense coordinating officers and only did so when requested by fema or another federal agency . upon establishment of fifth u.s. army as the army component to northcom , 10 full - time regional defense coordinating officers were established and located in the fema regional offices . defense coordinating officers are senior - level military officers ( typically army colonels ) with joint experience and training on the national response framework , defense support of civil authorities , and dhs's national incident management system . they are responsible for assisting the primary federal agency when requested by fema ; they provide liaison support and requirements validation ; and they serve as single points of contact for state , local , and other federal authorities that need dod support . the joint directors of military support at the joint staff is copied on the request so it can initiate parallel coordination and planning efforts . at this point , northcom then coordinates with the appropriate supporting service commands , force provider , the national guard bureau , or any other federal or dod stakeholder , depending on the nature of the incident and the requested capability . once northcom reviews and approves the request , it goes to the joint directors for military support for approval before being sent up to the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff and the assistant secretary of defense for homeland defense and americas' security affairs for policy review . finally , the request - for - assistance is forwarded to the secretary of defense for his approval . upon approval by the secretary of defense , the joint directors of military support will issue an execute order to designate a command structure and to task the appropriate commands , services , and dod agencies to provide support . northcom and dod have developed two methods to expedite the request - for - assistance review and sourcing process . first , northcom has worked with fema and dod officials to develop prescripted mission assignments , which are descriptions of a set of the capabilities civil authorities might need from dod . the prescripted mission assignments are developed so as to provide a common understanding of a capability , and they also serve as a template for drafting mission assignments . most of the defense coordinating officers told us that they use the prescripted mission assignments to a great extent to execute their civil support mission . for example , several of the defense coordinating officers found the prescripted mission assignments useful for outlining cost information or language as they prepared to write mission assignments . however , one defense coordinating officer said their usefulness for expediting requests - for - assistance is limited , because the requests still have to go through the regular process . second , the joint chiefs of staff have developed the defense support of civil authorities standing execute order , which pre - identifies forces that a supported combatant commander may use based upon historical requests for dod assistance .