the model generates an estimated funding requirement . during the second phase , the services may accept or reject the cost model's estimates and provide alternative estimates they developed outside the model . when the services propose an estimate other than that derived from the cost model , they meet with the osd comptroller and provide support for their estimate and , in conjunction with the comptroller , determine the requirement to be submitted . the services also provide estimates for some requirements that are not covered by the model — such as depot - level maintenance and procurement for replacement equipment . osd then reviews these estimates and , in conjunction with the services , determines a final estimate for inclusion in osd's supplemental budget submission . however , when differences occur , the osd comptroller has the final say in what equipment reconstitution requirement will be submitted in the supplemental budget . this report focuses on dod's planning , budgeting , and tracking and reporting for equipment reconstitution for military units that have returned from iraq and other global war - on - terrorism operations . we observed two problems with the cost model associated with the first phase of dod's process that have generated unreliable estimates . first , the cost model can overstate reconstitution costs related to aircraft and ship costs because these costs are covered in both the operations and reconstitution sections of the model . second , there is uncertainty in dod over the maintenance requirements covered by the model . we also noted problems with the second phase of dod's process . in one instance , the army did not consider funding in its baseline peacetime operation and maintenance budget that would be available for equipment reconstitution . the army also significantly overestimated the organizational - and intermediate - level maintenance costs to reconstitute individual equipment items . in another instance , the services included requirements in their reconstitution estimates that appear to be inconsistent with equipment reconstitution activities established by osd's supplemental budget preparation guidance . also , osd guidance only allowed the services to request funding to replace known battle losses — excluding projected battle losses and other expected losses — in preparing their fiscal year 2004 supplemental budget submissions . the model that osd and the services used in the first phase of the process to calculate reconstitution requirements for fiscal year 2004 resulted in an overstatement of about $1.2 billion . this is because the cost model contains an error that can result in a duplication of reconstitution cost requirements . the equipment reconstitution section of the cost model provides funding for aircraft and ship reconstitution that is already funded through the operations section of the model . all services support their aircraft through a flying - hour program that covers costs associated with operating aircraft , such as petroleum , oil and lubricants , consumables ( supplies ) , and spare parts . as a result , all organizational - and intermediate - level maintenance and repair requirements are met through the flying - hour program . using the information and analysis described here we assessed the reasonableness and completeness of the department's equipment reconstitution requirements .