vulnerabilities . cms disseminates information to macs about program vulnerabilities through several channels . one key channel is the agency's regular reports identifying vulnerabilities . for example , cms publishes midyear and annual reports on improper payments identified by cert and also makes cert data available to macs to conduct their own analyses . other data cms makes available include the part b national summary data file , which macs can use to compare the utilization rates of providers in their jurisdiction to national rates , to detect potentially aberrant billing patterns . in addition , cms facilitates regular conference calls and meetings with macs at which vulnerabilities are discussed . for example , cms leads three conference calls per month , each focusing on a different type of claim , in which macs can obtain information from racs about vulnerabilities these other contractors have identified in their analyses of paid claims . cms also sponsors two annual meetings for a / b mac staff — one for medical directors and another for medical review managers — and similar meetings for dme mac staff , at which vulnerabilities may be discussed . local coverage policies . cms facilitates information sharing about local coverage policies through regular conference calls and national meetings two to three times per year . cms also maintains a public web - based medicare coverage database that contains detailed information about both ncds and lcds . macs considering changes to local coverage policy can search the database for information about related ncds or lcds . some of the lcd descriptions contain enough information , including diagnosis and procedure codes , to give an idea of the edits that may have been implemented to enforce them . however , the lcd descriptions do not indicate whether those edits have actually been implemented or provide any measure of the effectiveness of those that have . prepayment edits . although cms facilitates limited and generally informal information sharing among macs about their prepayment edits , the agency does not systematically compile and disseminate information about effective edits . such information would include information about the national or local coverage policies on which the edits are based and the savings they have generated . cms requires macs to analyze the effectiveness of each of their edits — quarterly for manual edits and annually for automated edits — but does not require macs to report this information to the agency . shared systems . claims that meet the initial requirements in the front - end systems are sent to one of three shared systems — depending on the type of claim — where they are subjected to prepayment edits based on coverage and payment policy criteria . claims that do not meet these criteria are either automatically denied or flagged for review by trained staff . these systems also verify that providers are enrolled in medicare . claims that are not denied by automated edits or suspended for manual review by manual edits in the shared systems are then sent to the cwf , the central cms system that authorizes payment .