pub . 99-660 , title iii , §§ 301 et seq. , 100 stat . 3743 , 3755 ( amending the public health service act by inserting a new title xxi ; codified , as amended , at 42 u.s.c . 300aa - 1 et seq. ) began in 1988 , more than 15,000 claims had been filed and more than $2.8 billion has been awarded to petitioners . in 1999 , we reported that while the program appears to provide an easier process for obtaining compensation than through the civil court system , the claims process was not as quick or easy as expected . recently , concerns have been raised about the timeliness for adjudicating vicp claims and making changes to the vaccine injury table , how the funds in the vaccine injury compensation trust fund have been spent , and petitioner experiences and awareness of the program . you asked that we examine these issues . specifically , this report examines ( 1 ) how long it has taken to adjudicate vicp claims and how claims have been adjudicated , ( 2 ) the changes to the vaccine injury table and in the types of claims filed , ( 3 ) how the balance of and spending from the trust fund have changed , and ( 4 ) available information on petitioner experience with vicp and how hhs has informed the public of the availability of vicp . for the purposes of this report , we use the term claim to refer to the petition and case filed under vicp . we refer to the individuals filing the claims as petitioners . hrsa administers the program in conjunction with doj and uscfc . 1999 , and interviewed officials from hrsa and members of its advisory commission on childhood vaccines . we also examined hrsa data on the numbers of claims filed , by vaccine , and uscfc data on the number of claims alleging injuries on the vaccine injury table . to examine the balance of and spending from the vaccine injury compensation trust fund , we reviewed reports from the department of the treasury ( treasury ) , which manages the trust fund , to determine the income into and disbursements from the trust fund for fiscal years 2009-2013 . we also analyzed hrsa data on the amounts the agency reported for petitioner compensation and attorneys' fees and costs , and data from hrsa , doj , and uscfc on the amounts they obligated for administrative and other expenses related to processing vicp claims for those fiscal years using appropriations from the trust fund . finally , to examine available information on petitioner experience with vicp and how hhs has informed the public of the availability of vicp , we reviewed documents , including the public health service act , agencies' congressional budget justifications , agency strategic plans , and studies prepared for hhs . we also reviewed statements and interviewed officials from hrsa , doj , and uscfc and stakeholders ( from organizations representing providers , petitioners' attorneys , and parents ) regarding available information on petitioner experiences with vicp and steps hhs has taken to inform the public about the availability of the program .