the army pays for these examinations . the examinations are also used to assign early - deploying reservists a physical profile rating , ranging from p1 to p4 , in six assessment areas: ( a ) physical capacity , ( b ) upper extremities , ( c ) lower extremities , ( d ) hearing - ears , ( e ) vision - eyes , and ( f ) psychiatric . ( see app . i for the army's physical profile rating guide. ) according to the army , p1 represents a non - duty - limiting condition , meaning that the individual is fit for duty and possesses no physical or psychiatric impairments . p2 means a condition may exist ; however , it is not duty - limiting . p3 or p4 means that the individual has a duty - limiting condition in one of the six assessment areas . p4 means the individual functions below the p3 level . a rating of either p3 or p4 puts the reservist in a nondeployable status or may result in the changing of the reservist's job classification . army regulations that implement the statutory certification requirement provide that all reservists — including early - deploying reservists — certify their physical condition annually on a two - page certification form . army early - deploying reservists must report doctor or dentist visits since their last examination , describe current medical or dental problems , and disclose any medications they are currently taking . in addition , the army is required to conduct an annual medical screening for all early - deploying reservists . according to army regulations , the army is to meet the annual medical screening requirement by reviewing the medical certificate required of each early - deploying reservist . further , army early - deploying reservists are required to undergo , at the army's expense , an annual dental examination . the army is also required to provide and pay for the dental treatment needed to bring an early - deploying reservist's dental status up to deployment standards — either dental class 1 or 2 . reservists in dental class 3 and 4 are not deployable . class 3 reservists could have dental emergencies in the next 12 months , and reservists in class 4 have not had the required annual dental examination . the army has not consistently carried out the requirements that early - deploying reservists undergo 5- or 2-year physical examinations , and the required dental examination . in addition , the army has not required early - deploying reservists to complete the annual medical certificate of their health condition , which provides the basis for the required annual medical screening . accordingly , the army does not have sufficient health information on early - deploying reservists . furthermore , the army does not have the ability to maintain information from medical and dental records and annual medical certificates at the aggregate or individual level , and therefore does not know the overall health status of its early - deploying reservists . we found that the army has not consistently met the statutory requirements to provide early - deploying reservists physical examinations at 5- or 2-year intervals .