mr . chairmen , the national export initiative has focused the spotlight on u.s. agencies that assist u.s. exporters as a way of expanding economic growth and creating jobs in the united states . as the nation's export credit agency , the export - import bank is a key part of the initiative , and there are a number of detailed initiatives related to export credit in the report that was released on september 16 , 2010 . however , the goal of doubling u.s. exports in 5 years is an ambitious goal and would require not only increased activity by agencies such as ex - im but also increases in demand in key nations around the world . this heightened emphasis on overall exports and increasing the level of ex - im financing takes place in the context of specific congressional directives regarding the composition of that financing . our work on ex - im's financing with respect to small business — including minority and women - owned businesses — and environmentally beneficial exports has demonstrated that substantial steps have been taken , and ex - im continues to face substantial challenges . while ex - im has had more success in achieving the congressional targets for small business than for environmentally beneficial exports , opportunities remain for a more strategic use of resources and for better communication with congress and other stakeholders . more broadly , ex - im faces the challenge of contributing to the doubling of u.s. exports along with meeting other congressional requirements , including operating at little or no cost to the taxpayer . how any sharp increase in ex - im financing levels will affect specific targets we have described is not clear , and is likely to be an area requiring further discussion on how to balance these overall priorities . chairman moore , chairman meeks , ranking member biggert , and ranking member miller , this concludes my prepared remarks . i appreciate the opportunity to discuss these issues with you today . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittees may have at this time . for further information about this testimony , please contact loren yager at ( 202 ) 512-4347 or by e - mail at yagerl@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of the statement . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include celia thomas , shirley brothwell , karen deans , emily suarez - harris , richard krashevski , justine lazaro , valerie nowak , and jennifer young . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . economic growth was boosted by an improving trade balance . more recently , strong u.s. exports have been outpaced by import growth .