we agree . our report provides evidence that acquisitions can succeed if they take place in an evolutionary environment rather than an environment that requires complex solutions for a single quantum leap in software capabilities . to augment an evolutionary environment , requirements must be carefully managed and existing systems and software engineering knowledge must be taken into account , the development processes must be disciplined and transparent to decision makers , and key metrics must be gathered and used to support decisions . we disagree with the department's observation that the report “plays down significant challenges associated with acquisition of complex defense systems .…” to the contrary , our report highlights those challenges as inherent to acquisitions that proceed with limited knowledge about how to achieve quantum leaps in capability in a single acquisition . our comparison of two successful evolutionary programs ( tactical tomahawk and f / a - 18 c / d , both categorized as major defense acquisition programs ) with three revolutionary programs ( f / a - 22 , sbirs , and comanche ) shows different outcomes in terms of cost , schedule , and delivery of equipment to the warfighter . dod's rationale for providing programs with data less frequently than we recommended in our third recommendation suggested that data did not create knowledge and that knowledgeable software professionals are needed to interpret data . we agree that both knowledgeable people and data are needed , but those professionals must have data to interpret . we found that initially the f / a - 22 , sbirs , and comanche programs had knowledgeable staff but little data to analyze . dod indicated that it was already addressing software acquisition in policy in response to the fourth recommendation and cited multiple sections of dod directive 5000.1 as evidence . we do not agree that the current policy puts adequate controls in place to improve software practices to a level achieved by leading commercial companies . dod is silent about including incentives in contracts for improving software processes . the department's comments are printed in appendix i . to determine the best practices commercial companies use to manage software development and acquisition , we first conducted general literature searches . from these literature searches and discussions with experts , we identified numerous companies that follow structured and mature processes for software development and acquisition . we visited the following commercial companies: computer sciences corporation ( csc ) develops individual business solutions for commercial and government markets worldwide . the company is specialized in management and information technology consulting , systems consulting and integration , operations support , and information services outsourcing . in 2003 , the company generated revenues of $11.3 billion . we visited csc's federal sector office in moorestown , new jersey , and discussed its practices for developing and acquiring commercial and federal software . the federal sector unit has achieved a level 5 capability maturity model rating . diebold , incorporated manufactures self - service products , such as automated teller machines , electronic and physical security products , and software and integrated systems . in 2002 the company reported revenues of $1.9 billion .