the findings of this survey are not generalizable . to learn about what states are doing to help veterans and employers use the post - 9 / 11 ojt and apprenticeship programs , as well as gain insight on veterans' and employers' use of these programs and challenges states faced , we emailed a ms word questionnaire to saa officials in the 44 states in which these officials oversee implementation of these programs . after developing our questionnaire , we conducted two pretests with state officials to ensure that the questions were clear , comprehensive , did not introduce bias , and were not burdensome to complete . we made minor revisions to the survey instrument based upon these pretests . the survey included questions about methods of outreach to veterans and employers , assistance to employers , challenges to veteran and employer outreach and participation , and challenges with saa implementation of the program . it also included questions about the value or interest in key improvements , such as automating the payment system . we sent the survey by email in march and april 2015 using email addresses from the national association of state approving agencies website . ( 2 ) to what extent have va and states taken steps to inform veterans and employers about these programs ? ( 3 ) what challenges , if any , do veterans and employers report facing in using the post - 9 / 11 ojt and apprenticeship programs ? ( 4 ) to what extent has va assessed the performance and effectiveness of its post - 9 / 11 ojt and apprenticeship programs ? our approach for reviewing the post - 9 / 11 ojt and apprenticeship programs was comprised of various methodologies . for example , we conducted four surveys to gather various perspectives on aspects of the programs that spanned several of our research questions , including program use , outreach , and challenges veterans and employers reported in using the programs . ( see table 1. ) for our first objective , we analyzed va program data and conducted two nongeneralizable surveys — one of veterans who have participated in the post - 9 / 11 gi bill ojt or apprenticeship programs and one of employers and apprenticeship sponsors who have participated in these programs . specifically , we requested and analyzed data from two va datasets , the long term solution database , which includes information on the number of veterans who have received post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits under the ojt and apprenticeship programs , and the web enabled approval management system , which includes information on the number of approved ojt and apprenticeship facilities . for both sources , the data va provided covered participants , employers , and apprenticeship sponsors who participated in the program between october 1 , 2011 , when ojt and apprenticeship benefits first became available , and march 23 , 2015 , the most current data available at the time of our review . we assessed the reliability of these data by reviewing existing information about the data and the system that produced them and by interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report .