most contracts , however , were not awarded competitively . we did not assess the extent to which test program contracts were underreported . the test program contracts we reviewed were generally awarded more quickly and with less administrative burden than had the contracts been awarded using negotiated procedures and generally did not incur risks above those experienced on other federal acquisition efforts . the agencies and components we reviewed reported they generally applied their existing internal controls when reviewing and approving test program contracts . further , contracting officers generally documented their efforts to identify commercial sources , but nevertheless awarded 16 of the 26 test program contracts noncompetitively . dhs stated that a retroactive review to assess data on when the program was not used would be costly and labor intensive and would likely not result in findings that could be broadly addressed through policy changes or internal controls . we did not assess the test program's higher threshold of $12 million when used in support of a contingency operation or to facilitate the defense against or recovery from nuclear , biological , chemical , or radiological attack since we determined that these contracts accounted for only 2 percent of fiscal year 2011 obligations made by the components in our review . to determine the benefits and risks of using the commercial item test program , we reviewed relevant legislation , including the federal acquisition streamlining act of 1994 and the clinger - cohen act of 1996 , as well as applicable federal acquisition regulation ( far ) provisions . we reviewed agency and component policy and guidance related to test program use and oversight , commercial item acquisitions , simplified acquisition procedures , and contingency contracting . we did not intend for either dhs or doi to retroactively assess the reasons why contracting officers did not choose to use the test program and agree that doing so would not be cost - effective . however , the wide variation in the components' use of the authority and the lack of management visibility into its use indicates to us that the components may be missing opportunities to further reduce their lead times and administrative burden . given the improved reliability of test program data reported in fpds - ng , agencies have data they can readily use to assess their commercial acquisition portfolios to help ensure that they maximize available resources by taking advantage of opportunities to use the test program when appropriate to reduce administrative burden . to assess test program benefits , we analyzed contract file documents and interviewed contracting officers for the selected 26 contracts to determine how they applied the simplified procedures and how the procedures resulted in either a savings of time or reduction in administrative burden . we reviewed relevant regulation and compared the requirements for using the test program under far part 13 versus negotiated procedures under far part 15 which most officials told us they would likely use in the absence of the test program or existing mechanisms such as indefinite - delivery contracts and blanket purchase agreements .