fig . 3 shows the components of the hourly rate charged to corps' customers , along with an example of rates and associated costs . according to corps billing officials , customers who fund the corps through a reimbursable or direct fund basis typically receive standard invoices or statements that include a breakout of these g&a and technical overhead costs . the billing for customers who share the costs of a project with the corps , on the other hand , is handled by each individual district . according to the corps , district project managers determine what is included in the billing information provided to customers . periodically throughout the year , corps headquarters , divisions , and districts monitor actual overhead expenses incurred , compare them with budgeted overhead estimates , and adjust rates charged to customers , if necessary , to help ensure the difference between budgeted and actual overhead is as close to zero as possible by the end of the fiscal year . corps guidance calls for reviews of expenses and income no less than quarterly to determine whether budget projections and the existing overhead rates are on track . if you need me to repeat anything , please don't hesitate to stop me . how important , if at all , are each of the following types of overhead information for your organization in conducting business with the corps ? i will read you a list of 5 types of information and for each of these types of information , please tell me if it is very important , somewhat important , or not important . interview instruction: if the respondent answers not applicable and / or don't know in question 3 ( i.e. , how important are each of the following types of overhead information ) , then skip question 3a . otherwise , proceed with question 3a . why is overhead information important for your organization in conducting business with the corps ? during the past 3 years , did you request any of the following types of overhead information from the corps ? i will read you a list of the same five types of information and for each of these types of information , please tell me if you requested it or if you did not request it . i will read you a list of the same five types of information and for each of these types of information , please tell me if you have received enough , some but not enough , or none for your purpose . interview instruction: base the asking of questions 6 and 7 on the answer to question 5 . you may skip one or both depending on the answers provided . also , repeat their answers to question 5 in asking each question . in the previous question , you said that you “received some but not enough” or “received none” of a particular type of overhead information . what impact , if any , did this have on your organization ? and please explain why . referring again to your response to question five , you said that you “received enough” of a particular type of overhead information .