counties . gao - 01-560r . washington , d.c.: march 23 , 2001 . elections: the scope of congressional authority in election administration . gao - 01-470 . washington , d.c.: march 13 , 2001 . bilingual voting assistance: assistance provided and costs . gao / ggd - 97-81 . washington , d.c.: may 9 , 1997 . puerto rico: confusion over applicability of the electoral law to referendum process . hrd - 93-84 . washington , d.c.: may 28 , 1993 . voting: some procedural changes and informational activities could increase turnout . pemd - 91-1 . washington , d.c.: november 2 , 1990 . bilingual voting assistance: costs of and use during the november 1984 general election . ggd - 86-134br . washington , d.c.: september 15 , 1986 . justice can further improve its monitoring of changes in state / local voting laws . ggd - 84-9 . washington , d.c.: december 19 , 1983 . dak. , noted that bilingual voting assistance was not needed because about 95 percent of people in the covered language group can read and understand english . this opinion was also similar to that of a group of senior citizen filipino voters we met with through a cbo in los angeles county , calif . these voters had mixed views on the usefulness of the bilingual voting assistance they received . some of these voters indicated that the quality of the translated ballots was poor ; therefore , they instead voted using the english version of the ballots . however , these voters also noted that filipinos generally know how to read and speak english ; thus , the assistance was not necessary . yet , these voters also wanted the same benefits ( i.e. , translated election materials ) provided to them that other language minority groups received under section 203 . election officials and cbo representatives in some jurisdictions stated that modifications could be made that would improve the usefulness of the bilingual assistance currently provided to language minority voters . for example , election officials in four jurisdictions and cbo representatives in nine jurisdictions believed that the usefulness of bilingual voting assistance provided by the election office could be improved through additional community outreach and education efforts . election officials in five jurisdictions and cbo representatives in six jurisdictions noted that improvements in the translation of bilingual voting materials would improve their usefulness to language minority voters . finally , election officials in three jurisdictions and cbo representatives in seven jurisdictions believed that improvements in the recruiting and training of bilingual poll workers would improve the usefulness of bilingual voting assistance . ( see table 8 for a list of specific suggestions from election officials and cbo representatives for improving the usefulness of bilingual voting assistance. ) none of the jurisdictions we included in our study had formally evaluated the effectiveness of their bilingual voting assistance programs , although most had used some means of gathering information about the assistance provided . election officials in two jurisdictions told us that formal evaluations of their bilingual voting assistance programs were unnecessary , since even if they discovered that voters had not used the assistance or did not find it useful , the jurisdictions were still required to provide it .