training . opm employees cited strengths as well as concerns with employee development and training , as well as not feeling empowered to accomplish their tasks . as we have reported , agencies must develop talent through education , training , and opportunities for growth , such as delegating authorities to the lowest appropriate level . in the 2004 fhcs , 62 percent of opm employees agreed that “supervisors / team leaders in work unit support employee development” which is close to the agreement level of employees from the rest of government at 65 percent . opm employees were not as close to the employees in the rest of government in agreeing that “i receive the training i need to perform my job.” fifty - three percent of opm employees agreed with this statement as compared with 60 percent of employees from the rest of government . in the follow - up employee focus groups , some participants selected this item as one of the most important issues for opm to address . some focus group participants said opm's culture does not support training and employees do not have time to attend training classes . further , an opm executive told us that it can be a struggle to convince managers that people should attend training . some focus group participants also said that managers are not given sufficient and timely training budgets . opm officials believe that limited funding for training is an issue at opm , and added that opm is also working to provide managers with more timely training budgets . in 2003 , we reported that opm was using rotational assignments , special projects , and details to broaden the skills of employees . opm officials also told us the agency is taking steps to address training concerns by offering more online training courses . in 2004 , 57 percent of employees agreed with the statement that they have electronic access to learning and training programs readily available at their desk . although still below the 71 percent agreement level for the rest of government , this was an 8 percentage point increase from the 49 percent of employees who agreed with this statement on the 2002 fhcs . opm can build upon its current training initiatives , such as online courses and rotational assignments , to leverage the available training resources . critical resources . opm employees have indicated concerns regarding the availability of critical resources . although responses from opm employees overall are similar to employees from the rest of government , we noted one group of opm employees whose responses are not as close to their counterparts in the rest of government . among all opm employees , 51 percent agreed with the statement that they have “sufficient resources ( for example , people , materials , budget ) to get my job done” as did 49 percent of employees from the rest of government . for employees performing supervisory functions , however , the agreement rate was 35 percent at opm and 42 percent for the rest of government . participants in the follow - up focus groups selected this item as one of the most important issues opm needs to address to make the agency a better place to work .