typically , the plan sponsor is a fiduciary . the investment returns that participants receive reflect their share of the fund's assets after investment fees and other expenses have been subtracted . investment fees are reported as a percentage of the fund's overall assets , also known as the expense ratio . the 2005 survey of plan sponsors also found that participants bear a plan's record - keeping fees in about 50 percent of plans with 5,000 participants or more . hewitt associates' survey results are based on responses from 458 employers with 1,000 employees or more . nineteen percent of the respondents represented fortune 500 companies . the survey was conducted from mid - march through april 2005 . the survey and a link to a web site were e - mailed to respondents whose email addresses were available so they could complete the survey on the web or on paper . the other surveys were mailed with a stamped and addressed enveloped . services can include investment management ( i.e. hewitt associates is a human resource outsourcing and consulting firm . to assess how fees are disclosed to plan participants , we reviewed relevant laws and regulations , spoke with agency and industry officials , and reviewed sample disclosure documents . to understand requirements to disclose information about fees to participants , we reviewed erisa and relevant regulation sections such as 404 ( c ) and spoke with agency officials described above . to identify the content and frequency of fee - related disclosures typically made to 401 ( k ) plan participants , we spoke with plan practitioners and reviewed documents including sample disclosure documents . specifically , we interviewed an array of service providers that serve plans of varying sizes including members of the american bankers association , american benefits council , american council of life insurers , american society of pension professionals & actuaries , securities industry association , society of professional administrators and record keepers , as well as several plan consultants . we also interviewed officials from three plan sponsors . however , because we could not readily obtain a representative sample of service providers or plan sponsors , the information obtained does not represent the views of all service providers or plan sponsors . in addition , we reviewed a limited number of sample disclosure documents made to participants . because the documents do not reflect a representative sample , we supplemented the information with labor documents , including those from the 2004 erisa advisory council's working group on fee and related disclosures to participants , to determine the type of disclosures typically made to participants . to understand participants' awareness of fees and related disclosures , we spoke with the american association of retired persons ( aarp ) in addition to the agency and other industry professionals listed above . in addition to interviewing labor officials in the national office about the their enforcement and outreach efforts , we also interviewed officials from labor's regional offices located in atlanta , georgia ; philadelphia , pennsylvania ; san francisco , california ; and chicago , illinois about their ongoing enforcement projects related to fees .