deficiency reports . to protect itself from construction delays , an agency can include the liquidated damages clause in a prime contract , meaning that if the prime contractor fails to complete the work within the time specified in the contract , the contractor pays the government a daily fixed amount for each day of delay until the work is completed or accepted . liquidated damages can result from a delay caused by the prime contractor or one of its subcontractors . they are not to serve as a penalty but to represent an assessment of probable damage costs that would be incurred by the agency if delay causes the work to extend beyond the contractual completion date . the liquidated damages daily rate for failure to timely complete the work is included in the prime contract . these costs can vary depending on the project . for example , for one va contract the daily rate is $2,800 per calendar day of delay and for one usace contract the daily rate is $16,500 per calendar day . while oversight can help agencies identify instances of poor quality construction , we found that the selected agencies use a number of methods to prompt the prime contractor to address or correct deficiencies identified during oversight activities if problems persist . in all cases , the government held the prime contractor solely responsible for correcting all deficiencies , whether or not the deficient work was performed by a subcontractor or the prime contractor . retaining or withholding a certain percentage of each monthly progress payment owed by the government to prime contractors is a powerful motivator to encourage prime contractor and subcontractor performance . the far allows agencies to withhold up to 10 percent of each monthly progress payment to prime contractors in accordance with the contract until completion of all contract requirements . according to gsa officials , prime contractors can in turn withhold a similar percentage amount from each subcontractor's monthly progress payments until satisfactory completion of the work . progress payments may be withheld on the contracts we reviewed to account for materials and workmanship deficiencies or lack of progress on the project by prime contractors or subcontractors . for one usace contract , the agency retained $850,000 in payment for flooring and carpet damage and metal panel problems , among other things . some agency officials we interviewed stated that prime contractors take their performance evaluations on a current contract very seriously because a negative performance report can work against them in trying to win future federal construction contracts . the far generally requires agencies to evaluate and document contractor performance on contracts that exceed certain dollar thresholds at least annually and at the time the work is completed , and to make that information available to other agencies through ppirs , a shared government - wide database.completing past performance evaluations , the assessing officials rate the contractor on various elements such as quality of the product or service , schedule , and cost control . in addition , for each element , a narrative is provided to support the rating assigned . when assessing a contractor's past performance for a potential contract award , contracting officials may consider the evaluations in ppirs .