hais can be expensive . in 2005 the average payment for a hospitalization in pennsylvania was over six times higher for patients who contracted a hospital - acquired infection than for patients who did not acquire infections , according to a report by the pennsylvania health care cost containment council . a 2007 study of 1.69 million patients who were discharged from 77 hospitals found that the additional cost of treating a patient with an hai averaged $8,832 . the costs of hais are borne not only by the patients who suffer infections , but also by those who pay for care , such as the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) . according to the american hospital association , medicare paid for over one - third of all hospital costs in 2005 . hospitals may also incur some of the cost because they are not fully reimbursed for the cost of the extra care attributable to hais . although not all hais are preventable , public and private organizations have established standards and other activities aimed at controlling and preventing them . cms has established health and safety standards — known as conditions of participation ( cop ) — with which hospitals must comply in order to be eligible for payment by medicare and medicaid and which include the cop for infection control . hospitals may choose one of two ways to show that they have met these or equivalent standards: they may be certified by a state agency under agreement with cms to survey the hospital's compliance with the cops or they may be accredited by one of two private organizations — the joint commission or the healthcare facilities accreditation program of the american osteopathic association ( aoa ) . most hospitals are accredited by the joint commission . other activities within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) aimed at addressing the problem of hais in hospitals include the development of guidelines by cdc , which contain recommended practices that hospitals may adopt , and several databases in different parts of hhs that contain information about hais in hospitals . according to the institute of medicine , prevention of hais through implementation of evidence - based guidelines can lead to improvements in quality of care . furthermore , the collection of national data on these infections can provide a benchmark for individual hospitals to gauge their performance and design targeted interventions . federal and state lawmakers are also concerned about hais and have taken action to reduce them . with the passage of the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra ) , the congress took steps to revise the way medicare pays hospitals so that beginning on october 1 , 2008 , they would not receive higher payments for patients that acquire certain preventable conditions ( including any of three hais ) during their hospital stay . the hai - related preventable conditions that cms identified in the final regulation implementing subsection 5001 ( c ) of the dra were utis caused by catheters , infections caused by vascular catheters , and mediastinitis following coronary artery bypass graft surgery .