eight percent plan to do some multicasting . our finding that transitioning stations expect to show less digital content than current dtv stations are showing is likely because many of the current dtv stations are affiliates of the top four networks and are in major television markets . by contrast , transitioning dtv stations are more likely than current dtv stations to be unaffiliated with the top four networks or to be in smaller television markets . unaffiliated stations have less access to the increasing amount of hdtv or other digital content that is provided by the major networks . smaller stations sometimes rely more on syndicated shows — such as game shows , talk shows , or reruns of popular network programming — that are less likely to have been filmed in digital or high definition . smaller stations also have fewer resources to buy the equipment necessary to film and produce their own digital content . in fact , only 10 percent of transitioning stations with annual revenues less than $2 million said that they expect to produce any digital content of their own within their first year of digital broadcasting . we asked current dtv stations to describe the overall interest level in digital broadcasts by the consumers in their markets . according to these stations , few consumers have a high interest in dtv . seven percent of the stations said that consumers in their markets had no interest in dtv , and another 56 percent of the stations described overall consumer interest in their digital broadcasts as “low.” stations that reported providing more high definition content did not report higher consumer interest than current dtv stations as a whole . despite broadcasters' perceptions of low consumer demand for digital and high definition television , only some of the current dtv stations reported undertaking promotion activities that have significant cost in order to promote or market their digital broadcasts . the two most prominent ways stations chose to promote their dtv channel — methods that do not involve great expense — were through a digital or high definition identifier running at the beginning of the program ( 52 percent ) and by making information about digital programming available on the stations' web sites ( 50 percent ) . in addition to these methods , current dtv stations reported the following: thirteen percent said they use advertising spots or promotions for specific shows available in high definition , and 22 percent said they advertise their dtv channel . spectrum that broadcasters vacate is to be returned for other uses . some of the returned spectrum has been reallocated for public safety uses and some for commercial uses . after september 11 , 2001 , reassigning the spectrum for wireless uses , such as public safety communications and mobile phones , has become a higher priority and greater emphasis has been placed on a timely completion of the dtv transition . to move the transition along and more quickly reassign the spectrum , fcc established staggered deadlines by which broadcasters must build their dtv stations and begin broadcasting a digital signal .