( see app . we then selected studies that pertained to individual states in the following way . first we selected all leavers studies financed by aspe . of the leavers studies listed by the national conference of state legislatures and those mentioned in an article authored by brauner and loprest , we included only those that had not been included in our previous report or were not from a state that already had an aspe - funded study . in states that had issued multiple reports for their leavers studies for people who left welfare in different years , we selected the most recent study . when a state had no aspe - funded study or any listed by the national conference of state legislatures or brauner and loprest , but did have a report available on its web site , we selected the web report . waiver studies generally produced several reports . we selected for review the most recently issued waiver report because the data topics examined were similar in the initial and later reports . after selecting these types of studies and surveys , we removed from our list studies that did not appear to contain data that could answer our research questions or that used data from one of the national surveys on our list . in summary , we excluded literature searches , reviews of research on state policies or programs , technical assistance projects focused on improving or evaluating information systems or databases , and studies based on data from a national survey that we had included in our list . a list of 239 studies remained . finally , we obtained advice from five welfare experts about which of these 239 studies we should include . ultimately , we selected 17 of these studies . because this assessment is based on a judgmental sample and the data needs of an assessment of tanf's progress are derived from tanf's legislative objectives , several study limitations should be considered . first , while every attempt was made to be comprehensive in sample design and selection , some relevant data sources may have been omitted . second , framing the data needs for an assessment of tanf's progress around tanf's objectives , which focus on the behavior and well - being of low - income children and families , excluded from consideration the bodies of welfare reform research concerned with institutions , including studies of tanf's implementation at the state and local levels and descriptions of tanf program policies and practices . third , the study's focus on identification of quantitative data resulted in our eliminating data from most studies that used qualitative data collection methods . fourth , because our bibliographic sources for surveys and studies included both existing and planned surveys and studies , complete documentation for data sets was not always available . finally , because our coding focused on whether a certain data source collected measures on specific topics , but not on the precise measures used , we did not assess whether measures were comparable across studies .