gao - 07-310 . washington , d.c.: january 2007 . export controls: challenges exist in enforcement of an inherently complex system . gao - 07-265 . washington , d.c.: december 20 , 2006 . dod concurred or partially concurred with these recommendations . officials from the executive agent's office stated that departmentwide direction would give credence to the anti - tamper policy in practice . anti - tamper points of contact told us that the policy memorandums are not sufficient to ensure that program managers are implementing anti - tamper protection on weapon systems when necessary . one service anti - tamper point of contact stated that program managers might disregard the policy memorandums because they are high - level and broad . another service anti - tamper point of contact said that implementation is ultimately left up to the individual program manager . while a program manager's decision should be approved by the milestone decision authority and documented in the program protection plan , some service and program officials said that programs are not always asked about anti - tamper protection during the review . lacking departmentwide direction for the anti - tamper policy , dod components have been left to develop their own initiatives to assist program managers in anti - tamper implementation . however , the usefulness of these initiatives depends on the extent to which other components participate in these efforts . for example , the missile defense agency developed a risk assessment model to help program managers identify how much anti - tamper is needed to protect critical technologies . specifically , the model helps program managers assess the criticality of the technology relative to the risk of exploitation . however , when the missile defense agency sought comments on the initiative , the executive agent and services indicated that it was too lengthy and complex to use . the executive agent , in coordination with anti - tamper points of contact from the missile defense agency and services , has taken over this effort , and it is still in development . the navy is also implementing an initiative: a database intended to capture the information that programs across dod components have identified as critical . many officials we spoke with pointed to this database as a potential tool to improve identification of critical program information across dod components . to date , the navy and the army are submitting information for the database , but the missile defense agency and air force are not . the missile defense agency anti - tamper point of contact stated that its information is classified at a level above what the database can support and its program managers will not submit information for the database unless dod requires submissions by all dod components . however , the missile defense agency does have access to the database and uses it as a cross - check to determine if it is identifying similar critical program information . the air force has been briefed on the initiative but does not yet have consent from all of the commands to participate . without full participation across all dod components , the usefulness of this database as a tool to identify critical technologies that may need anti - tamper protection will be limited .