according to the u.s . global change research program , changes in the climate in the united states and its coastal waters have altered — and will continue to alter — the water cycle , affecting where , when , and how much water is available for all uses . changes in the climate — including warmer temperatures , changes in precipitation patterns , rising sea levels , and more frequent and intense storms — affect water resources in a number of ways such as increased flooding in some areas and drought in others , and inundation and erosion in coastal areas . precisely how and to what extent changes in the climate will affect particular water resources in the future is uncertain , but climate - related changes are expected to continue and increase in intensity in some areas of the nation . climate change has the potential to affect many aspects of the environment and society in which water resource management plays an active role . a 2011 federal interagency review of the potential impacts of climate change on water resources identified four interrelated areas of concern for water resource managers as follows: assuring an adequate water supply for multiple needs , such as drinking water , agriculture , energy production , industrial uses , navigation , and recreation ; protecting life , health , and property in the face of risks posed by protecting the quality of freshwater resources , including the quality of surface water and groundwater , and the health of fisheries and aquatic habitat ; and protecting coastal and ocean resources as rising sea levels and changes in storm frequency , intensity , and duration impact coastal infrastructure . adaptation — defined by the national research council as adjustments in natural or human systems to a new or changing environment that exploits beneficial opportunities or moderates negative effects — is an element of the proposed responses to climate change that is gaining more attention . more specifically , policymakers are increasingly viewing adaptation as a risk - management strategy to protect vulnerable sectors and communities that might be affected . as we reported in our may 2013 report on land resource management agency adaptation efforts , climate change adaptation planning frameworks generally consist of four key elements that are reviewed and revised as needed as new information emerges . these four elements are the following: establish a mandate to address climate change with clearly articulated adaptation goals , objectives , and measures of success toward meeting goals . assess and understand the risks , vulnerabilities , and opportunities posed by climate change by determining ( 1 ) what aspects of the climate are changing and over what periods , ( 2 ) which resources will be most at risk , ( 3 ) why these resources are likely to be vulnerable , and ( 4 ) what uncertainties are associated with the predicted climate change impacts and how this may impact adaptation efforts . develop and prioritize management adaptation actions ; that is , determine how to respond to the identified risks by considering a wide array of possible adaptation measures and identifying the highest priority adaptation measures .