subcontracts . the 2012 oig report found that ams did not recognize in its guidelines for check - off programs that its oversight role extended to monitoring subcontracts . following the release of the oig report , ams updated the guidelines to respond to the oig finding . under the 2015 ams guidelines , marketing specialists are to review a sample of subcontractor expenses during their management reviews . “got milk ? ” “pork: the other white meat” . “the incredible , edible egg” . these are three examples of advertising campaigns for agricultural commodities undertaken through research and promotion programs , commonly known as commodity check - off programs . at present , there are 22 commodity check - off programs authorized by the secretary of agriculture through orders issued after public notice and comment . the secretary issues these orders under the authority provided in legislation addressing specific agricultural commodities or under general authority provided in the commodity promotion , research and information act of 1996 . as stated in the general act , these programs were formed to strengthen a commodity's position in the marketplace through the development and implementation of promotion , research , and information programs . the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) agricultural marketing service ( ams ) has primary oversight responsibility for ensuring that check - off boards comply with legislative and regulatory requirements . the term check - off refers to the way the research and promotion programs are funded — an assessment is paid by producers , handlers , processors , importers , or others in the marketing chain for each unit of a commodity sold , produced , or imported . the programs are principally funded by this assessment and do not receive federal appropriations . in 2016 , program assessments totaled over $885 million for these federally authorized check - off programs . each check - off program is operated by a board , such as the american egg board or the cattlemen's beef board , whose members , for the most part , are appointed by the secretary of agriculture from nominations submitted by industry . check - off board staff are primarily responsible for the operations of the board and interacts daily with ams representatives . the check - off boards conduct activities to increase overall demand for the commodities ; expand markets in the united states and abroad ; and expand the commodities' uses through research , promotion , and consumer and industry information . among other things , check - off boards are explicitly prohibited from ( 1 ) engaging in any action that could be a conflict of interest ; ( 2 ) using assessed funds to influence any legislation or governmental action or policy ; and ( 3 ) promoting any advertising that may be false , misleading , or disparaging to another agricultural commodity . ams has primary oversight responsibility for ensuring that the boards follow these prohibitions and abstain from these activities . in 2012 , usda's office of inspector general ( oig ) found that ams needed to improve certain areas of its oversight of check - off board operations . you asked us to review ams's oversight of check - off programs .