gao - 15-368 . washington , d.c.: april 16 , 2015 . hhs had no written procedures . ensuring these procedures are available could better ensure that components consistently follow omb's requirements . we have long advocated the potential usefulness to congress , agencies , and the public of conducting retrospective regulatory analyses . retrospective analysis can help agencies evaluate how well existing regulations work in practice and determine whether they should be modified or repealed . in 2007 , we found that agencies had conducted more retrospective reviews of the costs and benefits of existing regulation than was readily apparent , especially to the public . we made seven recommendations to improve the effectiveness and transparency of retrospective regulatory review . these included that omb develop guidance to regulatory agencies to consider or incorporate into their policies , procedures , or agency guidance that govern regulatory review activities the following elements: 1. consideration of whether and how they will measure the performance 2. prioritization of review activities based upon defined selection criteria ; 3. specific review factors to be applied to the conduct of agencies' analyses that include , but are not limited to , public input ; 4. minimum standards for documenting and reporting all completed review results and , for reviews that included analysis , making the analysis publicly available ; 5. mechanisms to assess their current means of communicating review results to the public and identifying steps that could improve this communication ; and 6. steps to promote sustained management attention and support to help ensure progress in institutionalizing agency regulatory review initiatives . we also recommended that omb 7. work with regulatory agencies to identify opportunities for congress to revise the timing and scope of existing regulatory review requirements and / or consolidate existing requirements . in 2011 and 2012 , the administration issued new directives to agencies on how they should plan and conduct analyses of existing regulations that addressed each of our seven recommendations . in a 2014 report on reexamining regulations , we found that agencies often changed regulations in response to completed retrospective analyses , but could improve the reporting of progress and strengthen links between those analyses and the agencies' performance goals . we also concluded that omb could do more to enhance the transparency and usefulness of the information provided to the public . although we found that agencies posted their retrospective review plans online , obtaining a comprehensive picture of the agencies' progress was difficult because results were spread across multiple web sites . in addition , consistently providing links or citations to the supporting analyses and data , and including more detail on the methodologies and key assumptions used to estimate savings , would help congress and the public to better understand the basis for projected results .