( fig . 5 shows the affected jurisdictions' reported annual costs of services to compact migrants. ) these affected jurisdictions reported costs for the services identified in the amended compacts' enabling legislation: educational , health , public safety , and social services . education costs accounted for the largest share of reported expenses in all three jurisdictions , and health care costs accounted for the second largest share . officials in guam and hawaii also cited compact migrants' limited eligibility for a number of federal programs , particularly medicaid , as a key contributor to the cost of compact migration borne by the affected jurisdictions . we have previously found that the three affected jurisdictions' cost estimates contained a number of limitations with regard to accuracy , adequate documentation , and comprehensiveness . these limitations affect the reported costs' credibility and prevent a precise calculation of total compact cost impact on the affected jurisdictions . lack of reliable performance data . ongoing problems with the reliability of data on grant performance in the education and health sectors have prevented both countries from demonstrating and assessing progress toward compact goals for these sectors and from using the data to set priorities and allocate resources to improve performance . challenges to ensuring accountability for compact grant funding . the fsm's and rmi's single audits for fiscal years 2006 through 2011 indicated challenges to ensuring accountability of compact and noncompact u.s. funds in the fsm and rmi . for example , these governments' single audits showed repeat findings and persistent problems in noncompliance with u.s. program requirements , such as accounting for equipment . for this hearing , we have updated our prior analysis of audit reports and have found that accountability remains a concern . for example , while the rmi met the single audit reporting deadline for fiscal years 2006 through 2010 , it submitted the required reports for fiscal years 2011 through 2014 after the deadline . moreover , the 2014 reports for both countries identified several material weaknesses , such as an inability to account properly for equipment . limited oversight of compact grants . oia's oversight of grants under the amended compacts has been limited by staffing shortages . as we have previously reported , oia officials noted that budget constraints , as well as decisions to use available funding for other hiring priorities , were among factors that prevented oia from hiring staff that it had projected as necessary to ensure effective oversight for the amended compacts . these staffing shortages have affected oia's ability to ensure that compact funds are used efficiently and effectively . according to fsm and rmi officials , staffing constraints , as well as a lack of authority to enforce compact requirements , hampered oversight by the fsm and rmi offices responsible for compact implementation . the population of fas migrants in u.s. areas has continued to grow . we have previously reported that , while the majority of compact migrants live in three affected jurisdictions — hawaii , guam , and the cnmi — migrants are also present in several other u.s. states .