ambassador . from september 2012 through december 2013 , 53 attacks against u.s. embassy facilities and personnel occurred , including 4 attacks that resulted in the deaths of u.s. embassy personnel . these attacks raise questions about the security of u.s. diplomatic facilities , particularly those facilities not built to current security standards , such as the facility in benghazi . in response to the attack , state has begun taking a number of steps to enhance its risk management and security efforts aimed at protecting overseas facilities . for example , shortly after the attacks in benghazi , state , working with the department of defense , sent out interagency security assessment teams to evaluate the security at 19 higher - threat , higher - risk posts . those teams made a number of recommendations to improve physical and procedural security at each post , and state has begun to implement them . you asked us to review how state assures the security of older , acquired , and temporary work facilities overseas . we evaluated ( 1 ) how state manages risks to work facilities under chief - of - mission authority overseas ; ( 2 ) the adequacy of state's physical security standards for these work facilities ; ( 3 ) state's processes to mitigate vulnerabilities when older , acquired , and temporary work facilities overseas do not meet physical security standards ; and ( 4 ) how state's risk management activities align with its risk management policy and risk management best practices . to address these objectives , we reviewed u.s. laws ; state's physical security policies and procedures as found in memoranda , guidance , the foreign affairs manual ( fam ) , and foreign affairs handbooks ( fah ) — most notably , the physical security handbook and the overseas security policy board ( ospb ) standards ; state's bureau of diplomatic security ( ds ) documentation of overseas posts' physical security surveys , threat and risk ratings , and physical security waivers and exceptions ; post - specific documents pertaining to physical security ; state's bureau of overseas buildings operations ( obo ) construction and physical security upgrade documentation ; u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) physical security documentation ; state and usaid budgetary documents ; classified and unclassified accountability review board ( arb ) reports resulting from physical security attacks and state's documents evaluating their response to arb recommendations ; past gao , state office of inspector general ( oig ) , and congressional research service reports ; and reports by congressional committees and independent panels . we also interviewed officials in washington , d.c. , from ds ; obo ; state's office of management , policy , rightsizing , and innovation ( m / pri ) ; and usaid about risk management and physical security policies and standards and their implementation . we evaluated the reliability of obo's facility data in state's property database , as well as the data ds uses to assess risk . our concerns about these data are discussed in our findings . we evaluated the consistency of physical security standards within the fam and fah and the timeliness of updates to those policies .