accordingly , the department has increased its reliance on it . in particular , legislation enacted over the past several years has given the department new responsibilities for , among other things , strengthening the housing market . for example , the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 established a program intended to help families avoid home foreclosure by refinancing them into mortgages insured by fha . as a result , the number of mortgage loans insured by fha more than tripled between 2006 and 2010 , from almost half a million loans to 1.7 million loans . the information in my testimony is based on our previous reports on hud . other individuals who made key contributions include shannin g. o'neill , assistant director ; kami j. corbett ; lee a. mccracken ; and teresa m. neven . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . all work on which this testimony is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . hud's mission to create strong , sustainable , and inclusive communities and quality and affordable homes for all has significantly evolved due to the current economic and housing crisis . this in turn resulted in the need for much greater system processing capabilities to accommodate the increased demand . it plays a critical role in the department's ability to carry out its growing mission by supporting data collection and dissemination throughout the department and to external parties . for instance , the department reports that its business areas rely on it to process over 50,000 loan requests per week , over 12,000 service calls per month , and more than 7,000 grant requests annually for each of its major grant programs . despite its growing mission , hud's it environment has not effectively supported its business operations . in 2009 , we reported that the department's it had consisted of: over 200 information systems , many of which performed the same manual processing for key business processes ; and functions and , thus , were duplicative ; stove - piped , nonintegrated systems that could not share related data ; systems that were nearly 15 years old ( on average ) , including several different operating systems and using 35 different programming languages . a factor that had contributed to the state of hud's it environment was the department's focus , primarily , on the maintenance of its existing systems and infrastructure , rather than on the modernization needed to meet its expanding mission needs . for example , in fiscal year 2008 , about 2 percent of the department's it obligations were for new development , whereas the remaining 98 percent were obligated for operating and maintaining legacy systems . hud's office of the chief information officer ( ocio ) is responsible for supporting the department's programs , services , and management processes by providing it solutions and services . additionally , the ocio is responsible for developing , modernizing , and enhancing the it environment .