gao - 08-132t . washington , d.c.: october 16 , 2007 . dod personnel clearances: delays and inadequate documentation found for industry personnel . gao - 07-842t . washington , d.c.: may 17 , 2007 . ( 2 ) what were the number and cost of each type of clearance investigation and adjudication for industry personnel performed in fiscal years 2000 through 2006 ? ( 3 ) to what extent has dod developed procedures to estimate the number of investigations to be conducted ; plans to reduce delays and backlogs in the clearance program , if any ; and provide funding ? this report contributes to a larger gao body of work on dod's personnel security clearance program . ( see the list of related gao products at the end of this report. ) our scope was limited to industry personnel whose clearance investigations or adjudications occurred in fiscal year 2000 or later and were the responsibility of ousd ( i ) . for all three questions , we reviewed laws , executive orders , and policies related to top secret , secret , and confidential security clearance investigations and adjudications . those sources provided most of the criteria we used to assess the dod report on personnel security clearances for industry and for the data and planning we examined to address our other two researchable questions . we gained additional insights about causes and effects to explain our findings from reports ( eg , gao and dod office of the inspector general ) and documentary and testimonial evidence from interviews we conducted with personnel associated with a variety of government offices: ousd ( i ) , dss , dod's adjudication facilities for industry personnel clearances , the office of the under secretary of defense for the comptroller , and dod's personnel security research center . to determine the extent to which dod's report to congress addressed the five issues specified in public law 109-364 ( sec . 347 ) , we compared the findings in the dod report to the mandated requirements and governmentwide and dod - wide data quality standards . to determine the number and cost of each type of clearance work performed for industry personnel in fiscal years 2000 through 2006 , we obtained and analyzed investigations - related data from dss and ousd ( c ) , as well as adjudications - related data from dod's two adjudication facilities for industry personnel clearances . when we assessed the reliability of the data pertaining to numbers and costs of investigations and adjudications , we found that some of the information was not available , could not be assessed , or contained discrepancies when compared with data from other sources . since the data for fiscal years 2000 through 2004 were not sufficiently reliable , we have reported numbers and costs for only fiscal years 2005 and 2006 , which were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to determine the extent to which dod has implemented plans to make its clearance program more effective and stable by better estimating the numbers of industry clearances needed , reducing delays and backlogs , and providing adequate funding , we reviewed planning documentation that ousd ( i ) and dss officials provided .