( matter 1 ) . we are making the following four recommendations to dod . this led the navy to consider alternatives . in 2016 , the navy issued a request for proposals to have a commercial company recycle the non - nuclear portions of the ship . the navy also sought information from industry at that time on the potential for a commercial company to dismantle and dispose of the entire ship . in february 2017 , the navy announced it canceled its request for proposals on commercial recycling of non - nuclear portions of the ship and continued assessing its options . as part of this assessment , the navy determined it will not dismantle the entire ship at puget sound naval shipyard . instead , it is focused on two potential options . ( recommendation 1 ) the secretary of defense should require the navy to obtain an independent cost estimate , performed by dod's office of cost analysis and program evaluation or the naval center for cost analysis , for both the naval shipyard and full commercial options before choosing a dismantlement and disposal approach for cvn 65 . ( recommendation 2 ) the secretary of defense should require the navy to complete a risk management plan prior to beginning the cvn 65 dismantlement and disposal . dod and nrc provided written comments , which have been reproduced in appendix ii and appendix iii , respectively . dod and nrc also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense , the secretary of the navy , the nuclear regulatory commission , and other interested parties . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or oakleys@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to the report are listed in appendix iv . this report ( 1 ) describes the differences between the dismantlement and disposal options under consideration , including cost and schedule as well as workload and facilities ; ( 2 ) evaluates the navy's funding and reporting practices for dismantlement and disposal activities ; and ( 3 ) assesses the effect that nuclear regulatory authority considerations have on dismantlement and disposal options for cvn 65 . to identify the differences between the potential cvn 65 dismantlement and disposal options , we reviewed navy documentation on prior , ongoing , and future dismantlement and disposal activities , as well as information related to the different options the navy has considered or is considering for cvn 65 . we interviewed navy officials and reviewed documentation from the naval sea systems command , which includes naval reactors , and puget sound naval shipyard and intermediate maintenance facility ( hereafter referred to as puget sound naval shipyard ) .