add lobbyists . for lobbying activities . lobbyists are also required to submit a quarterly report , also known as an ld - 2 report , for each registration filed . the registration and subsequent ld - 2 reports must disclose: the name of the organization , lobbying firm , or self - employed individual that is lobbying on that client's behalf ; a list of individuals who acted as lobbyists on behalf of the client during whether any lobbyists served as covered executive branch or legislative branch officials in the previous 20 years , known as a “covered official” position ; the name of and further information about the client , including a general description of its business or activities ; information on the general issue areas and corresponding issue codes used to describe lobbying activities ; any foreign entities that have an interest in the client ; whether the client is a state or local government ; information on which federal agencies and house ( s ) of congress the lobbyist contacted on behalf of the client during the reporting period ; the amount of income related to lobbying activities received from the client ( or expenses for organizations with in - house lobbyists ) during the quarter rounded to the nearest $10,000 ; and a list of constituent organizations that contribute more than $5,000 for lobbying in a quarter and actively participate in planning , supervising , or controlling lobbying activities , if the client is a coalition or association . of the 80 ld - 203 reports sampled with contributions reported , 7 sampled reports failed to disclose one or more political contributions that were documented in the fec database . of the 80 ld - 203 reports sampled with no contributions reported , 1 of the sampled reports failed to disclose political contributions that were documented in the fec database . we estimate that among all reports a minimum of 2 percent failed to disclose one or more political contributions . of the 4,553 new registrations we identified from fiscal year 2010 we were able to match 4,132 reports filed in the first quarter in which they were registered , which is a match rate of more than 90 percent of registrations , similar to our prior reviews . to determine whether new registrants were meeting the requirement to file , we matched newly filed registrations in the last quarter of 2009 and the first three quarters of 2010 from the senate and house lobbyists disclosure databases to their corresponding quarterly disclosure reports using an electronic matching algorithm that allowed for misspelling and other minor inconsistencies between the registrations and reports . while most lobbyists we interviewed told us they thought that the reporting requirements were clear , a few lobbyists highlighted areas of potential inconsistency and confusion in applying some aspects of lda reporting requirements . several of the lobbyists said that the secretary of the senate and clerk of the house staff were helpful in providing clarifications when needed . as part of our review , lobbyists present during reviews were asked to rate various terms associated with ld - 2 reporting as being clear and understandable , not clear and understandable , or somewhat clear and understandable .