( recommendation 2 ) . we provided a draft of this report to the army for review and comment . in its written comments , reprinted in appendix ii , the army concurred with our recommendations and provided information on actions it has taken or plans to take to address them . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) and chief financial officer , the deputy chief financial officer , the director of financial improvement and audit readiness , the secretary of the army , and the director of the defense finance and accounting service . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9869 or khana@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . our objectives were to report on the extent to which the journal voucher working group ( working group ) had , as of march 2017 , ( 1 ) performed analyses to determine the root causes of unsupported journal vouchers ( jv ) for the department of the army's ( army ) general fund and ( 2 ) developed and monitored the implementation of corrective action plans to address identified root causes of unsupported jvs . to address our first objective , we reviewed our prior relevant reports and reports by the department of defense ( dod ) and dod's office of inspector general to gain an understanding of the nature of the issues identified related to the army's unsupported jvs for its general fund and how they affect dod's audit readiness as described in the financial improvement and audit readiness ( fiar ) guidance . we also reviewed various army , defense finance and accounting service , and dod financial reporting guidance ; performed walk - throughs of the jv process ; and interviewed agency officials to gain an understanding of the processes for recording jvs and analyzing causes of unsupported jvs , including ( 1 ) the various types of jvs recorded and reasons why the jvs are unsupported , ( 2 ) parties responsible for preparing and approving jvs , and ( 3 ) requirements for determining and documenting the root causes of unsupported jvs and monitoring such efforts . further , we obtained the working group's root cause analyses performed and completed as of march 2017 . we analyzed the documentation provided and interviewed agency officials to determine the extent to which ( 1 ) root cause analyses have been performed for all unsupported jvs of the army's general fund and ( 2 ) root causes had been identified to address the issue of unsupported jvs . we also reviewed documentation provided to determine whether the working group was including all unsupported jvs in the population used for analyses .