spillover effect . market development for one commodity may also increase demand for other commodities — a result known as a spillover effect . for example , almond promotions increase grape exports ( but not vice versa ) . unless such commodities are “co - branded” and marketed together , exporters do not see the spillover effect as a promotion incentive and thus tend to underpromote their own products compared with socially optimal levels . indirect effect . related to the first two sources of market failure , less than optimal amounts of promotion , and therefore of exports , will lead — in what is known as the indirect effect — to less than socially optimal operating levels in other segments of the farm economy and the general economy . uncertain funding . because of uncertainty about annual u.s. government allocations of market development funding , private - sector participants tend to develop short - term ( i.e. , 1 year ) plans that do not take into account the long - term effects of market development . for example , market development expenditures for high - value and bulk commodities have a lagged impact of 7 and 3 years , respectively , so that expenditures in a single year accrue benefits over several years . as a result , private - sector participants tend to underfund market development activities relative to the socially optimal level . to the extent that exports benefit other sectors of the general economy , such as by increasing growers' prices and government tax revenues , there is a compelling public interest in helping firms to develop new export markets for u.s. agricultural commodities . the 2007 cost - benefit analysis that the foreign agricultural service ( fas ) commissioned used a computable general equilibrium model , in addition to a market share model and a spillover effect model , to examine the economic impacts of fas's market access program and the foreign market development program . a computable general equilibrium model is a mathematical expression where all economic relationships are modeled simultaneously . for example , the price of a good depends on the price of all other input goods , profits , and wages , and vice versa , assuming full employment in the economy . compared with the market share or spillover effect model , the computable general equilibrium model includes a more comprehensive list of relevant variables while allowing more parameters to vary . using this model , the 2007 study found the following key results: the fas program and participant promotion expenditures under the 2002 farm bill present an economic - welfare - to - government - expense ratio of 10.3:1 and an economic - welfare - to - total - expense ratio of 5.2:1 . this result translates into an increase in farm cash receipts of $2.2 billion . the fas program and participant promotion expenditures under a hypothetical 2007 farm bill presented a potential economic - welfare - to - government - expense ratio of 8.2:1 and an economic - welfare - to - total - expense ratio of 4.1:1 , with a total economic benefit of $740 million .