gfos . also , for the fiscal year 2008 national defense authorization act , dod proposed eliminating mandatory retirement for years of service or time in grade for gfos above the grade of major general or rear admiral . a senate report accompanying the consolidated appropriations act of 2014 and a house report accompanying the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 mandated that gao assess the trends in costs of the active duty gfo population from fiscal years 2001 to 2013 . this report ( 1 ) identifies any changes in the population and statutory limits for active duty gfos relative to other active duty personnel , and the extent to which dod updated gfo requirements , and ( 2 ) assesses what is known about the costs associated with the active duty gfo population and their aides and any trends in such costs , including trends in gfo compensation costs relative to those of other active duty personnel for fiscal years 2001 through 2013 . end strengths are a measure of the number of personnel on military payrolls on the last day of each fiscal year ( september 30 ) . secretary of defense and the military services responsible for gfo management . we assessed the information we collected against dod guidance that requires military and civilian personnel resources be programmed in accordance with validated requirements that are periodically reevaluated , and a best practices model for strategic human capital management . to assess what is known about the costs associated with the active duty gfo population and their aides from fiscal years 2001 through 2013 , including any trends in gfo compensation costs relative to those of other active duty personnel , we identified the relevant offices in the office of the secretary of defense , the joint staff , and the military departments responsible for managing active duty gfos and aides , along with related costs , such as compensation , housing , and travel ; met with officials at these offices to determine the extent to which data were available for this time frame ; obtained and assessed the reliability of available data ; and analyzed available data , when possible . we used dod's composite standard pay rates to calculate the cost of compensation provided to active duty gfos and enlisted and officer aides from fiscal years 2001 through 2013 . the composite rates are used by dod when determining the military personnel appropriations cost for budget and management studies , but do not include compensation costs located in other budgets , such as education benefits . we identified criteria in dod guidance , federal internal control standards , and federal accounting standards that specify the need for full and reliable personnel and other cost data for the purpose of making operating decisions and allocating resources , and assessed the availability of gfo cost data against those criteria . we defined the gfo - related costs included in our scope as those costs that were ( 1 ) specified in the congressional reports that mandated our work , ( 2 ) consistent with our prior body of work on military compensation , or ( 3 ) determined as gfo - related costs based on discussions with knowledgeable officials .