the relationship between the army and the lsi is complicated . on the one hand , the lsi plays the traditional role of developing a product for its customer , the army , and on the other hand the lsi acts like a partner to the army in ensuring the design , development , and prototype implementation of the fcs network and family of systems . in forging a partner - like relationship with the lsi , the army sought to gain managerial advantages such as maintaining flexibility to deal with shifting priorities . a partner - like relationship also poses long - term risks for the government . depending on the closeness of the working relationship , the government's ability to provide oversight can be reduced compared with an arms - length relationship ; more specifically , the government can become increasingly vested in the results of shared decisions and runs the risk of being less able to provide oversight compared with an arms - length relationship , especially when the government is disadvantaged in terms of workforce and skills . in the case of fcs , these risks are present . the army is more involved in the selection of subcontractors than we have seen on other programs , involvement that can , over time , make the army somewhat responsible for the lsi's subcontracting network . on the other hand , the lsi is more involved with influencing the requirements , defining the solution , and testing that solution than we have seen on other programs . it must complete requirements definition and technology maturity . the spin - out capabilities must be demonstrated before committing to production . finally , the program schedule must allocate sufficient time , as needed , to test , fix and retest throughout the fcs test program . each fcs system , the information network , and the fcs concept should be thoroughly tested and demonstrated before committing to low rate initial production in 2013 . in 2006 , we reported that fcs program acquisition costs had increased to $160.7 billion — 76 percent — since the army's original estimate of $91.4 billion ( figures adjusted for inflation ) . while the army's current estimate of $163.7 billion is essentially the same , an independent estimate from the office of the secretary of defense puts the acquisition cost of fcs between $203 billion and $234 billion . the comparatively low level of technology and design knowledge at this point in the program portends future cost increases . our work on a broad base of dod weapon system programs shows that most developmental cost increases occur after the critical design review , which will be in 2011 for the fcs . yet , by that point in time , the army will have spent about 80 percent of the fcs's development funds . system integration must be completed and the army should be preparing to have released at least 90 percent of the engineering drawings by the time of the critical design review , a best practice . further , the army has not yet fully estimated the cost of essential complementary programs and the procurement of spin - out items to the current force .