about one quarter of those who used the programs were veterans . homelessness in america is a significant and complex problem . according to a survey conducted for the federal interagency council on the homeless in 1996 , 85 percent of homeless clients were single , predominately male and nonwhite , and almost 40 percent had less than a high school diploma . about 15 percent of homeless clients were families that had on average , two children . forty - two percent of homeless clients reported that finding a job was their top need followed by a need for help in finding affordable housing . almost 60 percent reported at least one problem with getting enough food to eat during the 30 days before being interviewed . about 40 percent reported alcohol problems in the past month , 26 percent reported drug problems , and 39 percent reported mental health problems during that period . as the survey demonstrates , the homeless population is far from homogenous . for many homeless people , particularly those in homeless families , homelessness is a short - term or episodic event . these individuals may require little more than emergency shelter to help them through a difficult situation . for other homeless people , particularly those with severe substance abuse or mental health disorders , homelessness is a chronic condition ; these individuals may require intensive and ongoing supportive services in addition to housing . as a result , the types of assistance that different homeless people and families require vary greatly . hud has responsibility for administering a homeless assistance grant account funded at about $1 billion in fiscal year 2002 . the homeless assistance grant account was created to provide funding for hud's four key homeless assistance programs: emergency shelter grants: this program is intended to improve the quality of existing emergency shelters for homeless people and makes additional shelters available for this population . under the current application process , communities are required to provide a continuum of care plan and an individual application for each project in that plan for which funds are being requested from any of the three programs . in addition , hud now uses the same core rating criteria for making award decisions for all three programs . by streamlining the application process , hud's goal was to lower the costs and problems of program administration for service and housing providers , with the expectation that this would enable providers to spend more of their resources on implementing the programs . grants can be used to provide rental assistance payments for either 5 or 10 years depending on the type of rental assistance requested and whether the grantee meets other program requirements . section 8 single - room occupancy moderate rehabilitation: the single - room occupancy program brings more standard single - room occupancy units into the local housing supply and makes them available to homeless individuals . these housing units are intended for occupancy by a single person and may or may not contain either food preparation or sanitary facilities .