( see fig . during the april – june 2002 quarter , high - and medium - endurance cutters logged over 27,000 hours for law enforcement missions , compared with about 1,100 hours for security missions . this is in marked contrast to the quarter immediately following september 11th , when hours for the two types of missions were about the same . however , security hours rose sharply again in the july – september 2002 quarter . according to coast guard officials , this increase came in response to the office of homeland security's raising the national threat level from “elevated” to “high” risk . are there operational efficiencies that the coast guard can consider as a way to help accomplish all of its missions in 2003 and beyond ? what framework would help the congress monitor levels of effort and results attained for all coast guard missions ? to answer these questions , we conducted such activities as reviewing coast guard documents and records and visiting coast guard installations to determine how activities were being affected . the districts we visited spanned three coasts — east , west , and gulf . our work , which was conducted from december 2001 through october 2002 , was done in accordance with generally accepted governmental auditing standards . we conducted our work at coast guard headquarters and at five of the coast guard's nine districts . a detailed description of our scope and methodology appears in appendix i . the coast guard , a department of transportation agency , is involved in seven main mission or program areas: ( 1 ) enforcement of maritime laws and treaties ; ( 2 ) search and rescue ; ( 3 ) aids to navigation ; ( 4 ) marine environmental protection ; ( 5 ) marine safety and security ( including homeland security ) ; ( 6 ) defense readiness ; and ( 7 ) ice operations . the coast guard has two major commands that are responsible for the overall mission performance in the pacific and atlantic areas . these commands are further organized into a total of nine districts , which in turn are organized into a number of groups , marine safety offices , and air stations . groups provide more localized command and control of field units , such as small boat stations , and patrol boats . marine safety offices are located at coastal ports and on inland waterways , and they are responsible for the overall safety and security of maritime activities and for environmental protection in their geographic areas . to accomplish these varying missions and responsibilities , the coast guard operates a variety of equipment ( see table 1 ) , including high - and medium - endurance cutters , patrol boats , and aircraft . a federal agency that is also part of the armed services , the coast guard has both military and civilian positions . at the end of fiscal year 2001 , the agency had over 41,000 total full - time positions — about 36,100 military and about 5,700 civilians . the coast guard also has about 8,000 reservists who support the national military strategy and provide additional operational support and surge capacity during emergencies , such as natural disasters .