this statement only includes unclassified information . ( see appendix i for details on our scope and methodology. ) we conducted work for this statement in february and march 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the coalition provisional authority ( cpa ) , established in may 2003 , was the u.n. - recognized coalition authority led by the united states and the united kingdom that was responsible for the temporary governance of iraq . state had also provided weekly unclassified updates on the number of personnel trained in each unit . in addition , the total number of iraqi security forces includes forces with varying missions and training levels . the multinational force's security transition plan depends on neutralizing the insurgent threat and increasing iraqi security capability . the insurgent threat has increased since june 2003 , as insurgent attacks have grown in number , sophistication , and complexity . at the same time , mnf - i and the iraqi government confront difficulties to building iraqi security forces that are capable of effectively combating the insurgency . these include programming effective support for a changing force structure , assessing progress in developing capable forces without a system for measuring their readiness , developing leadership and loyalty throughout the iraqi chain of command , and developing police who abide by the rule of law in a hostile environment . according to senior military officials , the insurgency in iraq — particularly the sunni insurgency — has grown in number , complexity , and intensity over the past 18 months . on february 3 , 2005 , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff told the senate armed services committee that the insurgency in iraq had built up slowly during the first year , then became very intense from summer 2004 through january 2005 . on the other hand , he also cited instances of poor performance by the police in western baghdad from august through october 2004 and mosul during november 2004 . u.s. government data does not provide reliable information on the status of iraqi military and police forces . according to a march 2005 state department report , as of february 28 , 2005 , the iraqi ministry of defense had 59,695 operational troops , or roughly two thirds of the total required . the ministry of interior had 82,072 trained and equipped officers on duty , or almost half of the total required . table 1 shows status of iraqi forces under the ministries of defense and interior . mnf - i's goal is to train and equip a total of about 271,000 iraqi security forces by july 2006 . however , the numbers of security forces , as reported in table 1 , are limited in providing accurate and complete information on the status of iraqi forces . specifically: the reported number of security forces overstates the number actually serving . ministry of interior reports , for example , include police who are absent without leave in its totals . ministry of defense reports exclude the absent military personnel from its totals . additionally , the report states that corruption continued to be a problem .