army . army officials told us that they partnered with the army public health center to build evidence - based mwr programs . based on this review , the army found that army mwr community recreation and fitness programs have not been formally evaluated as directed by dod instruction 1015.10 requirements to measure and assess programs . additionally , the army found that , while the army office of the assistant chief of staff for installation management provides program oversight , it does not possess the capability to conduct program evaluations . according to the results of the army public health center report issued in june 2017 , the army initiated a three - phase approach for evaluating its mwr programs . the report showed that assessing the evaluability of the army mwr programs is phase one . according to the army , these evaluations will enable the army to validate program outcomes and better position itself to compete for scarce resources . the report also showed that many of the 13 army mwr programs selected for review do not have direct links between activities and the priority outcomes with behavioral , social , and physical health , and that they do not have sufficient outcomes data that have been consistently collected . army officials said that phase two will include the development of formal evaluation plans for selected evaluable mwr programs . lastly , army officials said that phase three will be the execution of the evaluation for two selected mwr programs , which is on target to be completed by december 2018 . while army officials are learning how to evaluate programs through this partnership with the army public health center , they said that they have also learned that these endeavors are costly . officials said that a very modest program evaluation requires approximately $300,000 to $500,000 . army officials also stated that program evaluation requires support and participation by those organizations and people that deliver the programs . furthermore , according to army officials , resource reductions at the operational level ( garrisons ) are increasingly restrictive , preventing them from collecting critical information to support this multiphase effort . navy . navy officials said that they use the mwr enterprise modeling system , which is based on performance measures that have been developed and routinely reviewed and updated by headquarters , regional , and installation program managers . the mwr enterprise modeling system is used as the baseline for the annual mwr performance data call that measures actual program performance against performance standards . navy officials said that the performance measures provide the business strategy and guidance to ensure efficient , effective and market - driven delivery of programs and services . marine corps . marine corps officials said they collaborated with the rand corporation to provide an analytically rigorous assessment framework to evaluate program performance . the rand corporation provided draft measures of performance . marine corps officials said that the rand corporation also provided a user guide that outlines an evaluation methodology and ensures consistent and standard application . marine corps officials said that they are reviewing the draft measures to determine appropriate data collection and have drafted an implementation plan .