( see app . we also interviewed dod officials , including officials from the defense health agency ( dha ) , which oversees the tricare program , and the tricare regional offices , which oversee health care delivery in each tricare region , to understand the development and function of the plan , as well as the planned approach to addressing each element . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or at draperd@gao.gov . contact points for our office of congressional relations and office of public affairs can be found on the last page of this report . other major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . this appendix provides additional information regarding six elements identified by our prior work as leading practices for strategic management planning to establish a comprehensive , results - oriented framework . ( see table 3. ) in addition to the contact named above , bonnie anderson ( assistant director ) , daniel klabunde ( analyst - in - charge ) , and karen belli made key contributions to this report . also contributing were jacquelyn hamilton and elizabeth t. morrison . therefore , while dod officials were developing the tricare select implementation plan , they had to determine the specific program requirements for this option and modify the contracts to account for these changes . leading practice on challenges and risks may be captured through contract oversight mechanisms we also found that dod's implementation plan did not address the leading practice related to recognizing the challenges or risks to success for any of the seven elements . this practice ensures that an organization considers any external factors that could significantly affect the achievement of its goal . for example , for element a — ensure that at least 85 percent of the beneficiary population is covered by the network — the implementation plan did not address what challenges and risks the contractors might experience in establishing this network . for example , one of the two managed care support contractors stated that it did not have data on the beneficiaries who had sought coverage under tricare standard and extra as these beneficiaries did not have to enroll in these health plan options . thus , the contractor explained that it was difficult to establish a baseline for calculating the 85 percent network coverage required for tricare select . the other managed care support contractor told us that specific challenges included negotiating provider discounts in certain areas , identifying which providers participated in the past , and balancing the composition of the network between primary and specialty care . however , dod officials told us that they considered and planned for the challenges and risks associated with certain elements — including establishing a monitoring and remediation process to help ensure contractors meet the 85 percent network coverage requirement — even though this was not described in the plan . dod officials explained that their approach to the implementation plan was to create a strategic overview rather than a detailed work plan .