iv. ) the department of commerce also provided technical comments , which we incorporated into the report , as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees and the departments of state and commerce . we also will make copies available to others on request . what factors enabled the expansion of offshoring in these industries ? as these industries have become more global , what have been the trends in their u.s. – based activities ? to answer these questions , we analyzed data and other research to develop a broad understanding of these industries . we conducted research on how these industries developed offshoring relationships in specific countries — taiwan and china for semiconductor manufacturing and india for software services . we examined the available literature on both industries ; analyzed u.s. government data on foreign investment and trade in these industries ; and interviewed representatives from firms and private sector associations , as well as industry analysts in the united states , taiwan , china , and india . we conducted our analysis in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards from october 2005 through august 2006 . a detailed description of our methodology appears in appendix i . “offshoring” generally refers to an organization's replacement of goods and services produced domestically with imports from foreign sources . for example , if a u.s. - based company decides to move its computer programming activities to an overseas supplier , this would be considered offshoring . the overseas supplier may be an affiliate of the company , in which case the company has also invested overseas . in contrast , the supplier may be unrelated to the domestic company , in which case the company has outsourced its computer programming activities , as well as offshored them . semiconductors are devices that enable computers and other products such as telecommunication systems to store and process information . semiconductor device fabrication is the process used to create “chips,” the integrated circuits that are present in everyday electrical and electronic products . it is a multiple - step sequence of photographic and chemical processing steps during which electronic circuits are gradually created on a wafer made of pure semiconducting material , most commonly silicon . improvement in the performance of increasingly sophisticated electronics products depends on more powerful semiconductors that can store more information and process it faster . demand for semiconductors is driven by the demand for computers and communications products that use them . the semiconductor manufacturing process can be divided into three distinct stages: ( 1 ) design of the semiconductor integrated circuit , ( 2 ) fabrication of the semiconductor wafer , and ( 3 ) assembly and testing of the finished integrated circuit . the design and fabrication processes are the most capital - intensive , while the assembly and testing process tends to be more labor - intensive , although still relatively technologically sophisticated . for example , semiconductors are designed by computer engineers with the assistance of advanced software . they are then fabricated using chemicals , gases , and materials combined in an intricate series of operations using complex manufacturing equipment to produce wafers containing a large number of chips .