usda has such authority . in fact , usda is legally required to review certifications made by other countries that their meat and poultry food safety systems ensure compliance with u.s. standards and usda must also conduct on - site inspections before those products can be exported to the united states . at this time , 37 countries are approved to export meat and poultry products to the united states . frequency of inspections is not based on risk . under current law , usda inspectors maintain continuous inspection at slaughter facilities and examine each slaughtered meat and poultry carcass . they also visit each processing plant at least once during each operating day . for foods under fda jurisdiction , however , federal law does not mandate the frequency of inspections . the differences in inspection frequencies are , at times , quite arbitrary , as in the case of jointly regulated food products . for example , as we testified in 2001 , federal responsibilities for regulating the production and processing of a packaged ham and cheese sandwich depends on whether the sandwich is made with one or two slices of bread , not on the risk associated with its ingredients . as a result , facilities that produce closed - faced sandwiches are inspected on average once every 5 years by fda , whereas facilities that produce open - faced sandwiches are inspected daily by fsis . federal expenditures are not based on the volume of foods regulated , consumed , or their risk of foodborne illness . fda and fsis food safety efforts are based on the respective legislation governing their operation . as a result , expenditures for food safety activities are disproportionate to the amount of food products each agency regulates and to the level of public consumption of those food products . fda is responsible for ensuring the safety of approximately 79 percent of the foods americans consume annually , while its budget represented only 40 percent ( $508 million ) of the approximately $1.3 billion spent on food safety oversight during fiscal year 2003 . in contrast , fsis inspects approximately 21 percent of the foods americans consume annually , while its food safety budget represented 60 percent ( $756 million ) of the federal expenditures for food safety in 2003 . figure 2 shows the imbalance between the dollar amounts that the agencies spend on food safety activities and the volume of foods americans consume annually . perhaps more importantly , the agencies' food safety expenditures are disproportionate to the percentage of foodborne illnesses linked to the food products they regulate . for example , according to foodborne illness data compiled by the cdc , usda - regulated foods account for about 32 percent of reported foodborne outbreaks with known sources . conversely , fda - regulated foods account for about 68 percent of these outbreaks . ( see fig . yet , usda's food safety expenditures are about 49 percent more than fda's . finally , as figure 4 shows , fsis has 9,170 employees that are , by law , responsible for daily oversight of approximately 6,464 meat , poultry , and egg product plants .