review and they agreed with the content . to assess fema's practice of determining the amounts it pays to wyo insurance companies for their services without considering the companies' actual expenses , we compared the payments fema made to six wyo companies to the companies' actual flood insurance expenses . insurance companies report flood insurance expense data in annual statements that are submitted to naic , which also include expenses for the companies' other property and casualty lines of business . the six wyos we selected wrote flood insurance policies whose premiums totaled approximately 53 percent of the total wyo program premiums in fiscal year 2007 . our sample is not a representative sample of all wyos , so the results of our analysis cannot be generalized to the universe of wyos . we reviewed naic and fema flood financial information to assess the reliability of the information for our purposes . because fema's payments to wyos are determined by applying various proxies to premiums written or claim losses , we identified differences between the written premiums and claim losses that the companies reported to fema and naic . we obtained from wyo company officials explanations of these differences and determined that they would not significantly impact the companies' flood expenses . further , to review the payments and expenses for the six companies selected , we converted fema's fiscal year wyo payment data to calendar year amounts for comparison to calendar year actual expenses reported to naic ; recalculated the expense payments reported by the six wyos to fema on a test basis , using the written premium and claim losses incurred amounts the wyos reported to fema and fema's payment rates , all without exception ; and interviewed officials of the wyos regarding their flood operations , accounting for and assignment of expenses to the flood line , and reporting of flood line data to naic . to assist in comparing actual expenses to the expense payments , we adjusted the wyos' reported flood expenses in cases where , for example , companies offset their expenses incurred with the payments they received from fema . whether actual expenses are stable or otherwise is not relevant . fema stated that while we acknowledge in the body of our report that the years we reviewed — 2005 to 2007 — included the heaviest loss years in the history of the program and that these years are not indicative of typical years for loss adjustment expenses , we do not carry these caveats forward to our conclusions . fema stated that this results in a significant distortion of the expense reimbursement to wyo companies for the loss adjustment expenses . we did consider the unusually high losses in 2005 and 2006 when reaching our conclusion that fema sets rates for paying wyos for their services without knowing how much of its payments cover expenses and how much is for profit . ; ( 3 ) various audits by independent cpas , including required biennial audits , audits for cause , and state insurance department audits ; and ( 4 ) triennial operation reviews performed by fema staff .