( see fig . dod , nrc , and the department of transportation did not comment on this report . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretaries of agriculture , defense , health and human services , homeland security , and transportation ; the chairman of nrc ; the director of cdc ; the administrator of aphis ; and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact timothy m. persons , chief scientist , at ( 202 ) 512-6412 or personst@gao.gov or john neumann , director , natural resources and environment , at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or neumannj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . this appendix describes the steps we took to confirm the applicability of five elements of effective oversight we have used in the past for our evaluation of the federal select agent program ( select agent program ) . we have used these key elements in the past for assessing the effectiveness of oversight in other areas where low probability adverse events can have significant and far - reaching effects . these elements are as follows: independence: the organization conducting oversight should be structurally distinct and separate from the entities it oversees . ability to perform reviews: the organization should have the access and working knowledge necessary to review compliance with requirements . technical expertise: the organization should have sufficient staff with the expertise to perform sound safety and security assessments . transparency: the organization should provide access to key information , as applicable , to those most affected by operations . enforcement authority: the organization should have clear and sufficient authority to require that entities achieve compliance with requirements . we took several steps to confirm the applicability of these elements for our examination of the select agent program . first , we discussed the applicability of the criteria with senior officials from both components of the select agent program , within the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) and the animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) . hhs and usda — the agencies to whose components our recommendations are directed — both provided written comments agreeing with all of our recommendations . these comments are reprinted in appendixes iii and iv , respectively . in their comments , hhs and usda provided additional information about steps they are taking , or planning to take , to improve their oversight of select agents and to address our recommendations .