testing . twenty of the 28 stakeholders we contacted identified concerns or made recommendations related to cms's icd - 10 testing activities . their comments focused on cms's lack of comprehensive icd - 10 testing , as well as the need to communicate the future test results to covered entities . lack of comprehensive testing . seventeen stakeholders raised concerns that cms's icd - 10 testing was not comprehensive . specifically , some of these stakeholders were concerned that cms has not yet conducted medicare ffs end - to - end testing . additionally , some of these stakeholders were concerned that cms would not include enough covered entities in its testing . for example , one stakeholder expressed concern that not all provider types , such as small providers , would be represented in the planned testing . another stakeholder was concerned that the number of testing participants may not be large enough to get a true sense of industry readiness or the ability of cms to properly process the full range of icd - 10 codes . as previously noted , cms officials said that the agency has scheduled medicare ffs end - to - end testing with a total of 2,550 covered entities during three separate weeks in 2015 , and identified staffing and financial constraints as the reason for limiting the number of covered entities participating in the scheduled testing . however , agency officials indicated that the number of covered entities they plan to test with will exceed the number requested by some industry groups . in addition , cms officials said they are committed to ensuring that the testing participants are representative of the health care industry . communicate test results . seven stakeholders we contacted recommended cms better communicate the agency's readiness for the icd - 10 transition , by , for example , improving communication of test results . two of these stakeholders indicated that doing a better job communicating test results would not only increase confidence that cms will be prepared to process claims , but also would help providers identify modifications needed in their own coding or billing practices . cms officials noted that the agency intends to publicly release the results of medicare ffs end - to - end testing once the agency has completed its analysis of each of the three scheduled testing periods . specifically , cms's communications plan indicates that the agency intends to report on the results of each testing period within a month of when the testing is completed . cms officials told us that the report will provide details about the types and numbers of testing participants , technical challenges that arise during testing , and cms's plans for fixing them . education . twenty of the 28 stakeholders we contacted identified concerns or recommendations related to cms's covered entity education efforts . specifically , these stakeholders' comments focused on whether covered entities were aware of cms's educational materials to help them prepare for the icd - 10 transition . these stakeholders suggested cms emphasize benefits from transitioning to icd - 10 , as well as best practices and success stories , expand in - person training , and develop more specialty - specific materials . covered entity awareness of educational materials .