regulations . in may 2016 , cms updated its regulations for managed care programs in order to strengthen oversight . the updated regulations require a number of additional program integrity activities , such as those listed below . if fully implemented , these updated regulations may help with the identification and removal of overpayments and unallowable costs from data used to set future capitation rates . under these regulations states must arrange for an independent audit of the accuracy , truthfulness , and completeness of the encounter and financial data submitted by mcos , at least once every 3 years . through contracts with mcos , states must require mcos to have a mechanism through which providers report and return overpayments to the mcos . states must also require mcos to promptly report any identified or recovered overpayments — specifying those that are potentially fraudulent — and submit an annual report on recovered overpayments to their state . states must use this information when setting actuarially sound capitation rates . through contracts with mcos , states must also require mcos to report specific data , information , and documentation . in addition , the mco's chief executive officer or authorized representative must certify the accuracy and completeness of the reported data , information , and documentation . states must enroll mco providers that are not otherwise enrolled with the state to provide services to enrollees in medicaid ffs , and revalidate the enrollment at least once every 5 years . initially this requirement was to start for mco contracts beginning on july 1 , 2018 . subsequently enacted legislation codified this requirement in statute and moved the implementation to january 1 , 2018 . it is too early to know if these regulations will assure better oversight of mco payments to providers and the data used to set future capitation rates . the above program integrity requirements only went into effect recently — for contracts starting on or after july 1 , 2017 , and january 1 , 2018 . in addition , cms issued a notice in june 2017 stating that the agency will use its enforcement discretion to assist states that are unable to implement new requirements by the required compliance date . also , cms has delayed issuance of implementing guidance for certain provisions until the agency completes its review , a step that may further delay states' implementation . the agency has designated medicaid managed care for “deregulatory action” and plans to propose a new rule , but has not indicated which of these provisions , if any , would be revised . focused program integrity reviews . in fiscal year 2014 , cms implemented its focused program integrity reviews in order to target high - risk program integrity areas in each state , including managed care . as we previously reported , these focused reviews are narrower in scope than the prior reviews conducted by cms , but they still involve on - site visits to states . in its focused reviews of managed care , cms found that several states had incomplete oversight of mco payments to providers , even though the agency relies on states to verify reported mco overpayments and to ensure the overpayments are excluded from the data used to set capitation rates .