lack of reliable contract management data . although cms had generally reliable information on the basic attributes of each contract action , such as vendor name and obligation amount , cms lacked reliable management information on other key aspects of its far - based contracting operations . for example , in our october 2009 report we identified acquisition data errors related to the number of certain contract types awarded , the extent of competition achieved , and total contract value . standards for internal control provide that for an agency to manage its operations , it must have relevant , reliable , and timely information relating to the extent and nature of its operations , including both operational and financial data , and such information should be recorded and communicated to management and others within the agency who need it and in a form and within a time frame that enables them to carry out their internal control and operational responsibilities . the acquisition data errors were due in part to a lack of sufficient quality assurance activities over the data entered into the acquisition databases . without accurate data , cms program managers did not have adequate information to identify , monitor , and correct or mitigate areas that posed a high risk of improper payments or waste . lack of follow - up to resolve contract audit and evaluation findings . cms did not track , investigate , and resolve contract audit and evaluation findings for purposes of cost recovery and future award decisions . tracking audit and evaluation findings strengthens the control environment in part because it can help assure management that the agency's objectives are being met through the efficient and effective use of the agency's resources . control activities include both preventive and detective controls . a control activity can be preventive , detective , or both based on when the control occurs in the contract life cycle . additional , detailed background information is available in our related report , gao - 10-60 . according to the far , a cost reimbursement contract may be used only when the contractor's accounting system is adequate for determining costs applicable to the contract . to illustrate , of the contract awards in our sample , we found nine cases in which cost reimbursement contracts were used without first ensuring that the contractor had an adequate accounting system . our october 2009 report identified pervasive deficiencies in internal control over contracting and payments to contractors . specifically , as a result of our work , we estimated that at least 84.3 percent of far - based contract actions made by cms in fiscal year 2008 contained at least one instance in which 1 of 11 key controls was not adequately implemented . not only was the number of internal control deficiencies widespread , but also many contract actions had more than one deficiency . we estimated that at least 37.2 percent of far - based contract actions made in fiscal year 2008 had three or more instances in which a key control was not adequately implemented . the internal control deficiencies occurred throughout the contracting process and increased the risk of improper payments or waste .