the army concurred with all of these recommendations . you asked us to continue monitoring the army's efforts to deploy lmp and evaluate the army's progress in addressing the issues that are critical to successful implementation . accordingly , the objective of this review was to evaluate the extent to which the army will achieve the intended functionality of lmp during the third deployment . to address this objective , we reviewed and analyzed the army plans and policies that governed lmp implementation . we met with officials at the lmp program management office in marlton , new jersey , to discuss their plans to assist the sites in preparing for the third deployment of lmp . we also met with officials at the army materiel command to discuss how they were managing the third deployment , as well as with officials at the army logistics support activity to discuss their role in monitoring the data . to assess what steps the third deployment sites were taking with respect to preparing for lmp , we met with officials at the army sustainment command , the joint munitions and lethality life cycle management command , and the tank - automotive and armaments command . we also visited eight sites that are scheduled to deploy lmp during the third deployment , specifically , two army depots , three army arsenals , two ammunition storage locations , and an army location that manages the army's pre - positioned stocks . in order to determine the extent to which the intended functionality of lmp was being achieved at the sites that deployed lmp in may 2009 , we also visited the aviation and missile command , corpus christi army depot , and letterkenny army depot . in addition , because of their role in providing oversight of the army's lmp implementation , we provided our preliminary observations to the director of the army's office of business transformation and the department of defense ( dod ) deputy chief management officer , as well as to officials from the office of the deputy chief of staff of the army for logistics and the deputy commanding general of the army materiel command . army officials at the depots also told us that their ability to use the army workload and performance system was directly related to the quality of the data in lmp , and that until the data in lmp are corrected , they do not expect the reports to be accurate . despite the data issues , depot officials at both corpus christi army depot and letterkenny army depot stated that lmp is an improvement over the previous legacy systems because it has increased visibility over assets and provided a single source of data for decision making . for example , officials at corpus christi army depot told us that lmp has enhanced their ability to share information and interact with original equipment manufacturers , and that they now have increased visibility over contractor - managed inventories compared to that under the legacy systems . lmp program management officials told us that 29 of these sites will significantly use lmp .