gao - 17-557 . washington , d.c.: july 20 , 2017 . ( recommendation 2 ) . we provided a draft of the classified report to dod for comment . in its comments , reproduced in appendix i , dod concurred with both of our recommendations . in response to our first recommendation , dod indicated that the director , cape , will issue supplementary guidance for the relevant dod components to identify and document key risks related to implementation of recommendations from the 2014 reviews , risks related to implementation of alternate approaches , and potential unintended consequences . in response to our second recommendation , dod stated that dod cio will work with the stakeholders of the council on oversight of the national leadership command , control , and communications system to identify and document performance measures and milestones associated with progress toward the recommendations from the 2015 nc3 report , as well as the risks related to implementation of these recommendations . we are encouraged that dod is planning to take these actions and believe that , once they have been completed , the department will be better positioned to ensure that progress in implementing the recommendations from both the 2014 nuclear enterprise reviews and the 2015 nc3 report continues to be made , underlying problems within the defense nuclear enterprise are addressed , and risks are mitigated or accepted after deliberate consideration . dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , and to the secretary of defense ; the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics ; the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff ; the secretaries of the army , of the navy , and of the air force ; the commandant of the marine corps ; the commander , u.s. strategic command ; the department of defense chief information officer ; and the director of the office of cost assessment and program evaluation . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9971 or kirschbaumj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . in addition to the contact named above , key contributors to this report were penney harwell caramia , assistant director ; chris cronin ; r. scott fletcher ; jonathan gill ; brent helt ; douglas hunker ; joanne landesman ; marc molino ; amie lesser ; pamela davidson ; and michael shaughnessy . nuclear weapons sustainment: budget estimates report contains more information than in prior fiscal years , but transparency can be improved . nuclear weapons: dod assessed the need for each leg of the strategic triad and considered other reductions to nuclear force . each service inspected additional specific areas .