we provided drafts of this report to nara and omb for comment . ogis has a documented process for handling the requests that it receives . specifically , when a request is received — by phone , e - mail , fax , or electronically through its website — a case file is opened and assigned a tracking number in an automated case management system . once a case has been opened , the office goes through a fact - finding process to determine what services are called for , such as , helping the parties exchange information or suggesting options for resolution . for each case , further actions taken by ogis and the other parties involved , as well as any agreements reached , are recorded in the case management system . the office commented on six such requests during these 2 years . for example , the office suggested that agencies include model language in their system of records notices that would allow ogis to share information with the affected agency as a permitted disclosure under the privacy act . according to the officials , without the model language , ogis would be required to obtain written consent from each requester prior to being able to access their records when mediating a dispute . further , through various means ( for example , foia roundtable meetings , website , and blog ) in 2012 and 2013 , ogis invited agencies to submit foia correspondence , such as acknowledgment and close - out letters , for its review . we found the data sources to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to assess the office's actions to recommend policy changes to congress and the president , we analyzed its documents describing policy recommendations that were made to congress and the president . in addition , we reviewed the office of management and budget's ( omb ) written responses describing its reviews of ogis's policy recommendations and any applicable omb guidance , such as the circular a - 19 and we interviewed officials from omb's office of general counsel . nevertheless , while ogis has engaged in these specific activities , none was a proactive , comprehensive evaluation of federal agencies' foia policies and procedures . moreover , the office has not conducted any reviews of agencies' compliance with foia . rather , the office has generally worked in an ad hoc , reactive manner to respond to federal register proposals put forth by agencies or to seek opportunities to comment or provide training on correspondence and documentation other than foia policies and procedures . furthermore , the activities that it has undertaken have been limited to engaging with only a small fraction of the 99 federal agencies that , according to justice , have responsibility for implementing foia .