dod did not concur with our recommendations . dod further commented that the report confuses a program budget decision , which is an internal document , with the president's budget , which is the official explanation of dod's budget request , and that funds are not appropriated in accordance with a program budget decision . in addition , dod commented that the report's focus on the program budget decision results in the inaccurate conclusion that if dod had considered these funds it could have reduced the army's gwot gap and eliminated the gwot gaps of the air force and navy . in that regard , dod stated that the only resources available to the department are those appropriated by the congress and these funds were considered when determining the needs and expenses of the war . we recognize that a program budget decision is an internal document and that the president's budget is the official explanation of dod's budget request and that funds appropriated are determined by the congress — not by either a program budget decision or the president's budget . in our report , we refer to program budget decision 736 and the president's budget not to establish how much money the congress appropriated to support gwot , but to establish how much money dod intended for gwot . as stated in our report , according to a representative from the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , in december 2001 the president directed that his annual budget submission for dod be increased by about $10 billion annually to support gwot . consequently , program budget decision 736 , entitled continuing the war on terrorism and dated january 31 , 2002 , was approved by the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) . program budget decision 736 provided for increasing dod's annual budget request in the amount of more than $10 billion per year plus inflation in fiscal years 2003 through 2007 to enhance the department's efforts to respond to , or protect against , acts or threatened acts of terrorism against the united states . we therefore believe that since the funds referenced in program budget decision 736 were specifically identified as being requested in support of gwot , dod should maintain visibility over how these funds were used to support gwot . we believe that if dod asks for a significant increase in appropriations and explains that the increase is needed to support gwot , dod should be able to show that it actually used those funds for gwot . dod did not concur with our recommendations that the secretary of defense ( 1 ) adjust future supplemental appropriations requests to reflect the additional funds dod received in its annual appropriations to support gwot and explain these adjustments to the congress and ( 2 ) also consider the additional gwot funds provided through dod's annual appropriations in addressing any future gwot funding needs . if you have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9619 or pickups@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .