adverse action . this involves a suspension of more than 14 days ( including an indefinite suspension ) , demotion to a lower pay band or rate of pay , or removal ( an involuntary separation from employment ) . according to the u.s . merit systems protection board , an indefinite suspension is appropriate when evidence exists to demonstrate misconduct of a serious nature , such as an employee has committed a crime for which a sentence of imprisonment can be imposed , when the agency has concerns that an employee's medical condition makes the person's presence in the workplace dangerous or inappropriate , or when an employee's access to classified information has been suspended . atf and usms have case management systems that are designed to maintain employee misconduct data – – such as the date of the alleged incident , source of the allegation , description of the alleged misconduct , and the status of the investigation . atf's professional review board uses another system to manage outcome data associated with internal affairs investigations . after adjudication of atf internal affairs investigations , the board is to provide this outcome data to atf internal affairs for inclusion in its system . similarly , after the adjudication of management referrals for action , atf managers are to provide outcome data to atf internal affairs to include in its system . in addition to the system usms uses to manage internal affairs investigations , the agency has a separate system to record outcome data . our analysis of atf employee misconduct data found that atf opened 1,581 employee misconduct investigations during fiscal years 2014 through 2018 . as shown in table 1 , the majority of atf misconduct cases during this period were management referrals to divisions for informational purposes or for action . table 2 shows that the most common allegation category of misconduct that atf received from fiscal year 2014 through 2018 was job performance failure , representing 8 percent of all allegations , which includes not attending meetings , submitting reports of inspection late , or becoming agitated during performance feedback , among other things . after investigations are completed , results are forwarded to the professional review board for adjudication , and adjudication results are to be entered into atf's human resources system . for investigations that were adjudicated during the period we reviewed , six types of offense categories made up about 60 percent of those substantiated and captured in the atf human resources system , as shown in figure 2 . the exercise of poor judgment ( 14 percent ) and the failure to adequately secure government property ( 13 percent ) were the most common offenses . the employee misconduct outcomes for offenses ranged from corrective actions ( eg , letters of counseling or caution ) to adverse actions such as suspensions and removals . specifically , of the 503 investigations that had final actions reported in atf case management system , disciplinary action — suspensions of 15 days or less and letters of reprimand — accounted for 176 ( about 35 percent ) of the final outcomes . also , 135 ( about 27 percent ) of investigations adjudicated resulted in corrective actions ( cautions such as a verbal or written warning ) .