pub . 106-246 , division b , ยง 112 ( 2000 ) . standards and the department's interagency biometrics information sharing efforts . as agreed with your offices , given the continued importance of biometrics in military combat operations in afghanistan , this report examines the extent to which ( 1 ) dod's biometrics training supports warfighter use of biometrics , ( 2 ) dod is effectively collecting and transmitting biometrics data , and ( 3 ) dod has developed a process to collect and disseminate biometrics lessons learned . while forces under special operations command collect a small proportion of biometrics in afghanistan , the collections they do make are often from specific , high - value individuals . due to rounding , percentages do not total 100 percent . from the army and marine corps lessons learned centers as well as knowledgeable joint staff , military service , central command , special operations command , and biometrics identity management agency officials . more detailed information on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i of this report . we conducted this performance audit from may 2011 through april 2012 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . defense biometrics activities involve a number of military services , commands , and offices across the department . figure 2 depicts the relationship among several of the key dod biometrics organizations . roles and responsibilities for defense biometrics activities are explained in dod's 2008 biometrics directive , and summarized in table 1 . dod is revising its biometrics directive based on , among other things , new requirements in the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2011 . office of the secretary of defense officials said that they plan to issue the revised biometrics directive in the fall of 2012 . the office had started to draft an implementing instruction for biometrics based on the 2008 directive but suspended this effort pending issuance of the updated directive . according to dod officials , the implementing instruction is expected to contain a more detailed description of roles and responsibilities based upon the revised directive . to oversee biometrics activities in afghanistan , central command established task force biometrics in 2009 . according to the commander's guide to biometrics in afghanistan , task force biometrics assists commands with integrating biometrics into their mission planning , trains individuals on biometrics collection , develops biometrics - enabled intelligence products , and manages the biometrically enabled watchlist for afghanistan that contains the names of more than 33,000 individuals . this watchlist is a subset of the larger biometrically enabled watchlist managed by the national ground intelligence center . additionally , according to army officials , the army established the training and doctrine command capabilities manager for biometrics and forensics with responsibilities for ensuring that user requirements are considered and incorporated in army policy and doctrine involving biometrics .