( see fig . while this projected spending is largely driven by plans to acquire a new fleet of delivery vehicles , usps also projects increased spending in the other categories of facilities , information technology , and mail - processing equipment . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of providing information on usps's projected capital spending . in addition , we interviewed four usps vice presidents in charge of the departments that correspond with the four broad categories of capital - spending investments about historic , ongoing , and projected capital spending . we also selected and reviewed a non - generalizable sample of 14 decision analysis reports ( dar ) — internal usps documents used to justify and obtain approval for some proposed capital - spending projects — of the 66 approved by usps for fiscal year 2017 and part of fiscal year 2018 . usps requires dars for all proposed capital spending projects with a total project cost of at least $1 million . the dars contain information on , among other things , project specifications , purpose , risks and tradeoffs , and timeframes . in addition , while some of usps's planned capital spending is intended specifically to generate a return - on - investment — such as by increasing revenues or decreasing costs — much of usps's planned capital spending is to help sustain operations . specifically , according to our analysis of usps data , roughly 80 percent of usps's projected capital spending for fiscal year 2018 is for projects intended to help sustain operations . in its latest projection of capital spending , covering fiscal years 2018 through 2028 , usps projects an annual average of roughly $821 million on capital spending for vehicles , primarily driven by a multi - year acquisition of new delivery vehicles starting in fiscal year 2019 . we reviewed the dars to obtain descriptive information about the projects . while information presented from our reviews of the dars cannot be generalized to all dars , the information provides insights into usps's reasons for undertaking capital spending projects . in addition , we interviewed usps officials about the organization's historic and projected capital spending . such assessments are routinely conducted by the usps office of inspector general . to address usps's planned capital spending over the next 10 years , we reviewed usps data on capital spending from fiscal years 2007 through 2017 and usps documentation on projected capital spending from fiscal years 2018 through 2028 . in both cases , we focused on a fiscal year's actual or projected capital - spending cash outlays — or the amount of cash spent on capital projects — as opposed to capital - spending commitments made in that fiscal year . for historical data , we used data from usps's annual budgets , known as integrated financial plans , for fiscal years 2008 through 2018 . each annual budget contains data on actual capital spending levels from prior fiscal years . the annual budgets generally report capital spending in four broad categories: vehicles , facilities , information technology and other , and mail - processing equipment .