carry out its functions . these subgroups may be composed , in whole or in part , of individuals who are not members of the nstac . to analyze the extent to which the national communications system ( ncs ) provides priority communications programs , we reviewed relevant legislation , regulations and other documentation that outline ncs responsibilities in ensuring the continuity of communication including the homeland security act of 2002 , executive orders 12,472 and 13,231 , and ncs directive 3-10 . we also reviewed budget requests , annual reports , the performance assessment rating tool ( part ) reports submitted to the office of management and budget ( omb ) , and other documentation related to ncs activities . ( 3 ) to what extent does ncs plan and evaluate its services ? to analyze what priority communications programs ncs provides , we reviewed relevant legislation , available ncs program plans , as well as budget requests and annual reports . we also interviewed relevant ncs and federal communications commission ( fcc ) officials who have varying responsibilities for priority communications . in addition , we interviewed cognizant representatives from at&t , qwest communications , and verizon . we selected these carriers because they provide ns / ep communications services and were amenable to meeting with us . although their views cannot be generalized to all telecommunications companies that provide ns / ep communications , the information we obtained helped to enhance our understanding of their role in providing emergency communications . we also interviewed ns / ep officials from a nonprobability sample of 15 states and 13 localities , which we selected based on a variety of factors including geographical location , terrain and climate conditions , and types and frequency of natural disasters . while the results of these interviews cannot be generalized to reflect the views of ns / ep emergency management officials in all states and localities , the information obtained provided us with useful information on the perspectives of various ns / ep personnel about ncs and its priority communications programs . to determine how ncs enlists subscribers and controls access to its priority programs , we collected and reviewed subscriber eligibility criteria , and interviewed ncs officials on these criteria , ncs's outreach efforts to enlist new subscribers , and its internal controls for controlling access to these programs . we also obtained ncs standard operating procedures and compared them with criteria in standards for internal control in the federal government . to determine whether ncs adhered to its procedures for terminating access for subscribers who no longer meet the programs' eligibility criteria , we reviewed subscriber records for select former federal and state government officials . specifically , we reviewed a nonprobability sample of records for former members of the u.s. senate as well as members and delegates of the u.s. house of representatives ; immediate past heads of federal departments and agencies as of august 2008 ; and immediate past governors of u.s. states and territories as of august 2008 , which is when we obtained the subscriber data .