cost . to determine the extent to which the cost estimate for the iwtu reengineering project is reliable , we conducted an abridged analysis of the iwtu reengineering project's cost estimate , focusing on its comprehensiveness . typically , in analyzing a cost estimate against best practices in gao's cost estimating and assessment guide ( cost guide ) , we examine four characteristics , each defined by multiple criteria: credible . for this review , we assessed the cost estimate for the iwtu reengineering project against the comprehensive characteristic , in part because em officials told us that they had yet to develop a cost estimate for the program beyond phases one and two at the time of our review . specifically , we reviewed the cost estimate for the operation of the iwtu and the iwtu reengineering project , which , at the time of our review , was only developed for phases one and two of the project . if a cost estimate is not comprehensive ( that is , complete ) , then it cannot fully meet the well - documented , accurate , or credible best practice characteristics . when this happens , the schedule will not allow a sufficient understanding of the program as a whole , and users of the schedule will not have confidence in the dates and the critical path . in addition , we evaluated the comprehensive characteristic because it contributed to our analysis of em's evm system , as described below . see appendix ii for a summary assessment of the iwtu reengineering project's schedule estimate compared to selected best practices . operations activities . operations activities are recurring facility or environmental operations , as well as activities that are project - like , with defined start and end dates , according to em policy . em operations activities include operating waste processing facilities and the stabilization , packaging , transportation , and disposition of nuclear waste . em manages operations activities based on requirements listed in a cleanup policy that it issued in july 2017 . in february 2019 , we found that em cleanup site managers have discretion in how to classify cleanup work because doe and em have not established requirements on what work should be managed as an operations activity under em's cleanup policy or as a capital asset project under doe order 413.3b . further , we found that operations activities have less stringent management requirements than capital asset projects . we recommended that em establish requirements for classifying work as an operations activity and revise its cleanup policy to follow program and project management leading practices . doe generally agreed with our recommendations . beginning in january 2005 , em managed the development and construction of the iwtu facility as a capital asset project . once em determined that construction on the facility was complete in april 2012 , the project exited the capital asset oversight process established in doe order 413.3b and has since been managed as an operations activity , according to em idaho cleanup project officials . doe officials also told us that the iwtu reengineering project has been managed as an operations activity because the facility has been constructed and is now in a period of maintenance and repair .