ii. ) we are sending copies of this report to the honorable hershel w. gober , acting secretary of veterans affairs , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . to produce our estimates of responses in the population from which we sampled , we weighted each respondent's answers based on our stratification scheme . all sample surveys are subject to sampling error , that is , the extent to which the survey results differ from what would have been obtained if the whole population had received and returned the questionnaire . measures of sampling error are defined by two elements , the width of the confidence interval around the estimate ( sometimes called precision of the estimate ) and the confidence level at which the interval is computed . the confidence interval refers to the fact that estimates actually encompass a range of possible values , not just a single point . this interval is often expressed as a point , plus or minus some value ( the precision level ) . for example , an estimate of 75 percent plus or minus 2 percentage points means that the true population value is estimated to lie between 73 percent and 77 percent , at some specified level of confidence . the confidence level of the estimate is a measure of the certainty that the true value lies within the range of the confidence interval . we calculated the sampling error for each statistical estimate in this report at the 95- percent confidence level . this means , for example , that if we repeatedly sampled veterans from the same population and performed the analyses again , 95 percent of the samples would yield values that fall within the confidence intervals of our estimates . sampling errors in this report range from 1 to 7 ( plus or minus ) percentage points , with most being less than 5 percentage points . in addition to sampling errors , surveys can also be subject to other types of nonsystematic ( noise ) or systematic ( bias ) error that can affect results , such as differences in interpretation of the question or respondents' inability or unwillingness to provide correct information . unlike sampling errors , the magnitude of the effect of nonsampling errors is not normally known ; however , steps can be taken to minimize their impact . one potential source of nonsampling error that may be especially important in this survey is questionnaire construction . our early pretests revealed that compensation benefits can be an emotion - laden subject for veterans . some veterans had strong , unanticipated reactions to language used to phrase the question about offering a choice of payments . to ensure that the question was as clear and unbiased as possible , we did extensive pretesting of the questionnaire , making modifications based on veterans' comments . we also consulted with an outside expert in questionnaire design , who reviewed our survey instrument and provided recommendations . in addition , veterans found it difficult to respond to questions about a lump sum choice without details about what that choice might entail , especially the amount of the lump sum payment .