other design choices . according to design excellence building managers that responded to our survey and at locations we visited , the effect of several other design choices including energy efficient elements ( eg , solar panels and green roofs ) , courtyards , floors , and circulation ( eg , hallways , stairways , and elevators ) increased o&m costs . for example , according to these officials , ( 1 ) the design of green roofs led to water leaks ; ( 2 ) the design of courtyards led to problems maintaining unique landscaping ; ( 3 ) flooring choices , specifically selected materials , led to premature scuffing and cracking ; and ( 4 ) the design of hallways and stairways made them difficult to maintain . with the design excellence program , gsa aims to create buildings that are cost - effective and function well for tenants . however , gsa makes design choices for design excellence buildings during the planning and design stages of new projects without fully considering the effect of these choices on o&m costs and functionality . gsa does not estimate most o&m costs during planning and design . specifically , according to gsa officials we interviewed and planning documents we reviewed , when planning and designing new buildings , officials estimate the costs of major energy systems , such as boilers and chillers . however , based on our review of gsa and industry data , these systems only account for about one - third of o&m costs in design excellence buildings . mission spaces . managers from 48 design excellence buildings reported that the effect of design choices related to mission spaces ( i.e. , spaces in which federal employees conduct work ) increased o&m costs . specifically , managers from 32 buildings stated that design choices made in mission spaces increased repair costs , and managers from 30 buildings reported increased cleaning costs . gsa officials at several buildings we visited discussed challenges accessing and maintaining mechanical systems incorporated into tenant mission spaces . for example , one design excellence building includes a heating , ventilation , and air - conditioning ( hvac ) system that is hidden under a raised floor within mission spaces . because building managers cannot easily access the system , there are maintenance delays and challenges identifying and making necessary repairs , which ultimately result in higher o&m costs . building officials reported they considered replacing the hvac system , but doing so would cost approximately $55 million . ( see fig . gsa officials stated that they do not estimate the remaining two - thirds of o&m costs — which include maintenance , cleaning , and landscaping — until late in the building's construction . however , gsa officials also said that it would be costly to make significant design changes at that point in the process . in addition , the o&m estimates for maintenance , cleaning , and landscaping are for the purpose of selecting a contractor to provide these services , not as a means for addressing or reducing future o&m costs , according to officials .