we agree with this point . in fact we found an expenditure rate of 90 percent of program year 2000 funds within 2 years , indicating that states are going well beyond minimum expectations . labor also acknowledged that its spending estimate included all funds available at the start of the program year , without which an analysis of expenditure rates would be misleading . we do not contest labor's methodology , but think it is important to note that most of the funds available to states were allocated within the past year , and states have not had long to spend the funds . we continue to assert that a better way to look at expenditure rates is not in the aggregate , but on a year - by - year basis . regarding our conclusion that labor's data do not accurately reflect state spending because they exclude obligations , labor commented that , while it collects information on obligations due to statutory requirements , obligations are unimportant in formulating the budget because they represent future commitments to provide services , not actual service delivery . we continue to believe that obligations play a significant role in light of wia's greater emphasis on contracting for services and are recommending that labor establish a clearer definition of obligations that states can follow so that they can report more meaningful data to labor . while agreeing with our recommendation to clarify its definition of obligations , labor took exception to the recommendation to collect and report obligations made at the point of service delivery . labor was concerned that a new reporting requirement would be extremely burdensome and costly to implement nationwide , in part because it did not believe that service providers always collected this information . we believe that assessing both obligations and expenditures is an important tool for sound financial management at any level — state , local area , or service provider — and a number of states are already collecting local obligations . we are pleased to note that labor said it plans to work with states on this recommendation during wia reauthorization . labor also concurred with our recommendations to provide additional financial reporting guidance and technical assistance as well as to share promising practices for effectively managing spending . labor agreed that it would be a priority for the coming year to ensure that all states are aware of requirements for the accounting of wia funds . regarding our recommendation that labor communicate spending benchmarks that states should meet , labor disagreed with our characterization of the expenditure rates as benchmarks , saying instead that they were projections of spending used to formulate a budget . labor also commented that expenditure rates used to monitor spending were based on actual financial reports submitted by states , not on labor's expectations . labor has used these expenditure rates as benchmarks to identify states that were underspending their wia funds and to prioritize oversight efforts . we agree that using benchmarks to prioritize monitoring helps manage limited resources ; however , if spending targets are established , they should be disclosed .