hhs did not comment on our recommendations . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issue date . at that time we will send copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services , congressional committees , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or bascettac@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . in addition to the contact named above , helene f. toiv , assistant director ; george bogart ; hernan bozzolo ; frederick caison ; anne dievler ; and krister friday made key contributions to this report . the exact number of these responders is unknown . niosh awarded a contract for about $306,000 to the mount sinai school of medicine to provide screening services for nonfederal responders residing outside the nyc metropolitan area and directed it to establish a subcontract with aoec . aoec then subcontracted with 32 of its member clinics across the country to provide screening services . for its part , aoec was responsible for establishing a network of providers nationwide through its member clinics , referring nonfederal responders to the aoec member clinics for screening examinations , working with mount sinai to determine responders' program enrollment eligibility , ensuring proper billing , and reimbursing its member clinics for services . from february 2003 to july 2004 , the 32 aoec member clinics screened 588 nonfederal responders nationwide . an aoec official told us aoec experienced challenges in providing the screening services nationwide through its member clinics . in may 2007 , niosh took steps toward establishing the national program , but its efforts are incomplete . niosh approved a request from dcc to redirect about $125,000 from the june 2006 award to establish a contract with a company to provide screening and monitoring services for nonfederal responders residing outside the nyc metropolitan area . subsequently , dcc contracted with qtc management , inc. , one of the four organizations that had responded to niosh's request for information . qtc has a network of providers located across all 50 states and the district of columbia and will use internal medicine and occupational medicine doctors in its network to provide these services . in addition , qtc will identify and subcontract with providers outside of the qtc network to screen and monitor nonfederal responders who do not reside within 25 miles of a qtc provider . in june 2007 , niosh awarded $800,600 to dcc for coordinating the provision of screening and monitoring examinations , and qtc will receive a portion of this award from dcc to provide about 1,000 screening and monitoring examinations through may 2008 .