not all identified duplicate discounts are repaid . hrsa officials told us that covered entities' obligations for preventing duplicate discounts are the same for medicaid ffs and managed care . however , as we reported in 2018 , hrsa audits do not assess for the potential for duplicate discounts in medicaid managed care despite the fact that the potential for duplicate discounts related to medicaid managed care has existed since 2010 , when manufacturers were required to begin paying medicaid rebates under managed care in addition to ffs . as we noted in 2018 , hrsa indicated that it does not audit for duplicate discounts in managed care because the agency has not issued guidance on how covered entities should prevent this . as a result , we recommended that hrsa issue guidance to covered entities on the prevention of duplicate discounts under medicaid managed care and incorporate into its audit process an assessment of covered entities' compliance with the prohibition on duplicate discounts as it relates to medicaid managed care claims . we recommended that hrsa address these issues . hrsa concurred with our recommendations , and as of october 2019 , reported that it was continuing to work to determine next steps to address them . you asked us to examine stakeholders' efforts to prevent duplicate discounts under the 340b and medicaid drug rebate programs . in this report , we 1. describe state medicaid programs' policies on the use and identification of 340b drugs provided to their beneficiaries to prevent duplicate discounts ; and 2. examine hhs's efforts , specifically those of cms and hrsa , to ensure compliance with the prohibition on duplicate discounts in the medicaid drug rebate and 340b programs . to describe state medicaid programs' policies on the use and identification of 340b drugs provided to their beneficiaries to prevent duplicate discounts , we collected information from states and covered entities . specifically , in january 2019 , we sent a data collection instrument to all 50 states and the district of columbia requesting documentation of , and information about , their policies related to 340b drugs . the data collection instrument requested the states' policies related to the use and identification of 340b drugs in both medicaid ffs and managed care for three different methods in which outpatient drugs can be dispensed to medicaid beneficiaries . we received responses from all states , and reviewed their available policies to determine whether they allowed covered entities to provide 340b drugs to beneficiaries covered under medicaid ffs or managed care for each dispensing method , and how the state identified and excluded 340b drugs provided to such beneficiaries from rebate requests sent to drug manufacturers . for states that indicated they did not have written policies or procedures for using or identifying 340b drugs , we asked for a description of how they prevented duplicate discounts in practice . in order to gain a more in - depth understanding of how states worked with covered entities to implement policies and procedures to prevent duplicate discounts , we also interviewed medicaid officials from a nongeneralizable sample of four states .