increase returns on investment ? improve intergenerational equity ? – median monthly benefits for the 1955 , 1970 and 1985 birth cohorts . – median monthly benefits by benefit quintile . – distribution of benefits within each cohort . model 2 maintains current benefit structure for current and near retirees . reduces oasdi defined benefits for new retirees , survivors , dependents , and disabled workers starting in 2009 by altering the benefit formula . – slows growth in benefits by reducing pia formula factors by real wage growth . this essentially increases benefits levels across generations according to price growth ( absolute terms ) rather than wage growth ( relative terms ) . – for those who participate in the individual accounts , there is a further offset based on the hypothetical account accumulation , where contributions accrue at a real rate of 2 percent . increases benefits for certain widow ( er ) s and low - income earners . however , minimum benefit guarantees increase replacement rates for workers who qualify . therefore , overall progressivity of the system is unclear given these provisions and the uncertainty of market returns , the magnitude of participation , and the characteristics of future participants . overview of model 2 cohort results across cohorts , median monthly benefits are higher than the benefit reduction benchmark for persons who participate in an individual account ( see figure 6 ) . however , benefit levels received without accounts fall below the benefit reduction benchmark over time . pia formula factor reductions and the benefit offset disproportionately decreases replacement rates . the gap in benefits between the without accounts scenario and the tax increase benchmark and with accounts scenario grows across cohorts ( see figure 6 ) . this is due to the timing and structure of the benefit reductions under both the without accounts scenario and the benefit reduction benchmark ( see figure 6 ) . however , participation in the individual accounts may provide a benefit level even higher than the enhanced benefit for the lowest quintile since , over time , fewer workers will receive this enhanced benefit as wages are assumed to outpace inflation in the future . comparing median monthly benefits across cohorts in the lowest and highest quintiles indicates that the enhanced benefit for full - time “minimum wage” workers and individual accounts maintain benefits above the tax increase benchmark only for those in the lowest quintile in the 1955 and 1985 birth cohorts ( see figures 7 and 8 ) . – a number of people with accounts fare better than the tax increase benchmark and this number increases ( 19 to 40 percent ) across cohorts ( see figure 11 ) . – a minority of people without accounts fare better than the tax increase benchmark and this minority declines over time ( 9 to 1 percent ) . substantially for older cohorts , the effects of varying the real rate of return by plus or minus 1 percent increases over time .