currently , u.s . i would be pleased to answer any questions you and the subcommittee members may have . for further information about this testimony , please contact richard stana at 202-512-8777 . other key contributors to this statement were burns chamberlain , frances cook , josh a. diosomito , rebecca gambler , danielle pakdaman , evi rezmovic , julie e. silvers , and adam vogt . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . in cases when e - verify cannot confirm an employee's work authorization status either through the automatic check or the check by an immigration status verifier , the system issues the employer a tentative nonconfirmation of the employee's work authorization status . e - verify is vulnerable to acts of employer fraud , such as when the employer enters the same identity information to authorize multiple workers . moreover , although westat has found that most participating employers comply with e - verify program procedures , some employers have not complied or have misused the program , which may adversely affect employees . i appreciate the opportunity to be here today to participate in this hearing on electronic employment verification . as we and others have reported in the past , the opportunity for employment is one of the most powerful magnets attracting unauthorized immigrants to the united states . to help address this issue , in 1986 congress passed the immigration reform and control act ( irca ) , which made it illegal for individuals and entities to knowingly hire , continue to employ , or recruit or refer for a fee unauthorized workers . the act established a two - pronged approach for helping to limit the employment of unauthorized workers: ( 1 ) an employment verification process through which employers verify all newly hired employees' work eligibility and ( 2 ) a sanctions program for fining employers who do not comply with the act . following the passage of irca , the u.s. commission on immigration reform and various immigration experts indicated a number of problems with the implementation of immigration policies and concluded that deterring illegal immigration requires , among other things , strategies involving a more reliable employment eligibility verification process that focuses on disrupting the ability of illegal immigrants to gain employment . in particular , the commission report and other studies found that the single most important step that could be taken to reduce unlawful migration is the development of a more effective system for verifying work authorization . in the over 20 years since passage of irca , the employment eligibility verification process has remained largely unchanged . legislation has been introduced in congress to reform immigration laws and strengthen electronic employment verification . some of this legislation includes proposals that would require employers to use a mandatory , functional electronic employment verification program for verifying the work authorization of all newly hired employees .