hamp first - lien modifications . federal housing administration ( fha ) and rural housing service ( rhs ) modification programs ( fha - hamp and rural development , or rd - hamp , respectively ) . this produces potential opportunities for those funds to be used more efficiently elsewhere . how does the agency estimate and manage unexpended balances ? this last question has particular relevance for the mha program given the approaching deadline of december 31 , 2016 , for entry into the program . understanding an agency's processes for estimating and managing carryover balances provides information that can be assessed to determine how effectively the agency anticipates program needs and helps ensure the most efficient use of resources . in our september 2013 report on evaluating account balances in federal accounts , we identified several things to consider when attempting to understand how an agency estimates and manages carryover balances , as the following examples illustrate . what assumptions or factors did the agency incorporate into its estimate of the account's carryover balance ( eg , historical experience , demand models ) ? does the agency have a routine mechanism for reviewing its obligations and determining whether there are opportunities to deobligate funds ( eg , written procedures or ad hoc processes ) ? what is the agency's timeline for obligating and expending funds in the account ? what is the spendout rate after funds have been obligated ? we also found in our 2013 report that if an agency does not have a robust strategy in place to manage carryover balances or is unable to adequately explain or support the reported carryover balance , balances may either fall too low to efficiently manage operations or rise to unnecessarily high levels . for example , if treasury were to identify and deobligate any mha funds that are likely to not be expended , these funds may then be available for congress to permanently rescind and use elsewhere for other priorities . in 2009 , treasury announced that as many as 3 million to 4 million borrowers who were at risk of default and foreclosure could be offered a loan modification under hamp . in our july 2009 report , which reviewed these estimates , we found that treasury's estimate may have been overstated , reflecting uncertainty resulting from data gaps and the numerous assumptions that had to be made . in addition , we noted that documentation of the many assumptions and calculations necessary for the analysis was incomplete and that treasury had not specified its plans for systematically updating key assumptions and calculations . we concluded that to improve the validity of the projection , the process would need to be supported by detailed information and complete documentation and the key assumptions and calculations would need to be regularly reviewed and updated . based on those findings , we recommended that treasury institute a system to routinely review and update key assumptions and projections about the housing market and the behavior of mortgage holders , borrowers , and servicers , revising the projections as necessary to assess the program's effectiveness and structure .