damage was widespread . in the wake of katrina , for example , the red cross estimated that nearly 525,000 people were displaced . their homes were declared uninhabitable , and streets , bridges , and other landmarks were destroyed . approximately 90,000 square miles were affected overall and , as shown in figure 3 , entire communities were obliterated . still , some aspects of the census are proving to be problematic and a number of operational questions need to be resolved . to be sure , challenges are to be expected in an endeavor as vast and complex as the decennial census . moreover , shortcomings with prior censuses call for the bureau to consider bold initiatives for 2010 that entail some risk . thus , in looking toward the future , as the planning and testing phases of the 2010 census begin to wind down , it will be important for congress to monitor the bureau's progress in ( 1 ) identifying and diagnosing problems , ( 2 ) devising cost - effective solutions , and ( 3 ) integrating refinements and fixes in time to be evaluated during the dress rehearsal in 2008 . indeed , while the ramp - up to 2010 is making progress , past experience has shown that congress has every reason to remain vigilant . as we have done throughout the past several decades , we look forward to supporting the subcommittee in its decision - making and oversight efforts . mr. chairman , mr. clay , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee might have . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact brenda s. farrell on ( 202 ) 512-3604 , or by e - mail at farrellb@gao.gov . individuals making contributions to this testimony included betty clark , robert goldenkoff , carlos e. hazera , shirley hwang , andrea levine , anne mcdonough - hughes , lisa pearson , michael volpe , and timothy wexler . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the destruction and chaos caused by the storms underscore the nation's vulnerability to all types of hazards , and highlights how important it is for government agencies to consider disaster preparedness and continuity of operations as part of their planning . we have had a preliminary discussion with the bureau on this topic and will continue to assess the bureau's contingency planning as part of our oversight of the 2010 census . moreover , it will be important for the bureau to assess the impact the storms might have on its census - taking activities , as well as whether the affected areas have any special needs for data .