tsa also evaluates the vulnerability of pipeline systems through security assessments . pipeline operators and industry association representatives who we interviewed also reported exchanging risk - related security information and coordinating with federal and nonfederal entities , including tsa . however , we also identified weaknesses in several areas of tsa's pipeline security program management , including: ( 1 ) updating and clarifying pipeline security guidelines ; ( 2 ) planning for workforce needs ; ( 3 ) assessing pipeline risks ; and ( 4 ) monitoring program performance . we found in our december 2018 report that all of the pipeline operators and industry association representatives that we interviewed reported receiving security information from federal and nonfederal entities . for example , dhs components including tsa's intelligence and analysis and nccic share security - related information on physical and cyber threats and incidents . nonfederal entities included information sharing and analysis centers , fusion centers , industry associations , and subsector coordinating councils . pipeline operators also reported that they share security - related information with tsa and the nccic . for example , tsa's pipeline security guidelines requests that pipeline operators report physical security incidents to the transportation security operations center ( tsoc ) and any actual or suspected cyberattacks to the nccic . according to tsa officials , tsoc staff analyzes incident information for national trends and common threats , and then shares their observations with pipeline operators during monthly and quarterly conference calls . in our december 2018 report , we found that the pipeline operators we interviewed reported using a range of guidelines and standards to address their physical and cybersecurity risks . for example , all 10 of the pipeline operators we interviewed stated they had implemented the voluntary 2011 tsa pipeline security guidelines that the operators determined to be applicable to their operations . additional details on the scope and methodology are available in our published report . the work upon which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in our december 2018 report , we found that tsa provides pipeline operators with voluntary security guidelines that operators can implement to enhance the security of their pipeline facilities . five of the 10 pipeline operators characterized the guidelines as generally or somewhat effective in helping to secure their operations , 1 was neutral on their effectiveness , and 4 did not provide an assessment of the guidelines' effectiveness . pipeline operators and industry association representatives reported that their members also use the interstate natural gas association of america's control systems cyber security guidelines for the natural gas pipeline industry , the american petroleum institute's pipeline scada security standard , and the national institute of standards and technology's ( nist ) cybersecurity framework as sources of cybersecurity standards , guidelines , and practices that may be scaled and applied to address a pipeline operator's cybersecurity risks .