were some of the first to be affected . bop officials said that deferring hiring during crs had made it difficult for bop to maintain the ratio of corrections officers to inmates as the prison population increased . vba officials cited missed opportunities in processing additional benefits claims and completing other tasks . because newly hired claims processors require as much as 24 months of training to reach full performance , a vba official said that the effects of hiring delays related to crs were not immediate , but reduced service delivery in subsequent years . several case study agencies also reported delaying contracts during the cr period , which could reduce the level of services agencies provided and increased costs . for example , bop reported delaying the activation of its butner and tucson prison facilities and two other federal prisons in 2007 during the cr period to make $65.6 million available for more immediate needs . according to bop , these delays in the availability of additional prison capacity occurred at a time when prison facilities were already overcrowded . bop officials also said that delaying contract awards for new bop prisons and renovations to existing facilities prevented the agency from locking in prices and resulted in higher construction costs and increases in the cost of supplies . based on numbers provided by bop , a delay in awarding a contract for the mcdowell prison facility resulted in about $5.4 million in additional costs . in some instances , delaying contracts resulted in additional costs in terms of time and resources . for example , officials from bop , vha , and vba said that they sometimes had to solicit bids a second time or have environmental , architectural , or engineering analyses redone . some agency officials said that contracting delays resulting from longer crs also affected their ability to fully compete and award contracts in the limited time remaining in the fiscal year after the agency had received its regular appropriation . vha and acf reported that the application time available for discretionary grants may also be compressed by a longer cr . further , va stated that this compressed application time adversely affected the quality of submitted applications . similarly , bop's field acquisition office , which is responsible for acquisitions over $100,000 , said that trying to complete all of its contracts by the end of the fiscal year when a cr lasts longer than 3 to 4 months negatively affects the quality of competition . according to some representatives of nonprofit organizations and state and local governments , federal grant recipients could temporarily support programs with funds from other sources until agencies' regular appropriations are passed ; however , it was more difficult to do so during periods of economic downturn such as the one they recently experienced . an acf official told us that nonprofit organizations providing shelter to unaccompanied alien children have used lines of credit to bridge gaps in federal funding during a cr . however , in march 2009 , a shelter in texas informed acf's office of refugee resettlement that its credit was at its limit and it was in immediate need of additional funds to sustain operations for the next 45 to 60 days .