implemented . the fsm national government has made additional trust fund contributions but , according to fsm officials , has made a policy decision to make these contributions to the fsm trust fund instead of the compact trust fund . as of january 2018 , the rmi national government had implemented one of four other actions that its decrement management plan indicated it would take . implementing a value - added tax and net profits tax in 2017 not implemented . pub . 108-188 authorized an annual supplemental education grant ( seg ) for the fsm and rmi in fiscal years 2005 through 2023 , to be awarded in place of grants formerly awarded to the countries under several u.s. education , health , and labor programs . the fsm and rmi are not eligible for the programs replaced by the seg during these years . unlike the compact sector grants , the amended compacts' implementing legislation authorized the seg but did not appropriate funds for it . funding for the seg is appropriated annually to the u.s. department of education ( education ) and transferred to interior for disbursement . other provisions of the amended compacts' implementing legislation , as well as other u.s. law , make the fsm and rmi eligible for a number of additional programs . other federal departments are responsible for the administration and oversight of their respective programs in the fsm and rmi . compact sector grants and the seg , each of which end in 2023 , continue to support a substantial portion of government expenditures in the fsm and rmi . in the fsm , compact sector grants and the seg support about one - third of all government expenditures . the four fsm states rely on these grants to a greater extent than the fsm national government does . in the rmi , compact sector grants and the seg support about one - quarter of all government expenditures . the end of the compacts' programs and services agreements in 2024 would also require the fsm and rmi to bear additional costs to provide services currently provided by the united states as part of the agreements . appendix iv provides a detailed summary of programs and services we identified that have been provided through the amended compacts , the amended compacts' implementing legislation , compact - related agreements , and other provisions of u.s. law , as well as their status in the fsm and rmi after 2023 . the fsm national and state governments overall continue to rely on u.s. support for program expenditures . compact sector grants , the seg , and other u.s. grants supported almost half of fsm national and state government expenditures in fiscal year 2016 . compact sector and supplemental education grants that end in 2023 supported approximately one - third of total fsm national and state government expenditures in fiscal year 2016 , while other u.s. grants supported an additional 15 percent of total fsm government expenditures ( see fig . compact sector and supplemental education grants that end in 2023 support a larger proportion of fsm state governments' expenditures than of the fsm national government's expenditures .