casa alianza . casa alianza provides reintegration support including psychological and social assistance , child protection services , and children's rights advocacy for returnees as well as internally displaced persons . the organization worked in the belén assistance center from 2014 to 2017 with returning uac , according to casa alianza officials . mennonite committee for social action . this organization's support for returned migrants program began in 2014 and has various components including: ( 1 ) vocational training , ( 2 ) psychological assistance , ( 3 ) complementary workshops on life skills , and ( 4 ) humanitarian assistance . the program focuses on youth between ages 15 and 25 returning to the san pedro sula area . collaboration and effort association . this program in tegucigalpa focuses on providing returned children a safe place to live , teaching them responsibility and cooperation , and supporting their education . many of the adolescents are returned uac , and all beneficiaries must themselves help run the association's programs . host government challenges affect reintegration efforts usaid , through its agreements with iom , is providing assistance to host countries where various challenges affect reintegration efforts . some of these challenges affecting host countries , such as limited employment opportunities and resource constraints , are long - standing in nature . limited resources: with limited resources dedicated to reintegration efforts , the centers can connect few returning migrants with the appropriate government services . for example , at a ventanilla we visited in el salvador , just one official — who has no vehicle — is responsible for providing services to all returning migrants in an area roughly one - fifth the country's overall size and containing roughly one - fifth of its returning migrants . similarly , at the honduran reintegration assistance center we visited , there was only one staff member and no psychologist . as of july 2018 , the honduran government had opened 9 of the 16 planned reintegration assistance centers ; it plans to open the remaining ones by the end of 2018 . few training and employment opportunities: there are limited training and employment opportunities for returning migrants . one of the primary reasons cited for migration is the lack of employment opportunities in the countries . additionally , the employment opportunities that are available may not fit the migrants' skills . for example , only migrants with sufficient english skills can be placed in call centers . at the same time , the training programs being offered at a particular time may not interest the migrant . further , the few opportunities available may not be offered in the locations where migrants can readily access them . finally , an official from a multilateral organization working in the region raised the concern that many of the training opportunities offer similar skills , such as training to be a barber , beautician , or mechanic , and the market can support only so many people in these professions . need for individualized services: each returning migrant has a different set of needs , skills , and interests , but providing customized assistance takes time and resources .