production application . according to the ftz board , businesses that have had their production notifications denied or approved with restrictions can continue to seek approval , but they must submit a more detailed production application that discusses the economic factors involved in the proposed activities . according to the ftz board , the applicant must demonstrate that approval would result in a net positive national economic effect and a significant public benefit , such as creating employment opportunities and encouraging the retention of domestic business activity . of the 55 production notifications that the ftz board either denied or approved with restrictions , seven businesses continued to seek approval and submitted production applications . the ftz board reported that it has disapproved one production application and approved two others with significant restrictions based on industry - impact considerations . the four remaining production applications were pending as of may 2017 . cbp is responsible for oversight and supervision of ftz operators , including collection of duties , taxes , and fees . cbp's principal interest and concern in overseeing ftzs is to ( 1 ) control movement of the goods in and out of the zones , ( 2 ) ensure the collection of duties and taxes owed on goods transferred from ftzs , and ( 3 ) ensure that ftz procedures are in compliance with the ftz act and laws and regulations pertaining to zone use . cbp's responsibility for overseeing goods moving into and from ftzs involves three control points: 1 . cbp authorizes and supervises the admission of goods to ftzs . once the goods are admitted to ftzs , cbp delegates direct supervision of the merchandise and inventory control to the ftz operator until the goods leave the zone . cbp resumes supervision when goods are removed from zones and enter u.s. customs territory or are exported . cbp oversees ftzs through the audit - inspection method , meaning that cbp does not maintain ftz inventory records and that cbp personnel are not physically assigned to ftzs to supervise ftz operators . to ensure ftzs' compliance with u.s. customs policies , laws , and regulations , cbp primarily conducts compliance reviews , which are periodic visits by cbp personnel to observe or examine ftz transactions , records , procedures , and conditions . ftz operators are also required to post an operator's bond , which insures the operator's agreement to comply with the pertinent laws and cbp regulations and delineates the particular responsibilities under the bond . as part of its oversight of ftz operators , cbp reviews ftz operators' bond amounts to ensure that they are sufficient to cover duties and fees owed based on the value of merchandise held in the zone by the ftz operator . as part of its compliance reviews , cbp assigns risk levels to ftz operators based on violations or deficiencies found during the reviews , such as thefts , inventory control problems , or security errors . cbp guidance for conducting compliance reviews is outlined in its foreign - trade zones manual and its compliance review handbook for foreign trade zones . production notification . no duties or fees are paid if the goods are exported from the ftzs .