fns does not alert the states as to which processors were affected . if a state or school food authority procures food commercially , which accounts for 80 percent to 85 percent of products used in school meals , neither fns , fsis , nor fda is responsible for notifying states and schools ; the school food administrator is typically notified directly by a distributor , wholesaler , or whoever sold the school district the food . once schools are notified , recalls can expand if investigations reveal problems with products , in addition to those initially recalled . for example , fda or fsis may discover that problems at a particular manufacturing plant are more longstanding than initially thought . in these instances , the recalling firm could issue additional recalls for other products or time periods . as a result , schools could end up serving affected products between the first and subsequent recalls . in this report , we address holds and recalls by four companies which affected schools . from january 2009 through march 2009 , pca issued a recall — and expanded the recall on three separate occasions — for products it supplied . the companies that received or used its products also issued recalls , covering almost 4,000 types and brands of peanut - containing products . recalls were initiated after cdc , fda , and state investigations of illnesses suspected of being food - borne revealed salmonella in peanut butter manufactured by pca . how did federal agencies assess the effectiveness of recent recalls , and to what extent do these assessments ensure that recalls are being carried out effectively in schools ? to address these questions , we reviewed recent holds and recalls of products from four companies: 1 ) the 2009 peanut corporation of america peanut products recalls ; 2 ) the january and february 2008 westland / hallmark beef holds and recall ; 3 ) a series of recalls from december 2007 through february 2008 of canned vegetables by the new era canning company ; and 4 ) a december 2007 administrative hold on glacier sales inc. potato rounds . these events were selected to include recalls that took place over the last two years and include examples of recalls announced by both fda and fsis , as well as administrative holds initiated by fns . to determine the role of federal agencies in carrying out food holds and recalls involving schools , we reviewed relevant regulations , policies , and guidance related to food holds and recalls , and interviewed officials from usda , including fsis , fns , and the commodity procurement agencies , including the agriculture marketing service and the farm service agency ; as well as fda , the u.s. department of education , and the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) . through interviews with federal officials and reviews of documentation they provided on recent holds and recalls from the four companies , we determined how the federal agencies carried out their role of notifying states and schools of suspect products .