aggressive schedules . since the award of the current commercial crew contracts in september 2014 , the program , boeing , and spacex have all identified the contractors' delivery schedules as aggressive . program officials told us that , from the outset , they knew delays were likely due to the developmental nature of the program . multiple independent review bodies — including the program's standing review board , the aerospace safety advisory panel , and the nasa advisory council - human exploration and operations committee — also noted the aggressiveness of the contractors' schedules as they move toward certification . in february 2017 , we found that both contractors had notified nasa that they would not be able to meet the 2017 final certification dates originally established in their contracts and expected final certification to be delayed until 2018 . based on our ongoing work , we found that the contractors have notified nasa that these dates have slipped further to the first quarter of calendar year 2019 . figure 2 shows the original boeing and spacex contract schedule and the current proposed schedule for each contractor . however , the extent to which these schedules represent an accurate estimate of each contractor's final certification date is unclear for the following two reasons: 1 . each contractor provides schedule updates to the commercial crew program at quarterly status reviews , and the dates frequently change . the program has held 12 quarterly reviews since each contract was awarded . boeing has reported a delay six times and spacex has reported a delay nine times that included at least one key event identified in the timeline above at these quarterly reviews . the commercial crew program is tracking risks that both contractors could experience additional schedule delays and , based on our ongoing work , we found that the program's own analysis indicates that certification is likely to slip into december 2019 for spacex and february 2020 for boeing . the commercial crew program's verification closure notice process , which is used to verify that the contractors have met all requirements , is one of the other key oversight activities and potential workload challenges for the program . the program is completing that process concurrently with the phased safety reviews . the verification closure process is initiated by the contractor when it provides the program with data and evidence to substantiate that it has met each requirement , and is completed when the program has reviewed and approved the contractor's evidence to verify that each requirement has been met . the commercial crew program must also approve a subset of verification closure notices before key tests or milestones can occur . the maximum value of this contract line item is $150 million . nasa divided the certification work under contract line item 001 into two acceptance events: the design certification review and the certification review . an acceptance event occurs when nasa approves a contractor's designs and acknowledges that the contractor's work is complete and meets the requirements of the contract . the design certification review verifies the contractor's crew transportation system's capability to safely approach , dock , mate , and depart from the iss , among other requirements .