did you have an appointment time ? for the last time you experienced detention time , what was the reason ? for the last time you experienced detention time , how did the detention time impact you , if at all ? what type of freight were you hauling ? what type of facility were you delivering to or picking up freight from ? in general , does detention time impact your ability to meet federal hours of service requirements ? if yes , in what way does it impact ? besides the reason you mentioned previously , are there other reasons for why you have experienced detention time in the past ? besides the impacts you mentioned , has detention time impacted you in other ways in the past ? are you an owner operator , an owner operator leased , or a company driver ? are you paid according to your mileage or by a percentage , hourly , or by some other method ? are you a long - haul or short - haul driver ? 79.0% ( 230 ) 7.2% ( 21 ) both long haul and short haul 13.7% ( 40 ) 19 . are you an individual or team driver ? - submit to crrier within 1 ( one calendar day - 24 hours ) original duplicate - driver retin possssion for eight d ( total miles driving today ) vehicle numbers - ( show each unit ) . ( name of carrier or carriers ) ( driver's signature in full ) ( main office address ) ( name of co - driver ) . according to fmcsa , the regulations do not say what a log form must look like . did you collect detention fees ? does the company you work for collect detention fees ? during your last detention time , how long did you wait from gate to gate ? did you have any wait time before you got to the gate ? if so , what were the reasons for the wait time before you got to the gate ? however , it must include a 24-hour graph grid , in accordance with regulations , and the following information on each page , according to the agency: date: drivers must write down the month , day , and year for the beginning of each 24-hour period . ( multiple consecutive days off duty may be combined on one log page , with an explanation in the “remarks.” ) total miles driving today: drivers must write down the total number of miles driven during the 24-hour period . motor coach / bus number: drivers must write down either the vehicle number ( s ) assigned by their company , or the license number and licensing state for each truck ( and trailer , if any ) driven during the 24-hour period . name of carrier: drivers must write down the name of the motor carrier ( s ) they are working for . if drivers work for more than one carrier in a 24-hour period , they must list the times they started and finished work for each carrier . main office address: drivers must write down their carrier's main office address .