no other drugs had been previously approved for these diseases . vimizim , sponsored by biomarin pharmaceutical , treats children with mucopolysaccharidosis type iva , a rare inherited metabolic disorder resulting from an enzyme deficiency . ( see app . fda officials expressed concern about the pediatric voucher program , and do not support its continuation after its current authorization expires october 1 , 2016 . in written responses to our questions , fda officials reported that they have seen no evidence that the program has encouraged increased development of drugs for rare pediatric diseases . the agency also indicated that while it strongly supports the goal of the program — incentivizing the development of drugs for rare pediatric diseases — it has not seen evidence that the program has yet been effective in achieving this goal . instead , the agency suggested that companies may consider that other incentives , such as provision of an additional period of “market exclusivity,” may be more effective at incentivizing drug development than the priority review vouchers . fda specifically cited its authority to provide an additional 6 months of market exclusivity for fda requested pediatric studies in products that may produce health benefits in the pediatric population — known as pediatric exclusivity — as providing an effective incentive to drug sponsors . in addition to sharing its views regarding the program's effectiveness in incentivizing drug development , fda cited concerns about what it considers to be the significant adverse impact of the program on the agency's ability to determine its public health priorities . according to fda , the program interferes with its ability to set priorities on the basis of public health needs by requiring fda to provide priority reviews of new drug applications that would not otherwise qualify , based on the merits of those applications . the agency noted that an application for a drug will receive priority review designation if it is for a drug that treats a serious condition and , if approved , would provide a significant improvement in safety or effectiveness . however , fda anticipates that sponsors will seek to redeem their vouchers for new drug applications that would otherwise receive a standard 10-month review for more prevalent conditions that already have available treatments . such applications may be for drugs to treat diseases or conditions such as elevated blood pressure , high cholesterol , obesity , or diabetes and other drugs with substantial market potential . fda explained that , in effect , the program allows sponsors to “purchase” a priority review at the expense of other important public health work in fda's portfolio , which undermines fda's public health mission and the morale of its professional review staff . according to fda , the pediatric voucher program also places a substantial strain on its workload . first , the agency explained that performing a priority review on a drug that would otherwise merit a standard review requires the agency to conduct significant work in a compressed timeframe .