the guide includes two parts . part one provides four steps for analysts — including federal , state , and local auditors ; congressional staff ; and researchers — to identify and evaluate instances of fragmentation , overlap or duplication . each step includes examples that illustrate how to implement suggested actions or consider different types of information . part two provides guidance to help policymakers reduce or better manage fragmentation , overlap , and duplication . in recognition that the pervasiveness of fragmentation , overlap , and duplication may require attention beyond the program level , the guide also includes information on a number of options congress and the executive branch may consider to address these issues government - wide . some of these options are executive branch reorganization , special temporary commissions , interagency groups , automatic sunset provisions , and portfolio or performance - based budgeting . these options can be used independently or together to assist policymakers in evaluating and addressing fragmentation , overlap , and duplication beyond the programmatic level . congress can also use its power of the purse and oversight powers to incentivize executive branch agencies to act on our suggested actions and monitor their progress . in particular , the senate budget resolution for fiscal year 2016 directs committees to review programs and tax expenditures within their jurisdiction for waste , fraud , abuse , or duplication and to consider the findings from our past annual reports . also , the accompanying report for the house budget resolution for fiscal year 2016 proposes that the department of justice ( doj ) streamline grants into three categories — first responder , law enforcement , and victims — which is consistent with our prior work recommending that doj better target its grant resources . the resolution also highlights a number of the issues presented in our annual reports ( including the multiple programs that support science , technology , engineering , and mathematics education , housing assistance , homeland security preparedness grants , and green building initiatives ) ; notes the number of programs that will need to be reauthorized in fiscal year 2016 ; and states that our findings should result in programmatic changes in both authorizing statutes and program funding levels . congressional use of our findings in its decision making for the identified areas of fragmentation , overlap , and duplication will send an unmistakable message to agencies that congress considers these issues a priority . through its budget , appropriations , and oversight processes , congress can also shift the burden to the agencies to demonstrate the effectiveness of their programs to justify continued funding . we will continue to conduct further analysis to look for additional or emerging instances of fragmentation , overlap , and duplication and opportunities for cost savings or revenue enhancement . omb generally agreed with this recommendation . in addition , in march 2015 , the geospatial data act of 2015 was introduced and includes provisions to improve oversight and help reduce duplication in the management of geospatial data , consistent with our recommended actions . fully addressing the actions in our two reports could help reduce duplicative investments and the risk of missing opportunities to jointly acquire data , potentially saving millions of dollars .