drmo losses . our statistical samples identified missing turn - ins at two of the five drmos we tested and missing quantities at all five drmos tested , including many items that were in new , unused , and excellent condition . because drmo officials did not have documentation to show whether these items had been reutilized , transferred , sold , or destroyed , there is no assurance of whether the missing items reflected bookkeeping errors or if they related to theft . missing items in our statistical samples included turn - ins of 72 chemical and biological protective suits , 21 pairs of chemical and biological protective gloves , 47 wet weather parkas that were subject to demilitarization controls , and 7 sleeping bags , a cold weather coat , computer equipment , and various other items . reported drmo losses included 76 units of body armor , 75 chemical and biological protective suits ( in addition to those identified in our columbus drmo sample ) , 5 guided missile warheads , and hundreds of military cold weather parkas and trousers and camouflage coats and trousers . three drmos — kaiserslautern , meade , and tobyhanna — accounted for $840,147 , or about 45 percent , of the nearly $1.9 million in reported fiscal year 2004 losses of military clothing and equipment items requiring demilitarization . our follow - up investigations found a pervasive lack of physical accountability over excess inventory , which leaves dod vulnerable to the risk of theft and fraud , waste , and abuse . in many cases , it is not possible to determine whether discrepancies represent sloppy recordkeeping or the loss or theft of excess property due to the failure to verify turn - in documents and correct errors at the time excess items were received at the drmos . in the case of our columbus drmo sample , we found that inventory records were not adjusted for missing quantities in our sample . instead , drmo personnel recorded the entire amount of the listed quantities as being transferred to either the liquidation sales contractor or the joint service nuclear biological and chemical equipment assessment program ( jeap ) for inspection and reissue of military clothing and equipment . our review of transaction data for columbus drmo transfers showed that jeap did not confirm most of the items reported as transferred . for example , jeap confirmed receiving only 7 of the 17 turn - ins of clothing and textile items . further , the columbus drmo recorded a transaction to show that the 72 chemical and biological protective suits identified as missing during our statistical tests of columbus drmo inventory were transferred to jeap on november 10 , 2004 . however , our follow - up with jeap officials found that they have no record of receiving the protective suits . the columbus drmo's apparent manipulation of the inventory data avoided reporting the missing items as losses . our follow - up investigations of other selected drmo losses found the following .