ambassador . ambassador to russia provided his perspectives about amec in a letter to us dated may 24 , 2004 . we also interviewed officials from norway's federal audit agency ( riksrevisjonen ) and the bellona foundation , a norwegian nongovernmental organization that focuses on environmental issues in the arctic . to identify amec financial contributions , including those from the united states , we obtained data from the amec program office in dod , which is responsible for tracking all financial activities related to u.s. participation in amec . in addition , the amec program office , at our request , obtained financial data from norway and russia . the united kingdom's data were provided to us by the amec steering group co - chairman . we obtained responses to a series of questions focused on data reliability covering issues such as data entry access , internal control procedures , and the accuracy and completeness of the data from a united kingdom amec official . although we did not interview amec officials from russia and norway , we discussed in detail the russian and norwegian financial data with u.s. amec officials . based on the united kingdom responses and these discussions with u.s. amec officials , we concluded that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . with regard to the u.s. contributions to amec , we reviewed the data and posed a number of questions to the amec program office to determine the reliability of the financial data . specifically , we ( 1 ) met with amec program officials to discuss these data in detail ; ( 2 ) obtained from key officials responses to a series of questions focused on data reliability covering issues such as data entry access , internal control procedures , and the accuracy and completeness of the data ; and ( 3 ) added follow - up questions whenever necessary . based on this work , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report based on the work we performed to assure the data's reliability . to assess amec's future program objectives , we examined documents prepared by amec and interviewed officials responsible for developing the draft strategic plan . specifically , in may 2004 , we attended a meeting of amec's technical guidance group in gettysburg , pennsylvania , where the plan was formulated . while at the meeting we discussed amec's future plans with ( 1 ) the united kingdom's amec steering group co - chairman ( representing the royal navy ) , ( 2 ) representatives from norway's ministry of defense and norway's defense research establishment , ( 3 ) a representative from russia's armed forces environmental safety organization , and ( 4 ) the amec steering group co - chairman from dod . in addition , we used the draft strategic plan to analyze amec's long - term goals and objectives , including its proposal to include nuclear security as a new program objective . we also discussed amec's nuclear security focus with officials from the office of the secretary of defense for cooperative threat reduction policy , dod's office of nonproliferation , and doe's national nuclear security administration .