navy . the process the navy uses for identifying its force structure needs begins with the identification of the navy's steady - state , peacetime operations requirements . the navy then conducts campaign and warfighting risk analyses to determine the force's ability to fight and win ssa - approved defense planning scenarios . specifically , the navy tests each force element against the most stressing defense planning scenario , which provides the navy with its battle force warfighting — to include surge — requirements . these warfighting requirements are compared with steady - state requirements and the more stressing forms the basis of the force structure assessment , which establishes the long - term force structure goals of the navy's 30-year shipbuilding plan and aviation plan , and informs the programming and budget processes , among other things . air force . the air force has a largely decentralized process for identifying its force structure needs that is part of the air force's annual budget development process . the air force manages its activities and budgets primarily across 12 core functions — the broad capabilities the air force provides to the combatant commanders . much of the force structure analysis that informs budget decisions is also conducted at the core function level . the air force also conducts occasional leadership - directed studies on future capability needs in certain mission areas ( eg , air superiority needs beyond 2030 ) as well as a unified risk analysis of its entire force structure that is intended to inform senior leader budget decisions . the air force is currently revising its approach to better integrate its capability development and analysis earlier in the process . marine corps . the marine corps conducts service - level reviews of its force structure at the discretion of the marine corps commandant . a force structure review is typically directed as a result of major service - level issues , such as end strength or capability changes . marine corps force 2025 is the most recent comprehensive assessment of the marine corps' force structure and organization . this was a three - phased effort that relied on one defense planning scenario to develop alternative force structures and evaluate them against a near - peer adversary . army . the process the army uses for identifying its force structure needs has two phases: ( 1 ) “capability demand analysis” where the army uses ssa - approved defense planning scenarios to determine how large a force is needed to support the national defense strategy and with what mix of units and ( 2 ) “resourcing and approval” where senior army leaders assess each capability within the army to determine where reductions and growth need to occur given available resources . the secretary of the army approves changes to force structure through the end of the future years defense program in a decision memorandum , and these decisions are documented in an army structure memorandum . the commandant directed this review to emphasize growing information warfare capabilities . the marine corps also conducts force optimization reviews , which are biennial reviews designed to optimize the current and planned future force , taking into consideration new and emerging requirements . iii .