omb did not provide comments . hhs's comments are reproduced in appendix ii . hhs agreed with gao's recommendations and provided additional detail on steps it had initiated or planned to implement . with respect to our recommendation that ohs direct regional offices to consistently perform and document risk management meetings , hhs reports it is reviewing the risk management meeting process to ensure it is consistently performed and documented in its centralized data system and that it has taken related steps , such as requiring the grant officer to identify known or suspected risks prior to an on - site review . hhs also indicates that it will issue explicit guidance on enrollment terminology for grantees and monitoring teams , as well as provide guidance and make other efforts to effectively communicate the mechanisms in place for grantees to meet the requirements for obligation and expenditure of funds . in addition , in connection with our observation regarding ohs managers' access to aggregated drawdown data , hhs commented that it is pursuing plans to obtain monthly reports of this nature for ohs and regional program managers . hhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services , the director of the office of management and budget , appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . for example , one new question asks reviewers , “has the grantee drawn down an appropriate amount of funds , given where it is in the start - up process ? ” targeted reviews for established grantees that have recently received a triennial review will cover matters related to recovery act spending and early head start expansion . in these visits , reviewers do not ask grantees about some requirements , like partnering with parents or transportation services . hhs and contractor officials have stated that all monitoring visits to new grantees will be implemented as “surprise” visits in response to gao findings of fraudulent enrollment and attendance and enrollment discrepancies among some head start grantees as reported in may 2010 . typically , the ohs monitoring contractor notified grantees of their scheduled review date 30 days prior to the visit . according to the contractor , this date is chosen from among multiple weeks selected by grantees . to prepare for monitoring visits to first - year expansion grantees , danya gathered documentation and data on grantees and ensured support systems were equipped to receive recovery act grantee data . danya gathered documentation and data on grantees to prepare for monitoring visits , such as grantee start - up proposals and information entered into the head start enterprise system , a user - restricted web - based database that includes pir data and results of monitoring meetings with grantees . danya has also adapted its data systems to track recovery act - funded grantee review activities . in addition , danya recruited and trained reviewers to conduct visits to expansion grantees . as of october 20 , 2010 , danya had recruited over 270 new reviewers for the first - year monitoring visits to expansion grantees . the contractor stated that it recruited reviewers with fiscal , health , and early childhood development expertise .