gao - 09-3sp . washington , d.c.: march 2009 . the comments are reprinted in appendix i . the department of commerce agreed with the overall findings and recommendations and appreciated our efforts in helping the bureau develop a successful evaluation plan for the 2020 census . the department also included comments from the bureau on certain statements in the report . the bureau commented on our discussion of its initial estimate that the contingency plan it adopted would increase the cost of fv . the bureau commented that its initial estimate that the contingency plan would increase the cost of fv by $15 million was based on estimated workloads , that the final fv workload was much smaller , and that it had not attempted to reestimate the cost effect of the contingency plan separately . we revised the text to more fully reflect that the estimated increase was based on estimated workload , and emphasized the changes in “cost per case,” which better reflects the effect on cost of changes in workload . the bureau also commented on our discussion of telecommunication trends and the bureau's need to understand how different sources of contact information can affect its goal to reduce the differential undercount . the bureau agreed that the trend toward wireless communication needs more attention in the future and described how it had not yet collected certain data that might be needed to carry out evaluation of the type we recommended . according to our analyses , the additional data are easily obtained . we revised the text to point more specifically to the type of data that could help the bureau with future decisions about how to reach historically undercounted groups . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of commerce , the director of the u.s. census bureau , and interested congressional committees . the report also is available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions about this report please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 2757 or goldenkoffr@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report were ty mitchell , assistant director ; mark abraham ; sara daleksi ; ron fecso ; andrea levine ; donna miller ; jessica thomsen ; jonathon ticehurst ; holly williams ; and katherine wulff . 2010 census: key efforts to include hard - to - count populations went generally as planned ; improvements could make the efforts more effective for next census . gao - 11-45 . washington , d.c.: december 14 , 2010 . 2010 census: data collection operations were generally completed as planned , but long - standing challenges suggest need for fundamental reforms . gao - 11-193 . washington , d.c.: december 14 , 2010 . 2010 census: census bureau continues to make progress in mitigating risks to a successful enumeration , but still faces various challenges . gao - 10-132t . washington , d.c.: october 7 , 2009 . gao cost estimating and assessment guide: best practices for developing and managing capital program costs .