staffing challenges . ntia and rus will need additional personnel to administer btop and bip . ntia's initial risk assessment indicated that a lack of experienced and knowledgeable staff was a key risk to properly implementing the program in accordance with the priorities of the recovery act . in its fiscal year 2010 budget request to congress , ntia estimated that it will need 30 full - time - equivalent staff in fiscal year 2009 and 40 more full - time - equivalent staff for fiscal year 2010 . while rus already has broadband loan and grant programs in place and staff to administer them , it also faces a shortage of personnel . rus's staffing assessments indicated that the agency will need 47 additional full - time - equivalents to administer bip . data challenges . ntia and rus lack detailed data on the availability of broadband service throughout the country that may limit their ability to target funds to priority areas . according to the agencies , priority areas include unserved and underserved areas . the agencies require applicants to assemble their proposed service areas from contiguous census blocks and to identify the proposed service area as unserved or underserved . however , the agencies will be awarding loans and grants before the national broadband plan or broadband mapping is complete . fcc must complete the national broadband plan by february 17 , 2010 , and ntia does not expect to have complete , national data on broadband service levels at the census block level until at least march 2010 . two - step evaluation process . to address the scheduling and staffing challenges , ntia and rus are using a two - step process . in the first step , the agencies will evaluate and score applications based on the criteria in the nofa , such as project purpose and project viability . during this step , the agencies will select which applications proceed to the second step . after the first step is complete and the pool of potential projects is reduced , the agencies intend to conduct the second step — due diligence , which involves requesting extra documentation to confirm and verify information contained in an application . since not all applications will proceed to the second step , not all applicants will be required to submit extra documentation which will reduce the amount of information the agencies must review . use of nongovernmental personnel . both ntia and rus are using nongovernmental personnel to address anticipated staffing needs associated with the evaluation of applications and awarding of funds . to evaluate applications , ntia is using a volunteer peer review system , in which three unpaid , expert reviewers examine and score applications ; these volunteers must have significant expertise and experience in broadband - related activities , such as the construction and operation of a broadband network . in addition , ntia will use contractors in an administrative role to assist the expert reviewers . rus will also use contractors to evaluate and score applications . regardless of who reviews the application , the final selection and funding decisions are to be formally made by a selecting official in each agency . publish applicant information .