some examples follow . a guard was caught using government computers , while he was supposed to be standing post , to further his private for - profit adult website . a guard attached a motion sensor to a pole at the entrance to a federal facility garage to alert him whenever a person was approaching his post . another law enforcement agency discovered the device and reported it to fps . a guard , during regular business hours , accidentally fired his firearm in a restroom while practicing drawing his weapon . a guard failed to recognize or did not properly x - ray a box containing semi - automatic handguns at the loading dock at one federal facility we visited . fps only became aware of the situation because the handguns were delivered to fps . while the guards were fired or disciplined in each of these incidents , they illustrate that fps is able to identify some instances where guards are not complying with post orders and the importance of why it should improve the oversight of its guard program . we identified substantial security vulnerabilities related to fps's guard program . each time they tried , in april and may 2009 , our investigators successfully passed undetected through security checkpoints monitored by fps's guards , with the components for an ied concealed on their persons at 10 level iv facilities in four cities in major metropolitan areas . the specific components for this device , items used to conceal the device components , and the methods of concealment that we used during our covert testing are classified , and thus are not discussed in this testimony . of the 10 level iv facilities we penetrated , 8 were government owned and 2 were leased facilities . the facilities included field offices of a u.s senator and u.s. representative as well as agencies of the departments of homeland security , transportation , health and human services , justice , state and others . the two leased facilities did not have any guards at the access control point at the time of our testing . using publicly available information , our investigators identified a type of device that a terrorist could use to cause damage to a federal facility and threaten the safety of federal workers and the general public . the device was an ied made up of two parts — a liquid explosive and a low - yield detonator — and included a variety of materials not typically brought into a federal facility by employees or the public . although the detonator itself could function as an ied , investigators determined that it could also be used to set off a liquid explosive and cause significantly more damage . to ensure safety during this testing , we took precautions so that the ied would not explode . for example , we lowered the concentration level of the material . to gain entry into each of the 10 level iv facilities , our investigators showed photo identification ( state driver's license ) and walked through the magnetometer machines without incident . the investigators also placed their briefcases with the ied material on the conveyor belt of the x - ray machine , but the guards detected nothing .