accountability . the organization's human capital decisions are guided by a data - driven , results - oriented planning and accountability system . our recent work has shown that dhs and other federal agencies , such as the securities and exchange commission , have begun to use opm's framework as the basis for preparing strategic it and other human capital plans . talent management . the organization makes progress toward closing gaps or making up deficiencies in most mission - critical skills , knowledge , and competencies . according to dhs cio officials , they used the opm framework in developing the it human capital plan that they included in the august 2006 report to congress . dhs has developed an it human capital plan that is largely consistent with opm guidance . specifically , of 27 key practices in opm's framework , the department's plan and related documentation fully address 15 practices and partially address the other 12 , meaning that these 12 are missing elements that are essential to having a well - defined and executable plan . dhs officials responsible for developing the plan attributed the missing elements to , among other things , the department's decision to focus its resources on other it priorities . these officials also stated that until the missing elements are fully addressed , it is unlikely that the plan will be effectively and efficiently implemented , which in turn will continue to put dhs at risk of not having sufficient people with the right knowledge , skills , and abilities to manage and deliver its mission - critical it systems . examples of the key practices that dhs has fully and partially addressed in its it human capital plan and related documentation , organized according to opm's six standards for success , are given in the following text . also , table 3 is a summary of the dhs plan's satisfaction of all 27 key practices . appendix ii contains our full analysis of the plan's satisfaction of these 27 practices . the plan and related documentation satisfy a number of key practices in this standards area , including provision for incentives for new recruits , training for existing staff , and an exchange program to draw on private sector personnel with necessary skills . this is important because such practices are essential ingredients to acquiring , training , and deploying an effective workforce . however , the plan does not provide for regular collection and analysis of data on promotions , conversions , separations , and retirements to show an understanding of trends and related indicators of performance . without this information , dhs will be limited in its ability to know whether the techniques being employed are effective , and thus performance results and accountability goals are being met . leadership and knowledge management . dhs's plan and supporting documentation provide for a number of leadership and knowledge management practices . for example , dhs planning documents ( eg , dhs succession management plan fy 2006 – 2009 ) supporting the it human capital plan describe and encourage leadership development across all dhs components through application of the department's leadership competency framework and succession approach to workforce planning efforts .