we did not verify the basis for their responses . our survey showed that some states are able to provide funds above the required match ; some states provide only the required match ; and some states are unable to provide a match based on $14,000 per student and therefore fund the program at a lower level and receive less money from ngb . for example , california is able to provide additional support beyond the required match through additional money provided from the state general fund and funding from the program's local school district . in 2004 , california spent approximately $20,200 per graduate . oregon , on the other hand , funds its program primarily through state education money . due to recent state budget difficulties , oregon cannot fund the program at $14,000 per student . in 2004 , oregon spent approximately $12,600 per graduate . according to the national guard bureau , all 29 programs are providing the services required by the cooperative agreements , and several states have added program enhancements such as field trips or vocational classes . however , some states reported that they reduced nonrequired services to stay within their budgets . for example , they implemented pay and hiring freezes ; eliminated the student stipend ; and eliminated program enrichment activities , such as field trips and vocational classes . some states told us that additional funding , provided by a change in the cost - share ratio or an increase in the per student funding amount , would allow them to restore some of these services . although ngb has several mechanisms in place for overseeing the challenge program , it lacks a complete oversight framework , making it difficult to measure the effectiveness of the program . a complete oversight framework , as suggested by the government performance and results act of 1993 ( the results act ) and standards for internal control in the federal government , includes performance goals and measures against which to objectively measure performance as well as a mechanism for tracking findings of audits or reviews and responding to those findings . currently , ngb does not require participating states to establish performance goals for individual programs and therefore does not have a firm basis for evaluating program outcomes and dod's return on investment . in accordance with the cooperative agreements , u.s. property and fiscal officers in each state are required to conduct full audits of state challenge programs at least every 3 years . graduates can have placements in more than one of these categories . for example , an individual might be attending school and working part - time . challenge program sites continue to update their placement records after the 12-month follow - up period when they come in contact with former students . during the longitudinal study , for example , the contractor has been able to update placement data based on information received from state program officials and graduates . figure 6 shows post - residential placement trends for the past 3 reporting years . the total numbers of graduates placed in these 3 years are 2,407 in 2003 ; 3,698 in 2004 ; and 4,086 in 2005 .