same as above description . technical assistance training is used to educate mark - to - market property tenants about the restructuring process , how it may affect them , their rights , and what they can do to participate in the process . technical assistance and / or capacity building contract ( competitive ) cooperative agreement - formula driven ( noncompetitive ) grant ( competitive ) grant and cooperative agreement ( competitive ) grant ( competitive ) grant ( competitive ) evaluate and reduce lead - based paint hazards , especially in housing rented or owned by low - income families . technical assistance training and capacity building funding help recipients evaluate and control housing - related , lead - based paint hazards , and provide outreach and education activities . technical assistance and / or capacity building grant and contract ( competitive ) hud staff only use technical assistance funding for travel expenses . the general accounting office , the investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . you can print these documents in their entirety , including charts and other graphics . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . the list contains links to the full - text document files . to have gao e - mail this list to you every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to daily e - mail alert for newly released products” under the gao reports heading . an assessment of this issue was beyond the scope of this review . any award , regardless of the type of funding instrument , has a fixed performance period . the contract request for proposal or nofa will stipulate the proposed period of performance and whether additional funding can be provided beyond the period of performance without further competition . the five offices that administer technical assistance have basic oversight procedures in place . such procedures usually include monitoring the technical assistance provider's performance by reviewing payment requests and financial reports and the recipient's written evaluation of the technical assistance provider's performance . most program offices require technical assistance providers to submit quarterly , annual , or close - out reports — or a combination of these reports — on the status of their technical assistance programs , which are to be reviewed by hud program staff .