, supplemental ) . tsa recognized that the creation of the ccsp added additional regulated entities to tsi oversight responsibilities , and incorporated additional inspection requirements into the tsi regulatory activities plan . tsa concurred with our third recommendation that tsa develop a plan for how and when the agency intends to require the screening of in - transit cargo . tsa stated that the agency has implemented changes , effective august 1 , 2010 , that will require 100 percent of in - transit cargo to be screened unless it can otherwise be verified as screened . tsa's action is an important step toward addressing the potential security vulnerability associated with in - transit cargo and if implemented effectively , will address the intent of our recommendation . because this is a significant change and potentially operationally challenging , it will be important to closely monitor the industry's understanding and implementation of this requirement to help ensure that 100 percent screening of in - transit cargo is being conducted . tsa did not concur with our fourth recommendation to develop a contingency plan for meeting the mandate as it applies to domestic cargo that considers alternatives to address potential ccsp participation shortfalls and screening technology limitations . tsa stated that a contingency plan is unnecessary since effective august 1 , 2010 , 100 percent of domestic cargo transported on passenger aircraft will be required to be screened . the agency also stated that there is no feasible contingency plan that can be implemented by tsa that does not compromise security or create disparities in the availability of screening resources . however , the agency noted that several alternatives are available to and are currently being exercised by industry . the agency also stated that tsa developed the ccsp in collaboration with industry stakeholders to alleviate the burden on airlines to screen 100 percent of cargo while still meeting the mandate . we disagree that a contingency plan is unnecessary and unfeasible . as noted in this report , although tsa's approach would ensure that 100 percent of domestic cargo transported on passenger aircraft is screened , not transporting unscreened cargo could negatively affect the flow of commerce . in addition , while we recognize the ccsp as a positive and critical step toward achieving the screening mandate as it applies to domestic cargo , we continue to believe that there are feasible alternatives that tsa should consider to address potential ccsp participation shortfalls and screening technology limitations . such alternatives discussed in this report include mandating ccsp participation for certain members of the air cargo supply chain and requiring the screening of some or all cargo before it is loaded onto uld pallets and containers . effective may 1 , 2010 , tsa embraced one of the alternatives cited in this report by requiring freight forwarder ccsfs to screen all cargo before it is loaded onto uld pallets and containers . expanding this requirement to additional industry stakeholders could be a feasible alternative to address both ccsp participation shortfalls and screening technology limitations . moreover , although many industry stakeholders may support the ccsp , key partners in the program — shippers — have not joined the program at the levels targeted by tsa , thus jeopardizing its success .