to describe the extent to which the u.s . postal service ( usps ) follows leading practices , we compared usps's process for planning , selecting , managing , and evaluating capital investments to leading practices . we identified leading practices for the four phases — planning , selecting , managing , and evaluating capital investments — through analysis and review of the office of management and budget ( omb ) capital programming guide supplement to circular a - 11 , which identified leading practices from government agencies and the private sector , and examples of executive agency implementation of the capital planning and investment control ( cpic ) process . we identified leading practices that are applicable to usps's business model , which requires it to fulfill its mission of providing prompt , reliable , and efficient universal service to the public while remaining financially self - sustaining . however , unlike a private corporation , usps is bound by legal and other restrictions that limit its ability to make certain types of business decisions — such as eliminating particular lines of businesses , cutting back on services , and / or altering its business model in ways that inhibit its universal service provision . external and internal subject matter experts with experience in both the public the private sectors reviewed the leading practices we identified and found them to be reasonable for usps capital investments as applicable . these experts all provided comments that we incorporated into our capital investment leading practices . we compared our identified leading practices to usps's capital investment process . to understand usps's capital investment process , we reviewed usps policy , documentation , and testimonial evidence on the capital investment process . usps officials reviewed our initial description and provided feedback , which we incorporated into our work . we also met with usps officials responsible for the delivering results , innovation , value and efficiency ( drive ) strategic initiatives to assess the extent to which usps conformed to the leading practice of linking its capital investments to its strategic plans . we also met with and obtained documentation from usps's office of inspector general ( oig ) , to obtain an overall assessment of usps's capital investment process . to gather more detailed information about how usps policies were applied in specific cases , and to determine whether usps policies were consistently followed for a selection of high - cost capital investment projects , we selected 5 of 28 projects that were approved for over $25 million and were approved for funding after usps experienced net losses in fiscal year 2007 . from these 28 projects , we selected the four that had a positive projected return on investment as determined by usps , were not specific to a particular geographical area , and were completed by fiscal year 2012 . we included a fifth project ( that was fully deployed , but not yet complete ) due to usps's significant investment in the project ( see table 3 ) . we met with the program managers for each of the projects and reviewed documentation to assess the process for managing and evaluating these projects , and we conducted site visits to see four of the five projects .