this report expands on that briefing . specifically , we ( 1 ) evaluated the actions dhs and its components have taken to implement the acquisition oversight plan through may 2007 and ( 2 ) identified the challenges dhs faces in implementing the plan . we also identified opportunities for strengthening oversight conducted through the plan . to conduct our work , we reviewed relevant gao and dhs office of the inspector general reports and dhs documents , such as the oversight plan , completed reviews , and guidance to components . we interviewed officials in the office of the cpo and nine dhs components . appendix i presents our scope and methodology in more detail . we conducted our work from february 2007 to june 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in 2003 , the department of homeland security was created and tasked with integrating numerous agencies and offices with varying missions from the general services administration ; the federal bureau of investigation ; and the departments of agriculture , defense , energy , health and human services , justice , transportation , and treasury ; as well as the coast guard and the secret service . the plan is composed of four recurring reviews: self - assessment , operational status , on - site , and acquisition planning . the cpo has issued an acquisition oversight program guidebook , provided training on self - assessment and operational status reviews , and began implementation of the four reviews in the plan ( see table 1 ) . the acquisition oversight plan generally incorporates basic principles of an effective and accountable acquisition function and includes mechanisms to monitor acquisition performance . specifically , the plan incorporates dhs policy , internal controls , and elements of an effective acquisition function: organizational alignment and leadership , policies and processes , human capital , knowledge and information management , and financial accountability . while it is too early to assess the plan's overall effectiveness in improving acquisition performance , initial implementation of the first self - assessment has helped most components prioritize actions to address identified weaknesses . in addition , the cpo has helped several components implement organizational and process changes that may improve acquisition performance over time . for example , one component , with the assistance of the cpo , elevated its acquisition office to a level equivalent to its financial office . however , the acquisition planning reviews are not sufficient to determine if components' adequately plan their acquisitions . federal acquisition regulations and dhs directives require agencies to perform acquisition planning in part to ensure good value , including cost and quality . component hcas are responsible to ensure that acquisition plans are completed in a timely manner , include an efficient and effective acquisition strategy and the resulting contract action or actions support the component's mission . inadequate procurement planning can lead to higher costs , schedule delays , and systems that do not meet mission objectives . several recent reviews have identified problems in dhs's acquisition planning .