see figure 4 below . corps officials attributed this delay to the years of planning and community involvement needed to reach consensus on the lock design , as well as insufficient resources to address the lock replacement because of other construction projects.provide a nearly three - fold increase in lock chamber capacity ; however , corps officials told us that project costs have also increased considerably over time , with current construction costs estimated at $1.5 billion . the planned replacement lock will the corps uses performance indicators to measure the performance of its locks . each year the corps measures its performance in meeting a number of high priority goals , and as part of this effort , the corps assesses the extent to which the navigation projects are meeting authorized purposes and evolving conditions . the corps has developed performance metrics for navigation operation and maintenance activities to provide an indicator of the extent to which the corps is meeting those goals . recent data illustrate the effect that aging infrastructure is having on mts performance ( see table 2 ) . these metrics show that the hours of scheduled and unscheduled lock closures because of mechanical failures have increased since fiscal year 2009 . moreover , according to a senior corps navigation program official , there has been a consistent trend of deteriorating lock performance since 2000 . for some indicators , such as the number of preventable lock closures over 24 hours , performance in 2011 was better than in 2010 ; however , the performance of the locks still failed to meet corps' targets for 2011 . also , in fiscal year 2011 , the corps did not meet performance targets for locks at both inland waterways and coastal ports and harbors . the nation's road connectors at ports are used by trucks with heavy loads and are often in poor condition . dot has reported that much of the nation's freight transportation infrastructure was developed before 1960 to serve industrial and population centers in the northeast and midwest . since 1960 , however , there have been fundamental changes in the american economy as the population and manufacturing have grown in the south and west coast . according to dot , the growth in freight transportation is a major contributor to congestion in urban areas and congestion in turn affects the timeliness and reliability of freight transportation . in its december 2000 report to congress , dot found that many of the nation's intermodal road connectors to ports were under - maintained . for example , highway connectors to ports had twice the percentage of pavement deficiencies as non - interstate national highway system routes . in that study , dot found that 15 percent of the port connector mileage , which it defined as the roadway used by trucks to travel between major highways and ports , was in poor or very poor condition . more recently in 2004 , dot reported that about one - third of the port connector system was in need of additional capacity because of current congestion and that over 40 percent of the port connector mileage needs some type of pavement or lane - width improvement .