gao - 06-938 . washington , d.c.: september 20 , 2006 . defense management: actions needed to improve operational planning and visibility of costs for ballistic missile defense . gao - 06-473 . washington , d.c.: may 31 , 2006 . mda assumed a certain quantity of each element . for example , mda officials told us that they assumed 96 standard missile - 3 block 2a missiles because , at the time mda prepared the report , they planned to buy 96 block 1a missiles developed to intercept short - range ballistic missiles . however , mda did not solicit input from the services , joint staff , or combatant commands on whether they had done or begun analyses to determine element quantities . third , mda did not conduct a sensitivity analysis to identify the effects of cost drivers . a sensitivity analysis is a way to identify risk by demonstrating how the cost estimates would change in response to different values for specific cost drivers . therefore , a sensitivity analysis should be performed when developing cost estimates , and the results should be documented and reported to decision makers . this means , for example , that mda could have computed costs with and without significant categories of costs such as forward bases to identify the effect that adding forward bases would have on operating costs . the house armed services committee report on the national defense authorization bill for fiscal year 2006 recognized that operational capabilities and costs must be taken into account when making decisions on future funding support . finally , the cost estimates did not estimate costs over time — a process known as time phasing — which can assist decision makers with budgetary decisions . the mda report showed an annual cost estimate but did not state for how many years the development , production , and operating costs may be incurred . although mda officials stated they did not prepare time - phased cost estimates in order to prepare the report to congress in a timely manner , they agreed that showing cost estimates over time would be important information to support investment decisions at key decision points . key principles for developing life - cycle cost estimates also include two steps for assessing the confidence of cost estimates . however , mda did not take these steps to assess the confidence of the estimates reported in march 2006 . first , the missile defense agency did not conduct a risk analysis to assess the level of uncertainty for most of the cost estimates in the mda report . risk and uncertainty refer to the fact that , because a cost estimate is a prediction of the future , it is likely that the estimated cost will differ from the actual cost . it is useful to perform a risk analysis to quantify the degree of uncertainty in the estimates . by using standard computer simulation techniques , an overall level of uncertainty can be developed for cost estimates . in contrast , mda officials told us that they could only provide a judgmental confidence level for the most of the cost estimates .