ii ) . we also received oral comments from two groups representing industry organizations , the hospice association of american ( haa ) and the national hospice and palliative care organization ( nhpco ) , as well as from the large , for - profit hospice that provided the patient - specific visit data . in commenting on a draft of this report , cms stated that it agreed with our recommendations and intends to use our findings to supplement and reinforce preliminary evaluations the agency has made and future studies that are planned . in responding to our recommendation that it collect comprehensive , patient - specific data on hospice visits and services and the costs of these services , cms stated that it recognized the need for this type of analysis . it stated that collection of these data would require additional research funding , and it is uncertain when such funding would be available . cms noted that it has initiated efforts to collect data on costs with the recent establishment of the hospice cost reports . cms stated that it hoped the recommendations in our report could help the agency in developing a comprehensive research strategy for the hospice benefit . in responding to our recommendation that cms determine whether the hospice payment methodology and payment categories need to be modified , including any adjustments for small providers , cms agreed that the methodology implemented in 1983 was based on a delivery model that may have changed since that time . it concurred that the methodology should be reevaluated to determine its current appropriateness . it again stated that research funding is limited . cms agreed that the costs of drugs and other therapies , the number of hospice beneficiaries with noncancer diagnoses , and the mean length of stay have all changed since 1983 . cms stated that we did not demonstrate in the draft report that the provision of these and other therapies have increased the cost of providing care beyond the present payment . in the draft report , we stated that there may be problems with the distribution of hospice payments , but that comprehensive data are not available to evaluate the number of visits or costs of services provided during a medicare hospice stay . as noted in the draft report , the overall payment rate across all types of care is higher than our estimate of hospices' overall costs . in its comments , cms also raised concerns that we implied that payment methodology changes be made for small hospices before cms collects comprehensive data . we have clarified our conclusion to indicate the need for comprehensive , patient - specific data on the visits and services delivered by hospices and the costs of these services to inform any changes to the payment methodology . in response to our recommendation that cms should submit a legislative proposal to the congress to implement those modifications that would require a change in medicare law , cms stated that should it determine changes are necessary , it would evaluate those changes as part of its overall legislative strategy . cms also made technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . the external reviewers generally agreed with our findings and recommendations .