foster compatibility of the built and natural systems . achieving the long - term sustainability of the ecosystem will not be possible if decisions about the built environment are not consistent with the ecosystem's health . land use decisions must be compatible with the ecosystem's restoration while supporting of the needs for water supply , flood control , and recreation . the goal will also require developing public understanding and support of ecosystem restoration issues . the task force has published several documents and developed strategies and plans to address specific restoration issues since its establishment in 1993 . however , at the time of our review in 1999 , it had not developed an overall strategic plan to guide the restoration effort and accomplish its goals . we recommended that the task force develop a strategic plan that would clearly lay out how the restoration would occur and contained quantifiable goals and performance measures that could be used to track the restoration's progress . on july 31 , 2000 , the task force issued its strategic plan entitled coordinating success: strategy for restoration of the south florida ecosystem . the july 2000 plan submitted by the task force fully addresses two of the four recommended elements . the plan identifies the resources needed and identifies the agencies accountable for accomplishing specific actions . in addition , because the task force included discussions of several important aspects of outlining how the restoration will occur , we believe the plan partially addresses the third element . ( the section after this one discusses why the plan does not fully address the third element. ) in identifying the resources needed to achieve the restoration and assigning accountability for accomplishing specific actions , the plan states that it will cost an estimated $14.8 billion to restore the south florida ecosystem and describes major programs and plans that will contribute to the restoration . the plan also includes an appendix that provides additional information on the cost estimate , the categories of costs , and how the estimate was developed . the appendix contains information on the estimated cost of each goal and shows how the costs will be shared between the federal and state governments . information on the ongoing and future programs and activities that are associated with the goals , the agencies accountable for implementing those programs and activities , the total cost of each program and activity , and the amount appropriated for or allocated to those programs through fiscal year 2000 is also presented in the appendix . the plan also provides information on the over 260 projects that the task force believes will contribute to achieving the ecosystem's restoration . the plan contains a project summary table that clearly identifies which of the goals and subgoals each project is associated with and provides information on each project's total costs , the lead agencies accountable for implementing each project , the start and end date of each project , and the amount that has been appropriated for each project to date . for example , the plan's table shows that the modified water deliveries project is associated with subgoal 1.a.3 , removing barriers to sheetflow , which is one of the subgoals of goal 1 — get the water right .