this report does not include any recommendations . we provided a draft of this report to dod for comment . however , dod did not provide written comments and provided technical comments , which we incorporated in our report as appropriate . the alternative process is consistent with the relevant mhpi projects' operating agreements . the standard process has thresholds governing potential withdrawals or expenditures for army mhpi project litigation expenses . in the standard process , army officials generally make major decisions related to mhpi projects , including litigation costs , by following guidance in the residential communities initiative portfolio and asset management handbook . for example , the army treats litigation not accounted for in the budget process as a major decision requiring higher - level approval within the army when costs exceed either 5 to 10 percent of the annual budget or $250,000 over budget . in the standard process , army officials generally seek approval of such major decisions from either the office of the assistant chief of staff for installation management or the office of the assistant secretary of the army ( installations , energy and environment ) . the process involves sharing litigation information and estimated costs between the developer and four offices within the army ( mhpi project office , garrison commander , office of the assistant chief of staff for installation management , and the office of the assistant secretary of the army ) . however , according to army officials , the standard process has not yet been used to approve any major decisions regarding litigation expenses , because the pinnacle cases are the only cases that met the major - decision threshold criteria whose litigation expenses have been approved and would have gone through this process had decisions not been made to restrict access to information pertaining to this litigation . pinnacle then filed a cross - suit seeking to uphold the amendments . according to army officials , the army wanted pinnacle removed as the mhpi projects' property manager due to the alleged fraud and mismanagement . additionally , army officials stated that they have been motivated by concerns for resident safety because it has been alleged that pinnacle engaged in falsifying records regarding maintenance and repairs that pinnacle employees were responsible for performing at all four project locations . an army official stated that pinnacle has attempted to obtain information on the amount of funds the mhpi projects have spent on litigation and other litigation strategy - type information , such as documents provided to the army by clark , both through discovery and through a freedom of information act request , which the army ( with department of justice assistance ) successfully denied . according to army officials , the relevant property - management agreements include a provision that a party who sues under the agreement and substantially prevails is entitled to recoup their legal fees from the losing party . further , our review found that the mhpi projects' property - management agreements include a provision allowing the substantially prevailing party in litigation brought to enforce or interpret the agreements to be repaid for all court costs and for the reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys and certified public accountants .