dod concurred with our recommendation . while dod did provide an explanation in its february 2016 status report for its shortfall in estimated contracted services reductions , it did not provide a description of actions it is taking to achieve the required savings . we continue to believe that our previous recommendation is valid and should be fully implemented . dod's february 2016 status report does not include an efficiencies plan for reducing its civilian and contracted services workforces in fiscal year 2015 . section 955 of the fiscal year 2013 ndaa required dod to develop an efficiencies plan in order to reduce total funding for the civilian and contractor workforce from fiscal year 2012 through fiscal year 2017 at a rate not less , in percentage terms , than the savings in funding for basic military personnel pay achieved from reductions in military end strengths over the same period . the plan was to be developed within 90 days of the enactment of the ndaa , which would have been april 4 , 2013 . we have previously reported that dod's first two reports from september 2014 and february 2015 do not include a comprehensive description of the efficiencies plan for reductions that would provide congressional decision makers with information on how the department will achieve required savings . dod also stated that it continues to conform to the principles and tenets of strategic workforce planning and continues to conform to the plan prescribed in the department's planning , programming , budgeting , and execution processes . dod's february 2016 report does reference its strategic workforce plan and its planning , programming , budgeting , and execution processes , however it does not include a comprehensive description of an implementation plan that dod would use to achieve the congressionally mandated financial savings . without a comprehensive description of such a plan , congressional decision makers do not have complete information on how the department will achieve required section 955 savings . in response to the recommendation in our december 2015 report to include a description demonstrating that the plan is consistent with policies and procedures implementing workforce - management laws and steps that the department is taking to ensure that no unjustified transfers between workforces take place as part of the implementing plan , dod stated in its written comments that its february 2016 status report references dod's strategic workforce plan , which outlines workforce management laws that the department follows . it also states it has taken actions outside of the february 2016 report to ensure that the department remains in compliance with section 955 and other statutory requirements . however , we reported in july 2014 that dod's strategic workforce plan for fiscal years 2013-2018 lacked required elements under section 115b of title 10 of the u.s. code . specifically , we found that the strategic workforce plan did not address all statutory reporting requirements , such as the requirement to include an assessment of the appropriate mix of military , civilian , and contractor personnel capabilities . in may 2013 , we recommended that dod determine the appropriate workforce mix and as of august 2016 , dod had not yet done so .