prohibited transactions . ira owners are not permitted to engage in prohibited transactions that personally benefit the owner or other disqualified persons in a way other than as a vehicle to save for retirement . examples of such prohibited transactions include ira owners selling their own property to an ira , or taking a salary from an ira - funded business . ira owners who believe that an otherwise prohibited transaction should be permitted , may apply to the department of labor ( dol ) to request an exemption for a specific transaction . unrelated business income . earnings and profits made in tax - deferred savings vehicles like iras generally are reinvested in the account without generating current federal tax liability , but investments in certain unconventional assets can generate ongoing tax liability for ira owners . any ira that earns $1,000 or more of gross income from an unrelated business must file form 990-t exempt organization business income tax return with irs and pay related taxes . fair market value ( fmv ) . for example , if an ira owner engages in a prohibited transaction that has not been exempted by dol , the ira will lose its tax - favored status , and the account is treated as distributing all of its assets to the owner at the fmv on the first day of the year in which the prohibited transaction occurred . noncompliance with ira rules — if not detected — can also lead to millions of dollars in uncollected tax revenue for the government . individuals who invest in certain unconventional assets using roth iras can avoid taxation on investment gains . for example , founders of companies ( or key initial investors ) who use iras to invest in nonpublicly traded shares of their newly formed companies can realize many millions of dollars in tax - favored gains on their investment if the company is successful . irs is responsible for enforcing ira tax laws , including rules that apply when ira owners invest in unconventional assets . within irs , four business operating divisions have responsibilities for enforcing compliance with ira rules . when ira owners invest in less conventional and nonpublicly traded assets , custodians may find it challenging to properly report the fmv of those assets . starting with tax year 2015 , irs began requiring ira custodians to report selected information on unconventional assets in their clients' accounts . for some hard - to - value unconventional assets , ira owners may need to supply custodians with independent appraisals or other evidence to substantiate an asset's current fmv . failure to abide by the rules governing iras with unconventional assets can have significant consequences for ira owners . table 1 provides an overview of each division's ira enforcement activities . third - party reporting by ira custodians provides information that taxpayers can use in preparing their tax returns and that irs can use to identify noncompliant taxpayers and help close the tax gap . in 2015 , irs began requiring custodians to report new information to help identify iras with hard - to - value unconventional assets .