sec . 1400 ( c ) . see pub . 111-203 , §1062 for the requirement that the secretary of the treasury designate a date for the transfer of responsibility , among others , for promulgating regulations under various federal consumer financial laws to cfpb . see 75 fed . reg . 57252 ( sept. 20 , 2010 ) for treasury's designation of july 21 , 2011 , as the transfer date . wide plan for retrospective review of regulatory actions.lenders can use a borrower's residual income as one measure of ability to make a mortgage payment . hud does not maintain key data that it would need to conduct the reviews — such as information on points and fees and interest rate spreads ( criteria for determining if a loan is safe harbor or rebuttable presumption ) and data needed to calculate residual income . to mitigate the data gaps , hud officials said they have considered using hmda and nmdb data . but as we discussed previously , the availability dates of the expanded hmda and nmdb data — such as information on points and fees — are not known . as of may 2015 , the agency also had not identified how it would measure the effects of these regulations , including metrics , baselines , and analytical methods . hud officials stated that they have not finalized plans for their review of the qm regulations because of the uncertainty about the availability of data resources , such as nmdb . they noted that once the nmdb database was released , they would be able to determine whether it could be used as a resource to monitor and examine qm lending . but , without a plan to identify how to obtain necessary data and identify metrics , baselines and analytical methods , hud may be limited in its ability to effectively review its regulations and achieve the intended outcomes of its reviews . agency efforts to assess the qrm regulations included identifying outcomes and potential data sources and methodologies , but have not yet identified specific metrics , baselines , or analytical methods . the six agencies responsible for the qrm regulations — fdic , fhfa , federal reserve , hud , occ , and sec — have committed to commence a review of the qrm definition no later than 4 years after the effective date of the final rule ( dec. 24 , 2015 , for the qrm - related provisions ) , and every 5 years thereafter . in the risk - retention final rule , the agencies recognized that mortgage and securitization market conditions and practices change over time , and therefore stated it would be beneficial to review the qrm definition . more specifically , the agencies would consider the structures of securitizations , roles of the various transaction parties , relationships between enterprise and private - label markets , and trends in mortgage products in various markets and structures . they also stated that they would review how the qrm definition affected residential mortgage underwriting and securitization under evolving market conditions .