gao - 01-721 . ( see app . iii for a list of these reports. ) among other things , some of these reports often included sections on agency efforts to reduce fraud , waste , and errors in programs that reported improper payments . they also compared fiscal years 2001 and 2002 performance plans for consistency and assessed the progress reported in achieving these outcomes as well as the strategies agencies have in place to achieve them . recent revisions to omb circular a - 11 require selected agencies to report improper payment information in their initial budget submissions to omb . in addition , one of the initiatives in the president's management agenda , fiscal year 2002 , called for agencies to establish a baseline on the extent of erroneous payments . washington , d.c.: august 23 , 2001 . u.s. general accounting office . department of commerce: status of achieving key outcomes and addressing major management challenges . gao - 01-793 . we reviewed the budget of the united states government , fiscal year 2003 , to assess the extent to which it contained the improper payment information agencies were to submit with their initial budget submissions to omb and / or the baseline information requested in the agenda . since little information was publicly available on agency actions to reduce improper payments , we reviewed agency responses you provided us to the june 2001 letters that you and the chairman of the senate committee on governmental affairs sent to the heads and oigs of the 24 cfo act agencies . these letters asked the agency heads and oigs to assess their improper payment efforts in the five areas outlined in our october 2001 report , strategies to manage improper payments: learning from public and private sector organizations . these areas are ( 1 ) the control environment , ( 2 ) risk assessments , ( 3 ) control activities , ( 4 ) information and communications , and ( 5 ) monitoring . we also selected four cfo act agencies ( usda , hhs , hud , and ssa ) for more detailed review of their efforts to reduce improper payments . these agencies accounted for over 97 percent of the improper payments reported in fiscal years 1999 and 2000 financial statements . at these agencies , we spoke to officials in the inspector general , chief financial officer , and program offices and obtained reports and other documentation evidencing actions that they have taken or are planning to take to reduce improper payments . we focused on obtaining information on the agency actions to reduce the improper payments reported in their financial statements and / or performance plans . we also obtained information on barriers that they encountered when attempting to develop and / or implement methodologies to reduce improper payments . finally , we met with omb officials and reviewed documents regarding omb's progress in implementing recommendations made in our prior report . this included a review of revisions to omb circular a - 11 and correspondence and other guidance to agencies on improper payment - related issues . we performed our work from may 2001 through april 2002 . our work was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .