v ) . to address the first objective , regarding the extent to which bjs followed guidelines , we obtained quality guideline documents from bjs , the department of justice's office of justice programs , the department of justice , and the national research council . the guidelines that we obtained from these organizations covered the period between february 2001 , when the first product based on the 1999 police - public contact survey was issued , and june 2006 , when the most recent product based on the 2002 survey was issued . we included these federal organizations in our review because bjs is a component of the office of justice programs , which in turn is a component of the department of justice , and bjs considers itself to be “governed by” the information quality guidelines of these organizations . we included the national research council in our review because it is a widely recognized organization that issued guidelines that were intended to be statements of best practice and provide information on what constitutes an effective statistical organization . ( 2 ) what key factors affected whether and how bjs followed available guidelines ? to assess the extent to which bjs followed guidelines to help ensure the accuracy and integrity of its product issuance processes for the 1999 and 2002 police - public contact surveys , we reviewed quality guidelines pertaining to the review , approval , and dissemination of written products issued by the national research council ( a private , nonprofit institution that is a component of the congressionally chartered national academies ) , the department of justice , the office of justice programs , and bjs itself . the guidelines that we reviewed covered the period between february 2001 , when the first product based on the 1999 survey was issued , and june 2006 , when the most recent product based on the 2002 survey was issued . we initially identified a total of 63 guidelines from the four organizations . because the organizations had a number of similar guidelines , we eliminated the overlap by reducing the list to 24 nonduplicative guidelines . to determine the extent to which bjs followed each guideline , we developed a data collection instrument for recording information on whether bjs fully , partially , or did not at all follow the guideline . for bjs's 1999 and 2002 police - public contact survey reports and the one press release that was issued , we asked bjs to assess the extent to which it followed each of 15 guidelines , and provide us with documentary evidence supporting its assessment . we completed the instrument for the remaining 9 guidelines for which we already had sufficient information from bjs and office of justice programs documents and interviews , and asked bjs to confirm or not confirm our assessments . two gao analysts reviewed bjs's responses and all available supporting documentary and testimonial evidence , and made a final determination on the extent to which we believed bjs followed each guideline . we provided our findings to bjs for review and comment .