v ) . the commissioner cited several steps being taken with respect to the eic , including the development of the decision support tool and convening of the irs / treasury task force , referred to earlier , and the redesign of eic taxpayer notices . the commissioner said that the irs / treasury task force would consider the findings discussed in this report in evaluating “legislative and administrative solutions to recertification problems.” with respect to our recommendation that irs revise form 8862 , the commissioner said that the wage and investment division will study the use of form 8862 in eic recertifications and the examination of related issues . based on the results of that study and our findings , irs “will evaluate possible revisions to the form that will make communications clearer , reduce taxpayer burden , and aid the recertification and examination processes.” irs anticipates completion of this study by june 2003 . such a study , with the objectives cited by the commissioner , would be responsive to our recommendation . regarding our recommendation that irs revise form 886-r and similar forms , the commissioner said that irs plans to have revised forms that incorporate feedback from taxpayers and tax practitioners by the 2003 filing season . we agree wholeheartedly with the plan to obtain feedback from taxpayers and practitioners and look forward to seeing the results of these efforts . however , the commissioner's response did not clearly indicate that the intended revisions to the forms would reflect the specific changes we recommended . we encourage the commissioner to ensure that the recommended changes are made . in response to our two recommendations relating to child care provided by a taxpayer's relative , the commissioner said the following: “a child - care provider's statement by itself may not be sufficient to verify eligibility . child care arrangements . among other things , the report concluded , using fall 1995 data , that “fifty percent of preschoolers were cared for by a relative , with grandparents being the single most frequently mentioned care provider ( 30 percent ) .” in reports issued in may 1997 and november 1999 , we discussed three major barriers that confront low - income persons in trying to find child care: availability ; accessibility ; and cost , especially for infants and toddlers . as discussed in these reports , many parents of low - income families are likely to obtain work at low - skill jobs , such as janitor or cashier , that operate on nonstandard schedules at workplaces that often do not offer child care during hours outside the traditional “9 to 5” work schedule ; according to a 1999 urban institute paper , more than a quarter of low - income mothers work night hours ; accessibility , such as transportation to get to providers , was especially problematic in rural or remote areas ; and child care consumes a high percentage of poor families' income .