approved apbs . additionally , only 12 program offices reported that they fully adhered to dhs's scheduling guidance , which requires that programs sequence all activities , examine the effects of any delays , update schedules to ensure validity , and so forth . eight of these programs lacked department - approved apbs . dhs's lack of reliable performance data not only hinders its internal acquisition management efforts , but also limits congressional oversight . did your program's funding levels in each of the following budget documents meet your program's required funding needs as reflected in your apb ? check box at left if your program does not have an apb , and then click here to skip to question 34 number of respondents 71 at program start , component's commitment in a resource allocation plan ( rap ) no , funds in the document were below the apb do not know not applicable 4 6 5 at program start , dhs's commitment in a resource allocation decision ( rad ) number of respondents 17 35 . if your program has experienced funding instability ( e.g . a change in planned out - year funding from one five - year funding plan to the next five - year funding plan ) , did it affect your program in each of the following ways ? number of respondents 22 36 . if a gap existed between fy11 enacted funding and fy11 required funding , how effectively were you , as a program manager , able to directly communicate the impact on your program to dhs and component leadership ? check box at left if your program did not experience a gap between fy11 enacted and required funding , and then click here to skip to question 37 component leadership ( component head , cae , etc. ) somewhat effectively not effectively 1 dhs leadership ( deputy secretary , usm , parm officials , etc. ) somewhat effectively not effectively 1 3 37 . if you would like to elaborate on how resource allocation ( i.e . funding ) has affected the program's ability to achieve cost , schedule and performance goals , please use the following space . since the program was initially staffed , how many program managers have overseen the program management office ( pmo ) ? number of respondents 71 39 . what is the number of government ftes in your pmo for each of the following functional areas ? number of government ftes staffed at initiation of development activities number of government ftes currently staffed number of government ftes currently identified as a need by the program business functions ( includes auditing , business , cost estimating , financial management , property management , and purchasing ) number of respondents 47 engineering and technical ( includes systems planning , research , development and engineering ; life cycle logistics ; test and evaluation ; production , quality and manufacturing ; and facilities engineering ) . next - generation periodic reporting system ( nprs ) . establishing the integrated investment life cycle model ( iilcm ) not at all familiar 31 empowering the component acquisition executives ( caes ) not at all familiar 18 establishing functional coordination office ( e.g .