error ! no text of specified style in document . appendix vii: comments from the department of homeland security error ! no text of specified style in document . appendix ix: gao contact and staff acknowledgments error ! sba agreed with the revised recommendation . in addition to the contact named above , hilary benedict ( assistant director ) , john barrett , natalie block , antoinette capaccio , tanya doriss , justin fisher , ellen fried , juan garay , cindy gilbert , perry lusk , william shear , and elaine vaurio made key contributions to this report . after we provided a draft of the report to the agencies for comment , the departments of education and homeland security took action on their respective recommendations . specifically , in december 2017 , the agencies issued new project solicitations that reflected the updated consequence of not meeting the benchmarks . we agree that these agencies fully implemented the recommendations we made to them in this report . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretaries of agriculture , commerce , defense , education , energy , health and human services , homeland security , and transportation ; the administrators of the small business administration , the environmental protection agency , and the national aeronautics and space administration ; the director of the national science foundation ; and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or neumannj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ix . phase i awards normally do not exceed $150,000 . for sbir , phase i awards generally last up to 6 months . for sttr , these awards generally last 1 year . in phase ii , small businesses with phase i projects that demonstrate scientific and technical merit and feasibility , in addition to commercial potential , may compete for awards of up to $1 million to continue the r&d for an additional period , normally not to exceed 2 years . in phase iii , small businesses pursue commercialization of technology developed in prior phases . phase iii work derives from , extends , or completes an effort made under prior phases , but it is funded by sources other than the sbir and sttr programs . in this phase , small businesses are expected to raise funds from private investors , the capital markets , or funding sources within the agency that made the initial award other than the agency's sbir or sttr program . agencies can also participate in phase iii by , for example , purchasing the technology developed in prior phases . the 2011 reauthorization of the sbir and sttr programs amended the small business act to require participating agencies to establish , and sba to approve , minimum standards for businesses' progress in developing and commercializing technologies .