guidance . fhfa provided fhlbanks with guidance related to diversity , including board diversity . for example , the agency provided guidance on the roles and duties of the banks' omwi officers and the scope of diversity regulations . fhfa provided the banks a template to report newly required data on the gender and race / ethnicity of board directors . to help banks prepare their annual reports , in june 2018 fhfa also developed an annual report template that outlines and describes the contents of the required reporting elements . the template includes sections for individual fhlbanks to present data on board composition by diversity categories and to describe past and future outreach activities and strategies to promote board diversity and outcomes from the bank's activities . communications . fhfa has communicated guidance and discussed board diversity issues with fhlbank boards and with staff involved in the banks' board diversity efforts . for example , fhfa staff gave presentations at meetings during which fhlbank board directors shared information on board diversity efforts . the staff noted fhfa's omwi director generally attends the semi - annual conferences of the banks' omwi officers , during which she discusses diversity issues such as the roles and responsibilities of these officers and the scope of the fhfa regulations . furthermore , fhfa omwi and other offices developed and implemented some strategies to help fhlbanks maintain or increase board diversity . in 2016 , fhfa omwi staff met with fhlbanks and requested that the banks create a bank presidents conference board diversity task force to share practices to promote board diversity . the staff said that they act as facilitators and informal advisors and may provide technical assistance to the system - wide task force — for example , by developing a list of practices related to board diversity . also , as encouraged by fhfa , starting in 2017 , each bank has a representative ( a board director or the bank president ) on the task force . also , based on fhfa's 2016 annual fhlbank board analysis , the fhfa director approved requests from three fhlbanks to add an independent director seat for their 2017 boards to help maintain or increase board diversity . fhfa extended the offer to the other banks ( except des moines , as its board was undergoing restructuring after the merger with seattle ) . fhfa staff said in preparation for their 2017 fhlbank board analysis , they informally monitored the gender and minority status of the additional independent director seats filled by the seven banks that accepted the offer . six of the seats were filled by women ( of whom two were minorities ) and one seat was filled by a minority male , according to fhfa staff . fhfa staff also told us the fhfa director has some discretion on the number of director seats based on an individual bank's circumstances , including the request to maintain diversity . for example , in 2018 , one fhlbank requested to retain its female board vice chair to help preserve diversity and institutional knowledge on its board . fhfa granted the bank's request to keep the director for another year .