we agree . as we noted in this report , in some instances , continued efforts on action items may be warranted — for example , when new information or circumstances might require an update of guidance . our concern , however , is that it is unclear what additional work or progress had been made on these action items , since the hsc had designated them as complete . dhs stated that the information in our report is generally accurate and had no substantive comments on the content of the report . dhs further stated that while improvements can be made in the plan as we outlined in our report , there has been significant work accomplished in pandemic preparedness as a direct result of the plan . for example , dhs noted that significant collaboration at all levels of government and the private sector has occurred , which enabled a more efficient and coordinated response for the 2009 h1n1 pandemic . dot provided us with technical comments , which we incorporated . dod , dos , and usda informed us that they did not have any comments on the draft report . the white house , hhs , and dhs provided written comments on a draft of this report , which are reprinted in appendixes iii , iv , and v , respectively . as agreed with your office , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier . at that time we will send copies to the hsc , secretary of agriculture , secretary of defense , secretary of health and human services , secretary of homeland security , secretary of state , secretary of transportation , and other interested parties . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any further questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6543 or steinhardtb@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi . the objectives of this study were to ( 1 ) determine how the homeland security council ( hsc ) and the responsible federal agencies are monitoring the progress and completion of the implementation plan for the national strategy for pandemic influenza ( plan ) action items , and ( 2 ) assess the extent to which selected action items have been completed , whether activity has continued on the selected action items reported as complete , and the nature of that work . we did not assess the response efforts for the 2009 h1n1 pandemic in this report , but we continue to monitor the outbreak and the federal government's response . to address these objectives , we conducted an in - depth analysis of a random sample of 60 action items in the plan . we drew a random sample from the 286 action items involving six federal agencies with primary responsibility for ensuring completion of the large majority ( 88 percent ) of the 324 action items .