most of the farmlands , however , are small . table 4 summarizes the key questions we are reporting on that we asked during the structured interviews about the management of each sampled farmland . we also asked other questions that we do not specifically report on to supply further context for interviewees' responses . for example , after asking whether a certain management activity had occurred , such as an inspection , we asked the respondent during which season and year the activity took place and to describe the activity . in addition , to further analyze our survey responses , we applied certain statistical transformations to the data , which we then analyzed for statistically significant patterns . an easement is a nonpossessory interest in land . with an easement , the original landowner retains possession of the land , but , depending on which resources are being protected , the easement places restrictions on the land's use . all of the easements prohibit landowners from further developing the land subject to the easement , and many do not allow any agricultural activities or alteration of the habitat . not all of the properties that the service recommended for protection were of equivalent ecological value , however . in some cases , for example , the service recommended protecting a site whose soil or other characteristics indicated that it once was or could again become a wetland , even if the site was no longer a wetland at the time because of alteration of the habitat from farming practices , such as draining or leveling the land . in addition , the 1990 and 1996 farm bills restricted the agency's authority to establish easements under the program . in addition to helping the farm service agency assess inventory properties for important resources , in most instances the service agreed to serve as the manager of the easement properties . other federal or state agencies and private nonprofit organizations could also assume this duty , but the farm service agency gave priority to the service . moreover , service policy held that it would become the easement manager of farmlands it had recommended for protection , unless another federal or state easement manager had been identified . it was not uncommon for a federal or state agency , including the u.s. forest service , bureau of land management , or a state land management agency , to receive fee - simple lands or easement management responsibilities , although the majority of the farmlands were accepted by the service . all farmlands received by the service from the farm service agency — whether through an easement or fee - simple ownership — were to be administered as part of the national wildlife refuge system , with management responsibility for each farmland generally falling to the nearest refuge office . service guidance stipulates that refuge offices are responsible for management activities , including regularly inspecting farmlands to check for violations , determining whether landowners are complying with all the easement restrictions , and taking enforcement actions on violations . because the lands , or the interests in the lands , are government property , the service may take civil or criminal action against violators for the “destruction” of government property .