individuals who are homeless veterans . the term “homeless” or “homeless individual” includes: ( 1 ) an individual who lacks a fixed , regular , and adequate nighttime residence ; and ( 2 ) an individual who has a primary nighttime residence that is: ( a ) a supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed to provide temporary living accommodations including welfare hotels , congregate shelters , and transitional housing for the mentally ill ; ( b ) an institution that provides a temporary institutionalized ; or ( c ) a public or private place not designed for , or ordinarily used as , a regular sleeping accommodations for human beings ( reference: 42 u.s.c . a “veteran” is an individual who served in the active military , naval , or air service , and who was discharged or released there from under conditions other than dishonorable . ( reference: 33 u.s.c . local veterans' employment representative program ( labor ) conduct outreach and provide seminars to employers which advocates hiring of veterans ; facilitate transition assistance program ( tap ) employment workshops to transitioning service members ; establish and conduct job search workshops ; facilitate employment , training , and placement services furnished to veterans in a state under the applicable state employment service or one - stop career center delivery systems whose sole purpose is to assist veterans in gaining and retaining employment . eligible veterans and eligible persons . to provide employment instruction , information , and assistance to separating and retiring military personnel and their spouses through domestic and overseas installations and / or facilities by offering job search and other related services . service members within 2 years of retirement or 1 year of separation and their spouses . veterans' workforce investment program ( labor ) to provide services to assist in reintegrating eligible veterans into meaningful employment within the labor force and to stimulate the development of effective service delivery systems that will address the complex problems facing eligible veterans . service - connected disabled veterans , veterans who have significant barriers to employment , veterans who served on active duty in the armed forces during a war or in a campaign or expedition for which a campaign badge has been authorized , and veterans who are recently separated from military service ( 48 months ) . vocational rehabilitation for disabled veterans ( va ) to provide all services and assistance necessary to enable service - disabled veterans and service persons hospitalized or receiving outpatient medical care services or treatment for a service - connected disability pending discharge to gain and maintain suitable employment . when employment is not reasonably feasible , the program can provide the needed services and assistance to help the individual achieve maximum independence in daily living . veterans of world war ii and later service with a service - connected disability or disabilities rated at least 20 % compensable and certain service - disabled servicepersons pending discharge or release from service if va determines the servicepersons will likely receive at least a 20 % rating and they need vocational rehabilitation because of an employment handicap . veterans with compensable ratings of 10 % may also be eligible if they are found to have a serious employment handicap .