zotob worm . in august 2005 , a round of internet worm infections knocked 13 of daimlerchrysler's u.s. automobile manufacturing plants offline for almost an hour , leaving workers idle as infected microsoft windows systems were patched . zotob and its variations also caused computer outages at heavy - equipment maker caterpillar inc. , aircraft maker boeing , and several large u.s. news organizations . taum sauk water storage dam failure . in december 2005 , the taum sauk water storage dam , approximately 100 miles south of st. louis , missouri , suffered a catastrophic failure , releasing a billion gallons of water . according to the dam's operator , the incident may have occurred because the gauges at the dam read differently than the gauges at the dam's remote monitoring station . bellingham , washington , gasoline pipeline failure . in june 1999 , 237,000 gallons of gasoline leaked from a 16-inch pipeline and ignited an hour and a half later , causing three deaths , eight injuries , and extensive property damage . the pipeline failure was exacerbated by poorly performing control systems that limited the ability of the pipeline controllers to see and react to the situation . harrisburg , pennsylvania , water system . in october 2006 , a foreign hacker penetrated security at a water filtering plant . the intruder planted malicious software that was capable of affecting the plant's water treatment operations . the infection occurred through the internet and did not seem to be an attack that directly targeted the control system . browns ferry power plant . in august 2006 , two circulation pumps at unit 3 of the browns ferry , alabama , nuclear power plant failed , forcing the unit to be shut down manually . the failure of the pumps was traced to excessive traffic on the control system network , possibly caused by the failure of another control system device . as control systems become increasingly interconnected with other networks and the internet , and as the system capabilities continue to increase , so do the threats , potential vulnerabilities , types of attacks , and consequences of compromising these critical systems . critical infrastructure owners face both technical and organizational challenges in securing their control systems . technical challenges — including control systems' limited processing capabilities and their real - time operations — hinder infrastructure owners' ability to implement traditional information security technologies and practices . organizational challenges include the lack of a compelling business case to improve security and a reluctance to share information regarding incidents . according to industry experts , existing information security technologies and practices — such as strong user authentication and patch management — are generally not implemented in control systems due to several technical issues , including limited computational processing capabilities , the need for real - time operation , and the lack of consideration of cybersecurity in the original design of the system . these challenges are described here in more detail . limited computational capabilities . existing security technologies — such as authorization , authentication , encryption , intrusion detection , and filtering of network traffic and communications — require more bandwidth , processing power , and memory than control system components typically have .