we are pleased that msha has taken action to implement these recommendations . we have not , however , examined the effectiveness of the agency's actions or the extent to which these actions have addressed the issues we reported in 2003 . in passing the federal mine safety and health act of 1977 ( the “mine act” ) , congress gave much of the responsibility for ensuring the safety and health of mine workers to msha . under the stringent requirements of the mine act , msha must protect the health and safety of miners by thoroughly inspecting each underground coal mine at least four times a year , citing mine operators for violations of the mine act , ensuring that hazards are quickly corrected , restricting operations or closing mines for more serious violations , and investigating serious mine accidents . in addition , msha must approve the initial plans that mine operators prepare for essential systems that protect mine workers — such as ventilation and roof support systems — and revisions to the plans . to carry out these responsibilities , in 2003 , msha had approximately 350 inspectors and 210 specialists in eleven district offices . in addition , msha headquarters had not provided clear guidance to the districts on coordinating inspections related to mine plans with quarterly inspections of underground coal mines in order to avoid duplication of effort by district staff . finally , staffing shortages prevented msha from reviewing and approving plans for containing debris produced by the mines on a timely basis . msha had extensive procedures for approving ventilation and roof support plans . one of these , according to several district officials , was scheduling conflicts that prevented inspectors from visiting the mine within the specified deadline . in addition , there were circumstances in which inspectors were not able to follow up , such as when a mine operator suspended a mine's operations . however , in these instances , the inspector should have updated the database to show that the deadline was extended . in addition , although we found that , as of 2003 , about 44 percent of msha's highly trained and experienced underground coal mine inspectors would be eligible to retire within 5 years — and the agency's historic attrition rates indicated that many of them would actually retire — the agency had not developed a plan for replacing these inspectors . msha also had fewer inspector trainees on board than vacancies that would need to be filled when inspectors retired . msha headquarters officials told us that it would be difficult for them quickly hire and train replacements for the inspectors who retired . in addition to the fact that at least 18 months were needed to train each new inspector , it took the agency several months from the date an individual retired to advertise and fill each vacant position . as a result of losing these inspectors , msha may find it difficult to complete all quarterly inspections of underground coal mines . msha also did not collect all of the information on contractor staff who work in underground coal mines needed to assess the effectiveness of its enforcement activities .