gao - 05-144 . washington , d.c.: september 30 , 2004 . we agree that dod does not require such information . however , we recommended that dod meet with the department of transportation to determine whether any elements would be useful , and if so , to pursue a means to obtain them . consequently , we stand by our recommendation . department of transportation officials told us that they agreed with our recommendations and indicated that a national air security policy should be established to outline major goals and responsibilities for each of the agencies with responsibilities for the protection of u.s. airspace . department officials also stated that without a national policy , the agencies would continue to work without unified , common goals . transportation officials suggested that a policy coordinating committee be established for air security to address interagency issues . they also agreed that information sharing is critical to enhance air security and told us that they had begun sharing pilot deviations data with the faa strategic operations security manager as we had recommended . we agree with the department's overall comments and believe that this is the type of dialogue that should take place between the departments of homeland security , defense , and transportation . mr. chairman , this concludes my testimony . thank you again for the opportunity to discuss these issues . at this time , i would be happy to address any questions . in conducting our review of the response to violations of restricted airspace , we visited key offices within dod , dhs , and faa that have responsibility for oversight and management of u.s. airspace . we conducted our review in the washington , d.c. , area , at dod , including the office of the assistant secretary of defense ( homeland defense ) , defense intelligence agency , and joint theater air and missile defense office ; dhs , including the office of immigration and customs enforcement , united states secret service , and the transportation security administration , including the national capital region coordination center ; faa headquarters , domestic events network , air traffic control system command center , and the potomac consolidated terminal radar approach control facility . we also met with the federal bureau of investigation , the central intelligence agency , the national counterterrorism center , the national aeronautics and space administration , and the aircraft owners and pilots association . we did not review ground - based air defense batteries that are also part of the homeland air defense system . we conducted fieldwork at u.s. northern command and norad , colorado springs , colorado , as well as norad's northeast air defense sector , rome , new york ; western air defense sector , tacoma , washington ; and the continental u.s. norad region and southeast air defense sector near panama city , florida . we discussed and reviewed changes in operational responsibilities and plans of these organizations both pre - and post - september 11 , 2001 . to better understand these actions , we toured and observed the workings of the national capital region coordination center , the air defense sectors , the domestic events network , and the air and marine operations center .