postal service . dod paid $554 million in feca medical and compensation benefits in 2015 . given the substantial monetary outlay this represents , dod needs accurate information on the operation of the feca program , including the timeliness of its various processes . facilitating return - to - work outcomes can depend on timely job - suitability determinations . while not generalizable , our discussions with the military departments' injury compensation specialists , dod liaisons , and feca program managers indicate that the department may face challenges in its efforts to work with dol to effectively manage dod's feca process . however , without monitoring the timelines associated with injury compensation specialists' processing of feca claims — particularly the significant claims - management actions over which dol has approving authority — the department is not positioned to identify the extent to which delays or inefficiencies are present , at what points in the process they occur , or any reasons or resolutions for such issues . such information would help dod in managing its feca responsibilities , and allow the department to communicate any appropriate concerns to dol . to help support dod management of its feca responsibilities , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , in collaboration with the secretaries of the military departments and other defense agency leaders , to monitor timelines associated with significant feca claims - management actions in order to identify the extent to which delays or inefficiencies may be occurring and at what points in the process ; to identify any known reasons for the delays ; and to communicate this information to dol as appropriate for consideration and action . we provided a draft of this product to dod and dol for comment . in its written comments , reproduced in appendix ii , dod agreed with our recommendation . dol provided technical comments that were incorporated , as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense , the secretary of labor , and other interested parties including the military departments and other defense agencies . in addition , this report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff has any questions regarding this report , please contact brenda farrell at ( 202 ) 512-3604 or farrellb@gao.gov , or andrew sherrill at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or sherrilla@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . in 2015 , the department of defense ( dod ) had a higher percentage of beneficiaries over the age of 65 than the rest of the beneficiary population , as illustrated in figure 11 . dod also had a higher proportion of total - disability beneficiaries at or above full social security retirement age ( see fig.12 ) . about 56 percent of dod beneficiaries were at or above their full social security retirement age , compared to 32 percent of non - dod beneficiaries .