published studies . we conducted a comprehensive review of studies published from january 2003 through march 2009 that included an assessment of the health status , spending , utilization , or other demographic characteristics of hra and other cdhp enrollees compared with those in traditional plans . we identified 31 such studies , of which 18 focused exclusively on hra enrollees , and 13 focused on both hra and other cdhp enrollees . our review comprised peer - reviewed journal articles , studies by insurance carriers or independent consultants , national surveys , and government publications . for our review of health status , we included studies that used self - reported health status , assessed the health status or illness burden of plan enrollees based on diagnoses or disease indicators , or examined utilization prior to enrolling in an hra or other cdhp . for our review of spending and utilization , we included only those studies that addressed selection bias as part of the methodology to account for differences between hra and other cdhp enrollees and traditional plan enrollees that may affect the use of health care services . to assess differences in the health status of enrollees who switched into an hra compared with those who stayed in a traditional plan , we analyzed hra and ppo plan claims data for the two large employers we examined . we compared spending and utilization for health care services between the hra and ppo groups for each employer before introduction of the hra in 2003 . this design enabled us to observe the potential effect of selection bias due to differences in health status or other characteristics which we did not separately control for between the two groups . we also summarized the findings of studies that compared health status and other demographic characteristics of hra and other cdhp enrollees with those in traditional plans . to assess changes in spending and utilization of health care services for enrollees who switched into an hra compared with those who stayed in a traditional plan , we analyzed the changes in spending and utilization for the hra and ppo groups from the period before to the period after introduction of the hra in plan year 2003 . we also summarized the findings of studies that compared spending and utilization of hra and other cdhp enrollees with those in traditional plans . the results of our analyses are not generalizable beyond the enrollees , health plans , and employers included in our review . the results of our employer analyses cannot be compared between the public and private employers . in particular , the results of our spending and utilization analyses from the two employers may be influenced by the benefit design — such as the financial features — of the health plans we reviewed and the sizes of the hra and ppo groups in our study . additionally , because our analyses of the two employers reflected instances where employees had a choice between an hra and a ppo plan option , they do not represent the experiences of employees who have hras as their only plan option . we reviewed all data for soundness and consistency and determined that they were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .