, their occupation ) . it also asks about the highest degree or level of school a person has completed . if the person has completed a bachelor's degree or higher , the acs asks for the specific major ( s ) of any bachelor degree ( s ) the person has completed . the acs also contains questions to produce estimates of the number of people who are employed , unemployed , and not in the labor force . ( see fig . eighty percent of the 124 postsecondary stem education programs that responded to our survey , representing 88 percent of obligations , said they tracked their success at meeting workforce needs using at least one outcome - based measure . degree attainment , number of students pursuing stem coursework , number of students taking a stem job , and participant satisfaction were the most commonly reported outcomes . for example , the national institutes of health produced a report focused on the workforce outcomes of biomedical students , the majority of whom receive support from the national institutes of health at some point in their graduate careers . however , some programs did not measure an outcome or output that directly related to their stated objectives . for example , of the 78 postsecondary programs with a stated program objective to prepare students for stem careers , 53 percent ( 45 percent of obligations ) reported that they did not track the number of their students who took a job in a stem field . similarly , of the 49 programs with a stated program objective to increase the numbers of stem graduates , 39 percent ( 43 percent of obligations ) reported that they did not measure the educational attainment of their program participants . these data are consistent with our 2012 stem report , in which we found that stem education programs' outcome measures were not clearly reflected in the performance planning documents of most agencies . as we recommended in 2012 , the national science and technology council recently issued guidance to help agencies better incorporate their stem education efforts and the goals from the government - wide stem education 5-year strategic plan into their agency performance plans and reports . as agencies follow the guidance , improve their outcome measures , and focus on the effectiveness of the programs , more programs may measure outcomes directly related to their stated program objectives , such as preparing students for stem careers . according to our survey , preparing students for postsecondary education in a stem field is either a stated program objective or a potential secondary benefit of almost all federal k - 12 stem education programs . specifically , out of 30 federal k - 12 stem education program respondents to our survey , 13 programs ( 50 percent of k - 12 program obligations ) reported that preparing students for postsecondary stem education is a stated program objective , while 16 programs reported that it is a potential benefit of the program .