minnesota . state officials reported that the state had designed a uniform needs assessment tool for use across all hcbs programs in the state and had implemented it for most programs . the uniform assessment tool was used to determine functional eligibility for all hcbs programs in the state for which it was implemented and was also used to inform the development of service plans . new york . state officials reported that the state had implemented a set of needs assessment tools , referred to as a uniform assessment system , for use across multiple hcbs programs . the same uniform assessment system was used to both determine functional eligibility and to inform development of beneficiary service plans . north carolina . at the time of our review , officials described generally using different assessment tools for the separate hcbs programs in the state . state officials reported that the state had developed a new needs assessment tool for one medicaid hcbs waiver program , and that they planned to expand use of this tool to another program in the future . the state used different needs assessments to determine functional eligibility and for service planning in its hcbs waiver programs . washington . state officials reported that a uniform assessment system was used across hcbs programs in the state . the system was composed of multiple needs assessment components . one version of the assessment was used for hcbs programs serving individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities , and a different version was used for all other programs . for all hcbs programs , the same needs assessment system was used to determine functional eligibility and to develop the service plan . all six states we studied reported using more than one type of entity to conduct needs assessments for hcbs programs . for example , new york used five different types of entities , north carolina used four different types of entities , and the remaining four states used two or three types of entities to conduct needs assessments . state agencies , local public agencies , and independent contractors were used by four states to conduct needs assessments for at least one hcbs program . all states but one , washington , used hcbs providers or managed care plans to conduct needs assessments ( see table 2 ) . the types of entities that conduct needs assessments in the selected states varied across distinct hcbs programs , or for distinct needs assessment purposes within a single hcbs program . states may use multiple types of entities to conduct needs assessments because of differences in how particular hcbs programs were delivered . for example , the entities used in minnesota varied by delivery system — the state reported that it used local public agencies to conduct needs assessments for all medicaid hcbs programs other than its managed care hcbs program , for which managed care plans conducted needs assessments . in other states , different entities conducted needs assessments within the same hcbs programs depending on the purpose of the assessment .