( see fig . the u&c price , the retail price for a drug , is the price an individual without prescription drug coverage would pay at a retail pharmacy . the u&c price includes the acquisition cost of the drug paid by the retail pharmacy and a markup charged by the pharmacy . awp is the average of the list prices or sticker price that a manufacturer of a drug suggests wholesalers charge pharmacies . awp is typically less than the u&c price , which includes the pharmacy's own markup . awp is not the actual price that large purchasers normally pay . nevertheless , awp is part of the formula used by many state medicaid programs and private third - party payers to reimburse retail pharmacies . amp is the average of prices paid to a manufacturer by wholesalers for a drug distributed to the retail pharmacy class of trade , after subtracting any account cash discounts or other price reductions . cms uses amp in determining rebates drug manufacturers must provide , as required by the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 , to state medicaid programs as a condition for the federal contribution to medicaid spending for the manufacturers' outpatient prescription drugs . for brand drugs , the minimum rebate amount is the number of units of the drug multiplied by 15.1 percent of the amp . from january 2000 through december 2004 , the average u&c prices for a typical 30-day supply of 96 prescription drugs frequently used by bcbs fep medicare and non - medicare enrollees increased 24.5 percent . the average u&c prices for 75 prescription drugs frequently used by medicare beneficiaries and for 76 prescription drugs frequently used by non - medicare enrollees increased at similar rates . the average u&c prices for 50 frequently used brand drugs increased three times faster than the average u&c prices for 46 frequently used generic drugs . from january 2000 through december 2004 , the average u&c price collected from retail pharmacies by pace and epic for a 30-day supply for 96 prescription drugs frequently used by bcbs fep medicare beneficiaries and non - medicare enrollees increased 24.5 percent , a 4.6 percent average annual rate of increase . ( see fig . during the same period , using nationwide data from the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) , prices for prescription drugs and medical supplies for all urban consumers increased 21.3 percent , a 4.0 percent average annual rate of increase . additionally , using bls data , prices for all consumer items for all urban consumers — the consumer price index — increased 12.7 percent , a 2.5 percent average annual rate of increase from january 2000 through december 2004 . we also separately analyzed monthly trends in u&c prices for brand and generic drugs frequently used by bcbs fep enrollees . of the 96 drugs , 50 were brand drugs and 46 were generic drugs . similar to our calculation of medicare and non - medicare price indexes , we calculated indexes for brand drugs and generic drugs based on each drug's share of the total number of brand or generic prescriptions dispensed to bcbs fep enrollees in 2003 .