no data . gao sent a data request to the general counsel of each dfe asking about the applicability of 12 governance and accountability statutes to their entity . the table below reflects the response of the general counsel . we did not independently analyze the applicability of these statutes to each entity . there were no outstanding recommendations . the fec ensures the campaign finance process is fully disclosed and that laws regarding campaign finance are enforced . it also enforces the federal election campaign act ( feca ) and oversees the presidential public funding program . the commission is made up of six members , who are appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate . each member serves a single , 6- year term . by law , no more than three commissioners can be members of the same political party , and at least four votes are required for any official commission action . a new chairman is chosen each year from among the members , with no member serving as chairman more than once during his or her term . gao sent a data request to the general counsel of each dfe asking about the applicability of 12 governance and accountability statutes to their entity . the table below reflects the response of the general counsel . we did not independently analyze the applicability of these statutes to each entity . there were 51 outstanding recommendations . the federal housing finance board ensures the safety and soundness of the federal home loan banks , their access to the capital markets , and the fulfillment of their housing finance mission . under the housing and economic recovery act ( hera ) of 2008 ( pub . 110-289 , 122 stat . 2654 ( july 30 , 2008 ) ) , the fhfb will cease to exist 1 year after the effective date of hera , or july 30 , 2009 , to be replaced by the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) . hera also amended the ig act to require that the fhfa have an ig appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate . the board is comprised of four members appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate , who serve a 7-year term , and the secretary of hud . the president designates one of the board members as chairman . no more than three may be of the same political party and terms are staggered to end every other year . members filling a vacancy serve only the remainder of the predecessor's term . none . gao sent a data request to the general counsel of each dfe asking about the applicability of 12 governance and accountability statutes to their entity . the table below reflects the response of the general counsel . we did not independently analyze the applicability of these statutes to each entity . there were no outstanding recommendations . the federal labor relations authority oversees the federal service labor - management relations program . it administers the law that protects the right of employees of the federal government to organize , bargain collectively , and participate through labor organizations of their own choosing in decisions affecting them .