similar haccp requirements . fda and nmfs require , and fsis would require , facilities to implement haccp systems to reduce the risk of illness from contaminated foods . table 1 shows the requirements of a haccp system for catfish and how each agency implements or would implement these requirements . as table 1 shows , the three agencies essentially do not differ from each other in their haccp requirements . fsis acknowledges that many domestic processing facilities are already meeting many of its proposed requirements . nevertheless , if fsis implements its proposed catfish program , catfish processors are likely to see their paperwork requirements increase . for example , fsis would require written sanitation plans , while fda inspectors do not require written sanitation plans and instead require only that sanitation be monitored and records kept , according to fda officials . therefore , catfish processing facilities without written sanitation plans would now be required to develop them . catfish processing facilities that already contract for inspection services with nmfs must have written sanitation plans , but fsis officials said the format of the fsis sanitation plan would differ from the one already required by nmfs . fsis officials noted that some of the additional paperwork burden required for fsis regulations would be offset by the reduction of fda paperwork requirements . however , facilities that process catfish and other seafood would be required to meet both fsis and fda paperwork requirements , which may differ . for instance , fsis plans to develop its own forms for documenting a haccp system , which will require processors of catfish and other seafood under fsis and fda oversight to enter the same information twice — once for fsis and once for fda . inspection overlap and unnecessary inspection frequency . fsis's proposed catfish program would introduce inefficiencies into the u.s. catfish inspection system by duplicating existing fda and nmfs inspections . currently , about 18 major domestic facilities process catfish , according to fsis , and an unknown number of facilities process both catfish and other seafood . with the implementation of fsis's catfish inspection program , facilities that process only catfish may be inspected by fsis and nmfs , and facilities that process both catfish and other seafood may be inspected by all three agencies — fsis , fda , and nmfs . fda inspects facilities that process only catfish every 3 to 5 years because it considers catfish a low - risk product , but it may inspect other facilities that process catfish , along with other seafood , more frequently , depending on the risks associated with the other seafood . nmfs conducts a minimum of quarterly inspections of processing facilities that participate in its quality management program , including a majority of the domestic catfish - processing facilities fsis identified . according to nmfs documents we reviewed , many retail and distribution firms buying processed catfish products currently require nmfs product verifications and are likely to still require nmfs verification after promulgation of the fsis proposed regulations .