gao - 13-852t . washington , d.c.: september 10 , 2013 . ies has substantially improved the education research field . gao - 13-518 . washington , d.c.: june 26 , 2013 . education officials also provided technical comments , which we incorporated into the final report , as appropriate . education generally agreed with our recommendations and has several plans in place to address them . specifically , ies noted that it continues to be committed to producing high - quality reports while shortening the time period for its peer review process , and stated that it will develop a system to more comprehensively monitor all of the stages in its report production process so that it is able to identify and address potential problems more easily and quickly . to further emphasize its commitment to obtaining practitioner and policymaker input , ies also said it will begin an annual solicitation for practitioner and policymaker input on its research agenda by posting an invitation on its web site and widely advertising the opportunity through its ies newsflash email notices . additionally , as we noted in our report , ies commented that it is currently working to align its performance measures with its current investments , including developing measures for the rel program . finally , ies agreed that it is important to measure and assess the effectiveness of ies - supported dissemination activities . ies noted it will build knowledge in this area through its fiscal year 2014 request for applications for a new r & d center focused on knowledge utilization to develop measures for how practitioners use research evidence to guide what they do in schools and classrooms . we support ies's continued focus and emphasis on advancing knowledge and providing usable information to improve education policy and practice . we are sending copies of this report to relevant congressional committees and the secretary of education . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or our staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or scottg@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . our review examined ( 1 ) the extent to which the institute for education sciences ( ies ) demonstrates its ability to support high - quality research and fulfill its mission ; ( 2 ) the extent to which selected department of education ( education ) research and technical assistance groups disseminate relevant products to the field ; and ( 3 ) how ies coordinates its activities with other relevant federal research entities and within education . for all three objectives , we reviewed the education sciences reform act of 2002 ( esra ) to identify statutory requirements related to ies management , processes , and procedures . we obtained and analyzed agency documents detailing ies's processes and performance .