with information . appendix vi: county officials' suggestions to improve radiological emergency preparedness and nrc's / fema's responses nrc staff's response any outreach effort is beneficial and would help nrc meet its “increase public confidence” performance goal . however , nrc does not normally communicate with local jurisdictions but , rather , relies on the state as a single point of contact . nrc believes that its state outreach efforts have been successful . in addition , it would be very resource - intensive if nrc were to routinely meet with local officials . fema's guidance allows states and local jurisdictions the flexibility to structure the exercise scenarios to spend more time at the alert level and less time at the general emergency level . fema only fema should not always conduct exercises at the general emergency level . in other words , fema should vary the emergency action level during its exercises . nrc's region i staff said that conducting exercises at the general emergency level contributed to the positive responses taken by local jurisdictions during the february 2000 event . however , the probability that a general emergency will occur is very small while the probability for an alert is greater . fema's guidance allows states and local jurisdictions the flexibility to structure the exercise scenarios to spend more time at the alert level and less time at the general emergency level . fema should establish liaisons with the counties that would be familiar with the relevant emergency plan . the liaisons would participate in the off - site exercises . with only one exception , fema implements its programs through the states . the states are responsible for assisting local jurisdictions and providing them with information . new york state officials have asked fema to coordinate its communications / interactions with local jurisdictions through the state . ( app . iii provides a brief description of the new process for emergency preparedness. ) this is because under the new safety oversight process , nrc will rely even more on utilities to track and correct certain problems through their corrective action programs . during subsequent inspections , nrc will select a sample of corrective actions taken to verify that they resolve the findings and limit the potential that they will recur . therefore , without a strong commitment by the utility to follow through to fix problems or when nrc does not hold utilities accountable for fixing them , problems can worsen . this is what happened at indian point 2 . as described in the next section , some of the problems that occurred during the february 2000 event were uncorrected from the past , which confirmed that consolidated edison did not effectively correct its many emergency preparedness weaknesses . nrc conducted an intensified inspection effort to determine the causes of and response to the february 2000 event . during the inspections , nrc identified several emergency preparedness problems . although consolidated edison has taken actions to correct these problems , a recent nrc inspection found that similar problems persist . despite concluding that consolidated edison took the necessary steps to protect public health and safety during the february 2000 event , nrc identified several weaknesses with the emergency preparedness program at indian point 2 .