pcori . pcori's board of governors approved three extramural research projects related to kidney disease in fiscal year 2015 for funding totaling $14 million . the national institute of diabetes and digestive and kidney diseases ( niddk ) established the kidney research national dialogue ( krnd ) to help inform its research priorities by obtaining input from the kidney care research community . the krnd consists of three phases . phase 1 ( 2010 — 2013 ) : krnd was an interactive , web - based forum that allowed participants to submit , comment on , and prioritize potential kidney disease research priorities . participants were asked to categorize their ideas into 12 topic areas , such as chronic kidney disease , acute kidney injury , and end stage renal disease . according to niddk's website , the krnd had over 1,600 participants from more than 30 countries . phase 2 of the krnd ( 2011 — 2014 ) : niddk invited research experts to participate in one of 12 topic - specific working groups . each group was charged with fully assessing the postings from phase 1 of the krnd , identifying research gaps , and developing a potential strategy for moving the field forward . each working group published their priority recommendations in the clinical journal of american society of nephrology . the groups' papers covered the following 12 topics: 1 . overview of the krnd 3 . acute kidney injury 4 . defining kidney biology to understand renal disease 6 . improving chronic kidney disease therapies and care 7 . propagating the nephrology research workforce 8 . pediatric kidney disease: tracking onset and improving clinical 9 . glomerular disease 10 . filling the holes in cystic kidney disease research 11 . translational research to improve chronic kidney disease outcomes 12 . the krnd: gearing up to move forward phase 3 ( 2014 — present ) : niddk officials continue to seek comments on the priorities articulated in the 12 topic papers through comments on pubmed commons ( an nih - funded open , web - based platform ) . niddk officials told us that , to date , they have not received any comments . in addition to the contact named above , will black ( assistant director ) , kristeen mclain ( analyst - in - charge ) , jesse elrod , and alison smith made key contributions to this report . also contributing were hayden huang , drew long , yesook merrill , vikki porter , and emily wilson . department of health and human services . agency for healthcare research and quality ( ahrq ) . as part of its mission to improve the safety and quality of health care , ahrq funds extramural research grants to study chronic kidney disease in areas such as patient safety and disease management , and assessment in patients with multiple chronic conditions . according to arhq officials , in fiscal year 2015 , arhq provided new or ongoing funding to four kidney disease research projects in the amount of $1.3 million . centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) .