incarceration inconsistencies . in our inconsistency analysis that we reported on in february 2016 , we identified about 22,000 applications having an unresolved incarceration inconsistency , which were associated with about $68 million in combined subsidies . cms officials , however , told us they did not terminate eligibility for incarceration inconsistencies , because the agency determined in fall 2014 that ssa's prisoner update processing system ( pups ) was unreliable for use by the marketplace . as a result , cms officials told us the agency elected to rely on applicant attestations on incarceration status . ppaca provides that incarcerated individuals are not eligible to enroll in a qualified health plan through a marketplace , with the exception of those incarcerated pending disposition of charges . cms currently uses pups to generate incarceration inconsistencies when there are indications an applicant may be incarcerated . as part of the inconsistency resolution process , the marketplace notifies applicants to send documentation to resolve the inconsistency . to do so , consumers can submit documentation such as release papers , cms officials told us . under cms's approach to incarceration inconsistencies , agency officials told us , the marketplace continues to make an initial verification attempt using the pups data . if a consumer maintains he or she is not incarcerated , cms will rely on that representation and not take adverse action , regardless of what pups indicates , officials told us . according to hhs officials , based on the data reliability issue , the marketplace no longer requires applicants to submit documentation on incarceration status . in its 2013 computer - matching agreement with cms , ssa acknowledged that pups is not as accurate as other ssa data and contains information that ssa may not have independently verified . social security number inconsistencies . under cms regulations , the marketplace must validate all social security numbers provided by submitting them to ssa along with other identifying information . if the marketplace is unable to validate the social security number , it must follow the standard process for resolving all types of inconsistencies . in our analysis , we identified about 35,000 applications that had an unresolved social security number inconsistency , which were associated with about $154 million in combined subsidies . we reported that cms officials told us they did not take action to terminate coverage or adjust subsidies during 2014 based on social security number inconsistencies . they said this was because such inconsistencies are generally related to other inconsistencies , such as citizenship or immigration status , and that document submissions for citizenship or immigration status may also resolve social security number inconsistencies . overall , cms officials told us they do not consider missing or invalid social security number information to be a stand - alone inconsistency that must be resolved , and do not take adverse action in such cases . however , cms regulations state that “to the extent that the is unable to validate an individual's social security number through the social security administration,” the marketplace must follow its standard inconsistency procedures .