over the next several years . the food and drug administration ( fda ) regulates dietary supplements the food and drug administration ( fda ) regulates dietary supplements under provisions of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act , as under provisions of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act , as amended by the dietary supplement health and education act of 1994 amended by the dietary supplement health and education act of 1994 ( dshea ) . dshea defines dietary supplements as products that , among ( dshea ) . dshea defines dietary supplements as products that , among other things , are intended for ingestion to supplement the diet , labeled as a other things , are intended for ingestion to supplement the diet , labeled as a dietary supplement , and not represented as a conventional food or as a dietary supplement , and not represented as a conventional food or as a sole item of a meal or diet . they must also contain one or more dietary sole item of a meal or diet . they must also contain one or more dietary ingredients . dshea does not require manufacturers to register with fda ingredients . dshea does not require manufacturers to register with fda or identify the products they manufacture or the ingredients of those or identify the products they manufacture or the ingredients of those products . however , all food facilities , including manufacturers and products . however , all food facilities , including manufacturers and distributors of dietary supplements , were required to register with fda no distributors of dietary supplements , were required to register with fda no later than december 12 , 2003 , under the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 and implementing regulations . this includes an initial registration with fda and updates within 60 days of any changes in information . registration must include the name and address of the facility and an emergency contact , and facilities that manufacture or sell certain types of products , such as vitamins , must self - identify as such . under dshea , dietary supplements are broadly presumed safe , and fda does not have the authority to require them to be approved for safety and efficacy before they enter the market , as it does for drugs . however , a dietary supplement manufacturer or distributor of a supplement with a “new dietary ingredient” — an ingredient that was not marketed in the united states before october 15 , 1994 — may be required to notify fda at least 75 days before marketing the product , depending on the history of use of the ingredient . for the most part , fda relies on post - market surveillance efforts — such as monitoring adverse event reports it receives from companies , health care practitioners , and individuals ; reviewing consumer complaints ; and conducting facility inspections — to identify potential safety concerns related to dietary supplements . once a safety concern is identified , fda must demonstrate that the dietary supplement presents a significant or unreasonable risk , or is otherwise adulterated , before it can be removed from the market .