analyst . the analyst stated that only a small number of site users have contributed lessons learned to the share a - 76 ! web site , which she attributed , in part , to the amount of time and effort needed to document and obtain agreement by all levels of the organization on the lessons learned . in addition , the analyst stated that there is reluctance to share negative lessons , and often the review and approval process sanitizes best practice information so that it becomes too general to be most helpful to users . share a - 76 ! promotes the sharing of best practices and lessons learned related to one form of outsourcing that was conducted under the omb circular a - 76 competitive sourcing process . among other things , the site contains guidance , links to other relevant sites , sample documents , and a best practices library that communicates field staff experiences and advice about the circular a - 76 process . a nima project official said that nima's staff routinely accesses the web site because it contains a wealth of information on policies , procedures , lessons learned , and links to other outsourcing sites . the dod analyst responsible for share a - 76 ! estimated that the site receives about 12,000 visits per month and said that on the basis of e - mails and anecdotes , user satisfaction is favorable . however , this web site is specific to the omb circular a - 76 process , which may not apply to other types of outsourcing . for example , circular a - 76's policy pertains to public / private competitions and requires that the final evaluation between the government and the private sector be based exclusively on cost . dod acquisition and it officials acknowledged that there is no mechanism in dod to easily share and leverage lessons learned relating to outsourcing it services . however , these officials agreed that a departmentwide effort to identify , capture , and disseminate lessons learned and leading practices of projects with experience in carrying out it outsourcing could offer valuable insights and new ideas that would benefit others . moreover , officials from three of the projects in our review told us that there is value in collecting and disseminating the knowledge acquired from it outsourcing projects in a systematic manner across the department . each of the projects in our review identified knowledge and experience gained from their approaches to outsourcing it services that could offer insights and practices for other ongoing and future projects to consider . for example: mhs developed specific guidance and lessons learned for implementing a performance - based incentive contract for help - desk operations . the department of the navy's nmci project has developed a series of lessons learned related to transitioning to the provider that is being shared within the nmci community ; one example was that all personnel should be available during scheduled testing and deployment . nima has experience in contracting techniques emphasizing a partnering approach with providers to refine requirements and establish a common understanding of costs . in addition , a departmental it outsourcing knowledge - sharing approach could include links to information about other government agencies' it outsourcing projects .