board review of appeal . when the board receives the file , it may grant or deny the claim . if the board finds it cannot make a decision until the regional office does additional work ( eg , requesting a more recent medical exam ) it sends , or remands , the case back to the regional office or to the vba appeals management center in washington , d.c. , which develops evidence and adjudicates the claim . a veteran dissatisfied with the board's decision can appeal , in succession , to the u.s. court of appeals for veterans claims , to the court of appeals for the federal circuit , and finally to the supreme court of the united states . va created the dro position and implemented the dro review process nationally in 2001 after a 1997 – 1998 pilot in 12 regional offices . in the pilot , dros were responsible for performing reviews of all appeals and had the ability to make a new decision based solely on a difference of opinion with the original decision . va promulgated final regulations when it implemented dro review nationwide in 2001 , which made the process optional and required the veteran to expressly choose it . later in 2001 , va headquarters issued guidance to the regional offices expanding the responsibilities of dros to include mentoring and training other disability claims staff and working with regional office managers to identify error trends and training needs . since fiscal year 2003 , when va started tracking dro involvement in appeals , data show more veterans have chosen a dro review than a traditional review for appeals of decisions on their disability compensation claims . from fiscal years 2003 through 2010 , veterans chose a dro review in 534,439 appeals , or 61 percent of all appeals filed over this time period , according to board data . the percentage of appeals in which a dro review was chosen increased each year , from 54 percent of all appeals in fiscal year 2003 to 65 percent in fiscal year 2010 ( see fig . however , there was significant variation across va's regional offices . for example , during the 8-year time period , the regional office in columbia , south carolina , had the lowest percentage of dro reviews chosen — 32 percent — and san diego , california , the highest — 87 percent . more than half of the regional offices had the dro review chosen in at least 50 percent of all appeals filed . our review suggests a key factor in the choice of a dro review is whether a veteran has assistance from a third party , such as a vso representative or a private attorney . sixty - three percent of all appeals filed by veterans with representation chose a dro review compared to 44 percent of those filed by veterans without representation across all regional offices . controlling for selected factors that may affect the choice of a dro review , veterans with representation are still more likely to choose a dro review for their appeals .