who cares ? child care teachers and the quality of care in america: final report: national child care staffing study . berkeley: child care employee project , 1989 . u.s. general accounting office . early childhood programs: the use of impact evaluations to assess program effects . gao - 01-542 . washington , d.c.: april 16 , 2001 . u.s. general accounting office . child care: states increased spending on low - income families . gao - 01-293 . are they in any real danger ? what research does — and doesn't — tell us about child care quality and children's well - being . princeton , n.j.: mathematica policy research , inc. , 1996 . marsh , janet . south carolina child care: survey of the workforce 2000 . a report prepared for the south carolina department of health and human services . clemson , s.c.: clemson university institute on family and neighborhood life , 2001 . massachusetts child care resource and referral network for the massachusetts office of child care services . massachusetts child care center & school age program salary and benefits report . a report prepared for the massachusetts office of child care services . october 2000 . mccartney , k. “effect of quality of day - care environment on children's language development.” developmental psychology 20 ( 1984 ) : 244-260 . mills and pardee , inc . the massachusetts early care and education staff recruitment and retention research and recommendations . a report prepared for the massachusetts office of child care services . april 2001 . montgomery , deborah , gabriele phillips , dennis zeller , helaine hornby . quality improvement program evaluation: final report , year 1 evaluations – child care initiative project , healthline , stipend for permit . a report prepared for the california department of education . palo alto , calif.: institutes for research and hornby zeller associates , inc. , 1999 . national research council and institute of medicine . from neurons to neighborhoods: the science of early childhood development . committee on integrating the science of early childhood development . edited by jack p. shonkoff and deborah a. phillips . washington , d.c.: national academy press , 2000 . nichd early child care research network ( eccrn ) . “early child care and self - control , compliance , and problem behaviors at twenty - four and thirty - six months.” child development 69 , no . nichd eccrn . “effect sizes from the nichd study of early child care.” paper presented at the biennial meeting of the society for research in child development , albuquerque , n . mex. , april 1999 . nichd eccrn . “infant child care and attachment security: results of the nichd study of early child care.” symposium presented at the meeting of the international conference on infant studies , providence , r.i. , april 1996 . nichd eccrn . “the relation of child care to cognitive and language development.” in child development ( in press ) . norris , deborah j. and loraine dunn . taking a closer look: tiered licensing and differential quality . peisner - feinberg , e. s. , and m. r. burchinal .