m st. a ct . ppendix iv: decennial response integration stem ( dris ) contract details the dris contractor will be responsible for designing , building , and operating the systems , staffing , and infrastructure to process census data provided by respondents via census forms , telephone agents , the internet , and enumerators ; assist the public via telephone and internet ; and monitor the quality and status of the data capture operations . the dris contract does not include providing the systems or staffing used for field enumeration operations . census 2000: the bureau procured key elements of its data capture and processing system from different contractors , and it developed in - house a system for collecting data from the internet . the bureau was also responsible for integrating data collected through the different modes of capture ( paper , telephone , internet , and field operations ) . 2010 census: the dris contract will allow the bureau to have a single contractor design , develop , and implement a system to integrate data from all of the response modes . activities to date: the bureau began acquisition planning for dris in 2003 . between 2003 and contract award , it performed planning and solicitation activities including conducting research on data capture , developing planning documents , drafting and issuing a rfp , and evaluating proposals from vendors . the bureau awarded the contract on schedule in october 2005 . tomation ( fdca ) contract details ppendix v: field data collection fdca will rovide the automtio for the breau to capre iformtio collected dring ernal iterview , eliminating the eed for paper maps anddress li for ddressanassng anrespnse follow - up . the fdca cotrctor will rovide office automtio for 12 reional census ceter , the perto rico re office , anapproimtel 00 office ; the telecommunictionsfrastrctre for hedquarter , reional , and locl office ; mobile computing device for field worker ; itetio with other 2010 cnsus system ; and develomet , delomet , techicsupport , deinslltio , and dispsaervice . activitie associted with creting mgement pl nd ddressing in detil the firt mjor phase ( exection period #1 ) of fdca implementtion activitie propoed y the fdca contrctor to support field opertion to condct the 200 dress rehesal ( mr. 2006 – mr. 2009 ) all ctivitie propoed y the fdca contrctor to support field opertion to condct the 2010 census ( april 2006 – sept. 2010 ) census 2000: field d collectioas redominantlandled througpaper ddress li , maps , and qtionnaire . 2010 census: fdca i degned to support the breau's field d collectio ctivitie ano iterfce with the decennrspnse itetio system , the breau'sapre system . activities to date: the breau moved the rd dte for fdca from the ed of the 200ler to mrch 2006 to enable otetil cotrctor to develo , t their owxpnse , “nrodctio rey” rototypsystem for ddressanassng , which will be evuated as part of rce electio . stem ( dads ii ) contract details appendix vi: d sydads , developed prior to census 2000 , is the bureau's system for tabulating and disseminating data from the decennial census and other bureau surveys to the public .