twelve sectors reported they were not tracking advs . of the 12 sectors , according to headquarters - provided information , most reported not tracking because they lacked the resources to do so . no single federal law comprehensively addresses advs . however , various laws and regulations provide federal authority for responding to maritime pollution and navigation threats , including threats posed by advs . the table includes laws that specifically prohibit abandonment of a vessel on public or private waterways or require that the owner remove an abandoned or derelict vessel under certain circumstances after notice from the state . what key factors guide how federal agencies respond to incidents involving advs in u.s. waterways ? to what extent do federal agencies track advs in u.s. waterways and their expenditures for responding to them , and what does their data show ? what actions have states taken to address advs and what factors do they cite as affecting their efforts ? to answer the first objective , we reviewed federal laws and regulations to identify federal agency authorities and roles relative to advs . additionally , we reviewed policy and guidance issued by federal agencies with responsibility for leading adv responses , including the coast guard , epa , usace , noaa , and fema . we selected these states for their geographic diversity and their varying state adv - related laws and programs . we interviewed officials from five coast guard sectors ( columbia river , maryland - national capital region , mobile , new orleans , and puget sound ) ; four epa regions , and four usace district offices ( baltimore , mobile , new orleans , and seattle ) . we also interviewed officials from two noaa field offices responsible for implementing the agency's nationwide marine debris program ( mobile , al and seattle , wa ) . the results of these site visits are not generalizable , but provide insight on federal agency adv response - related authorities , policy , and actions . to answer the second objective , we obtained and analyzed information from federal agencies regarding their methods for tracking advs , caseload for responding to adv - related incidents , and associated expenditures . specifically , we analyzed federal laws and agency policy and guidance to identify requirements or methods for tracking adv - related incidents and interviewed agency headquarters and field officials to obtain information on how these laws , guidance , and policies have been implemented . additionally , we analyzed data provided by coast guard , epa , usace , noaa , and fema showing adv - related cases and expenditures in coastal states . we did not analyze adv - related cases and associated expenditures from u.s. territories . to conduct these analyses , we compiled agency data for fiscal years 2005 through 2015 , the most current full fiscal year data available at the time of our review . we analyzed these data to identify each agency's reported number of adv - related cases and associated expenditures . we also reviewed case files for selected adv responses to obtain insight into federal actions and the factors that guided them during fiscal years 2005 through 2015 .