development . additionally , faa's 2012 reauthorization legislation directs the secretary of transportation to encourage airport planners to consider passenger convenience , airport ground access , and access to airport facilities during the development of intermodal connections on airport property . similarly , the passenger rail investment and improvement act of 2008 ( priia ) authorized development of high - speed intercity passenger rail corridors and the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) appropriated $8 billion to fund development of these corridors and intercity passenger - rail projects . in june 2009 , the federal railroad administration ( fra ) established the high - speed intercity passenger rail ( hsipr ) program that provides discretionary grants for high - speed or intercity passenger rail projects . in allocating funds , priia directed fra to give greater consideration to projects that , among other things , encourage intermodal connectivity among train stations , airports , subways , transit , and other forms of transportation . however , federal policy for surface transportation , aviation , and passenger rail is established through separate legislation . for example , the planning and funding for highway and transit projects are addressed under the moving ahead for progress in the 21st century act,planning and funding of u.s. airports is addressed under the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 , and the planning and funding for intercity passenger rail is addressed under priia . while the federal government does not provide funding specifically for air - rail connections , it has established a number of other funding mechanisms that can be used to enhance elements of air - rail connectivity . ( see app . iii. ) most federal funding for transportation projects is provided through grant programs through the individual specific modal administration and reserved for improvements specific to that mode . for example , most direct federal financial support for airport capital projects has been provided through grants from faa's airport improvement program ( aip ) . while aip grants may be used to fund intermodal projects , an airport's use of its funds is generally restricted to an airport project that is owned or operated by the airport sponsor and that is directly and substantially related to the air transportation of passengers or property . airports have funded portions of light rail and transit ( such as subway or bus ) using aip funds at airports meeting these restrictions . funding for intercity passenger rail has been provided in the form of operating and capital subsidies to amtrak , as well as the hsipr grant program . federal oversight of air - rail projects is primarily divided across dot's respective modal administrations , though dot has established some practices to coordinate oversight of intermodal projects . for example , for an air - rail connection project , the aviation component is overseen by faa , while the rail component is overseen by fra .