section 2433 . currently , the air force estimates research and development costs for sbirs - high to be $4.4 billion . we reported that when dod's sbirs - high satellite program began in 1994 , none of its critical technologies were mature . moreover , according to a dod - chartered independent review team , the complexity , schedule , and resources needed to develop sbirs - high , in hindsight , were misunderstood when the program began . this led to an immature understanding of how requirements translated into detailed engineering solutions . we recently reported to this subcommittee that while the sbirs restructuring implemented a number of needed management changes , the program continues to experience problems and risks related to changing requirements , design instability , and software development concerns . we concluded that if the air force continues to add new requirements and program content while prolonging efforts to resolve requirements that cannot be met , the program will remain at risk of not achieving , within schedule , its intended purposes — to provide an early warning and tracking system superior to that of its current ballistic missile detection system . dod has also initiated several programs and spent several billion dollars over the past 2 decades to develop low - orbiting satellites that can track ballistic missiles throughout their flight . however , it has not launched a single satellite to perform this capability . we have reported that a primary problem affecting these particular programs was that dod and the air force did not relax rigid requirements to more closely match technical capabilities that were achievable . program baselines were based on artificial time and / or money constraints . over time , it became apparent that the lack of knowledge of program challenges had led to overly optimistic schedules and budgets that were funded at less than what was needed . attempts to stay on schedule by approving critical milestones without meeting program criteria resulted in higher costs and more slips in technology development efforts . for example , our 1997 and 2001 reviews of dod's $1.7 billion sbirs - low program ( which was originally a part of the sbirs - high program ) showed that the program would enter into the product development phase with critical technologies that were immature and with optimistic deployment schedules . some of these technologies were so critical that sbirs - low would not be able to perform its mission if they were not available when needed . dod eventually restructured the sbirs - low program because of the cost and scheduling problems , and it put the equipment it had partially built into storage . in view of the program's mismatch between expectations and what it could achieve , the congress directed dod to restructure the program ( now under the responsibility of the missile defense agency ) as a research and development effort . dod's new space acquisition policy may help increase insight into gaps between needs and resources , but it does not require programs to close this gap before starting product development . in other words , the new policy does not alter dod's practice of committing major investments before knowing what resources will be required to deliver promised capability .