other costs and considerations may need to be evaluated as well . a number of federal and state programs require registration as a prerequisite , such as state drivers' licenses and identification cards , federal student aid programs , u.s. citizenship , federally sponsored job training , and government employment . selective service system officials said there could be costs to remove language from forms and program materials stating that registering with the selective service system is a prerequisite to qualifying for these programs . furthermore , selective service system officials said that agreements with civilian agencies to provide alternative civilian service for conscientious objectors would be terminated if registration were discontinued or the agency were disestablished , and reinstituting these agreements in the event of a draft would take time . terminating the selective service system would also require amending the military selective service act and potentially other laws involving the selective service system . selective service system and dod officials identified factors that should be considered if the functions of the selective service system were to be performed by another federal or state agency or with another database . we were unable to identify specific costs associated with these options because , according to officials from dod and the selective service system , there is no database that is comparable to or as complete as the selective service system's database . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness ; and the director of the selective service . however , officials did identify several factors and limitations that could affect the costs and feasibility of having the selective service system's functions performed by another entity . officials from the selective service system identified several databases and agencies that currently help populate their registration database . to assess the reliability of computer - processed data used to estimate costs , we interviewed selective service system officials and obtained documentation from the department of the interior to confirm the data and internal controls used in the system . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this audit . we also interviewed dod and selective service system officials to identify and describe federal or state agencies or comparable databases that could replace the selective service system's registration database . we obtained dod and selective service system officials' perspectives about the considerations and potential limitations involved in using another agency or database , as well as factors that could affect the cost and feasibility of another agency or database being used to perform the functions of the selective service system . we also reviewed gao's previous reports on the selective service system . we conducted this performance audit from february to june 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . brenda s. farrell , ( 202 ) 512-3604 or farrellb@gao.gov .