other - please explain in the q81 . in all cases in most cases in some cases q8 . if your osdbu is not currently involved in acquisition planning , what entity is involved in acquisition planning that advocates for small business consideration ? in your agency's annual small business goal - setting process , does your osdbu discuss potential goals with any of the following parties ? does your osdbu have other functions that do not relate to section 15 ( k ) of the small business act ? for example , responsibilities for monitoring agency processes in areas other than those relating to small business . to what extent is your osdbu facing each of the following challenges in performing its mission ? if you have any other comments on the topics covered in this survey , please enter them below . in addition to the individuals named above , emily r. chalmers , william r. chatlos , nancy eibeck , brodi fontenot , john t. mcgrail , marc molino , and carl ramirez made significant contributions to this report . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . you can print these documents in their entirety , including charts and other graphics . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . please briefly explain your answer to the previous question - what level of activity , if any , has your osdbu had in this area ? to what extent does your osdbu cooperate and consult with the sba ? please briefly explain your answer to the previous question - what level of activity , if any , has your osdbu had in this area ? does your osdbu negotiate the small business goals , ( also referred to as socioeconomic goals ) for your agency with the sba ? gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . the list contains links to the full - text document files . to have gao e - mail this list to you every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to e - mail alerts” under the “order gao products” heading . please briefly explain your answer to the previous question - what level of activity , if any , has your osdbu had in this area ?