the time for action is now . mr. chairman , senator gregg , members of the committee , let me repeat my appreciation for your commitment and concern in this matter . the time for action is now ! as widely reported , the $248 billion fiscal year 2006 unified budget deficit was lower than originally forecast and lower than last year's deficit of $318 billion . while this improvement in the 1-year fiscal picture is better than a worsening in that picture , it did not fundamentally change our long - term fiscal outlook . in fact , the u.s. government's total reported liabilities , net social insurance commitments , and other fiscal exposures continue to grow and now total approximately $50 trillion , representing approximately four times the nation's total output , or gross domestic product ( gdp ) in fiscal year 2006 , up from about $20 trillion , or two times gdp in fiscal year 2000 . the overall picture of the long - term fiscal outlook is not news to this committee . however , the long - term challenge is fast becoming a short - term one as the first of the baby boomers become eligible for early retirement under social security on january 1 , 2008 — less than one year — and for medicare benefits in 2011 — less than 4 years from now . the budget and economic implications of the baby boom generation's retirement have already become a factor in congressional budget office's ( cbo ) 10-year baseline projections and will only intensify as the baby boomers age . simply put , our nation is on an imprudent and unsustainable fiscal path . herbert stein once said that something that is not sustainable will stop . that , however , should not give us comfort . it is more prudent to change the path than to wait until a crisis occurs . and that brings me to my next point . while restraint in the near term and efforts to balance the budget over the next 5 years can be positive , it is important that actions to achieve this also address the long - term fiscal outlook . the real problem is not the near - term deficit — it is the long - term fiscal outlook . it is important to look beyond year 5 or even year 10 . both the budget and the budget process need more transparency over and focus on the long - term implications of current and proposed spending and tax policies . i will suggest a number of things that i believe will help in this area in this testimony . our government produces two types of measures — budget and financial — which further break down into three different numbers that can be seen as indicators of our current financial condition: the unified budget deficit , the on - budget deficit and the net operating cost or accrual deficit . no one of these alone is enough — we should look at all of them . the most commonly reported measure is the unified budget deficit . this is a largely cash - based number that represents the difference between revenues and outlays for the government as a whole .