hill . the ord specified a number of kits to be built and available to add on to vehicles as operations dictated the need for them . however , the army never fully addressed this requirement . the need for armor kits after somalia never materialized , and , according to army officials , the ord was not completed because funding was not available to fully meet the 1996 requirement due to other higher funding priorities in the army . according to one army official , given the amount of effort expended to develop and approve the ord , it is relatively uncommon for an ord not to be funded through production , especially when research and development funds had been spent , prototypes developed , and blast testing performed . even though the 1996 requirement was not fully addressed , a small number of armor kits were produced around this time period for two types of trucks , the hemtt and the pls , to support operations in bosnia . according to the army's project manager , development of these kits was initiated in response to an ons from units deployed to bosnia . the ons was submitted prior to completion of the ord . however , these kits did not meet all the protective requirements specified in the ord , such as providing blast protection . the bosnia kits were never installed on vehicles and were placed into storage because the need for them was never realized . the army's november 2003 armor requirement , developed in response to experiences in iraq and afghanistan , addressed the same vehicles confronting similar threats as those found in the january 1996 ord . this november 2003 requirement for the crew protection kit validated an operational wartime need for add - on armor kits for light , medium , and heavy tactical wheeled vehicles in support of oif and oef . the requirement cites the january 1996 ord as providing the basis for add - on armor and extends the requirement to continue identifying alternative capabilities for development , testing , and procurement . the november 2003 requirement noted that the armor kits are necessary to provide a capability to protect against small arms fire , ieds , mine blast protection , and artillery fragmentation ; and to minimize degradation of the vehicle mission . army officials in theater modified the november 2003 requirement by changing the distribution of armor and prioritizing armor needs ; however , the amounts of armor kits required remained the same . table 3 shows the 1996 and 2003 requirements , as well as the most recent armor requirements . because not all the kits required under the 1996 ord were developed , the army went into iraq with less protective capability than it might otherwise have done . however , the army's work done in support of the ord and the bosnia kits laid a foundation to meet future truck armor requirements . for example , the limited number of kits developed for military operations in bosnia was pulled from storage and used in iraq .