the department had no comments on our recommendation . we will continue to follow - up with the agency to determine the extent to which this recommendation has been addressed . in addition , we have ongoing work identifying risks associated with irs's legacy it systems , and the agency's management of these risks . in summary , irs faces longstanding challenges in managing its it systems . while effective it management has been a prevalent issue throughout the federal government , it is especially concerning at irs given the agency's extensive reliance on it to carry out its mission of providing service to america's taxpayers in meeting their tax obligations . thus , it is important that the agency establish , document , and implement policies and procedures for prioritizing its modernization efforts , as we have recently recommended , and provide congress with accurate information on progress in delivering such modernization efforts . in addition , we have emphasized the need for irs to address the inherent challenges associated with aging legacy systems so that it does not continue to maintain investments that have outlived their effectiveness and are consuming resources that outweigh their benefits . continued attention to implementing our recommendations will be vital to helping irs ensure the effective management of its efforts to modernize its aging it systems and ensure its multibillion dollar investment in it is meeting the needs of the agency . chairman buchanan , ranking member lewis , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . if you or your staffs have any questions about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or at pownerd@gao.gov . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony are sabine paul ( assistant director ) , rebecca eyler , and bradley roach ( analyst in charge ) . irs 2013 budget: continuing to improve information on program costs and results could aid in resource decision making , gao - 12-603 ( washington , d.c.: june 8 , 2012 ) information technology: consistently applying best practices could help irs improve the reliability of reported cost and schedule information , gao - 13-401 ( washington , d.c.: april 17 , 2013 ) information technology: agencies need to strengthen oversight of multibillion dollar investments in operations and maintenance , gao - 14-66 ( washington , d.c.: nov. 6 , 2013 ) information technology: irs needs to improve the reliability and transparency of reported investment information , gao - 14-298 ( washington , d.c.: april 2 , 2014 ) information technology: management needs to address reporting of irs investments' cost , schedule , and scope information , gao - 15-297 ( washington , d.c.: february 25 , 2015 ) information technology: federal agencies need to address aging legacy systems , gao - 16-468 ( washington , d.c.: may 25 , 2016 ) this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .