subsidies . state and local government subsidies are largely payments to railroads . state and local government spending also includes gross investment , capital transfer payments , and net purchases of nonproduced assets . gross investment is spending on capital goods like structures , equipment , and intellectual property — items that are called fixed assets or capital because of their repeated or continuous use in providing government services for more than 1 year . structures include residential and commercial buildings , highways and streets , sewer systems , and water systems . state and local government capital transfer payments include disaster - related insurance benefits paid to the u.s. territories and the commonwealths of puerto rico and northern mariana islands . net purchases of nonproduced assets are composed of net purchases of land less oil bonuses ( payments to states for the long - term rights to extract oil ) . our main indicator of the sector's fiscal balance is its operating balance net of funds for capital expenditures ( henceforth , operating balance ) , which is a measure of the sector's ability to cover its current expenditures out of current revenues . the operating balance is defined as total receipts minus ( 1 ) capital outlays not financed by medium - and long - term debt issuance , ( 2 ) total current expenditures less depreciation , ( 3 ) current surplus of state and local government enterprises , and ( 4 ) net social insurance fund balance . alternative indicators of fiscal balance include net saving and net lending or borrowing . net saving is the difference between current receipts and current expenditures . since current expenditures exclude capital investment but include a depreciation measure , net saving can be thought of as a measure of the extent to which governments are covering their current operations from current receipts . net lending or borrowing is the difference between total receipts and total expenditures , and is analogous to the federal unified surplus or deficit . total receipts differ from current receipts because they include capital transfer receipts . total expenditures differ from current expenditures because they include capital investment , capital transfer payments , and net purchases of nonproduced assets . however , they exclude fixed capital consumption . the former three categories are cash expenditures , while the latter is a noncash charge . net lending or net borrowing represents the governments' cash surplus or borrowing requirement . this measure is normally negative because governments borrow to finance their capital investment ( and sometimes to finance current operations as well ) . the following equations describe how we simulated state and local government receipts and expenditures , as well as the intermediate variables used in those simulations . for this update , we started with historical data for 2017 , or the most recent year available , and then simulated each variable for each year from 2018 through 2092 ( the simulation period ) . to simulate state and local government receipts and expenditures , we use simulations of various national - level demographic , macroeconomic , and health care variables derived from projections produced by cbo , cms , and the oasdi trustees , and otherwise derived using our own assumptions ( see table 2 ) .