these key process areas are described in table 1 . as established by the model , each key process area contains five common features — commitment to perform , ability to perform , activities to be performed , measurement and analysis of activities , and verification of activities' implementation . these five features collectively provide a framework for the implementation and institutionalization of the key process areas . whereas dla's bsm project fully or substantially satisfied sei's sa - cmm requirements for the key process areas for level 2 , as well as requirements for one level 3 ( defined level ) key process area , its fas project did not satisfy all the criteria for any of these key process areas . a discussion of how each system compared with the sa - cmm is summarized below . we focused on the key process areas necessary to obtain a repeatable level of maturity , the second level of sei's five - level model . we also evaluated against one level - 3 key process area — acquisition risk management — because of its importance . we met with project managers and project team members to determine whether and to what extent they implemented each key practice , and to obtain relevant documentation . in accordance with the sei model , for each key process area we reviewed , we evaluated dla's institutional policies and practices and compared project - specific guidance and practices against the required key practices . more specifically , for each key practice we reviewed , we compared project - specific documentation and practices against the criteria in the software acquisition model . if the project met the criteria for the key practice reviewed , we rated it as a strength . if the project did not meet the criteria for the key practice reviewed , we rated it as a weakness . if the evidence was mixed or inconclusive and did not support a rating of either a strength or a weakness , we treated it as an observation . if the key practice was not relevant to the project , we did not rate it . we evaluated dla's only two software acquisition projects underway at the time of our review: the business systems modernization ( bsm ) and the fuels automated system ( fas ) . to determine what actions dla has planned or in place to improve its software processes , we identified the group within dla that is tasked with performing this function . we interviewed agency officials who are involved in software process improvement , collected data , and analyzed draft policies and draft working papers describing planned work . we performed our work from may through october 2001 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in addition to the individual named above , key contributors to this report were suzanne burns , yvette banks , niti bery , sophia harrison , madhav panwar , and teresa tucker . last , bsm satisfied all but one key practice in evaluation , and we do not view that practice as significant .