attorneys . we gathered data from the environment and natural resources division's case management system database that tracks basic information on cases , including lead plaintiffs' names , filing and disposition dates , and relevant statutes . to examine the extent to which settlements in deadline suits have impacted epa's rulemaking priorities , we obtained from epa's office of general counsel data on deadline suits it had settled from january 2001 through july 2014 and the epa office ( s ) responsible for implementing the terms of the settlements . we interviewed individuals from academia , an environmental group , industry , and a state official from oklahoma , to obtain their perspectives on deadline suits.collected information from fws on cases where attorney fees were sought . more details on the scope and methodology for this work can be found in each of our issued reports . the work upon which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . to carry out its responsibilities under the nation's environmental laws , epa conducts an array of activities , such as promulgating regulations ; issuing and denying permits ; approving state programs ; and issuing enforcement orders , plans , and other documents . many of these activities may be subject to legal challenge.and clean water act require epa to take certain actions , such as issuing rules , to implement provisions of the law within certain statutorily designated time frames , and epa is subject to legal challenge for not taking the mandatory actions by the required deadline . if the legal challenge is a deadline suit , epa works with justice to consider several factors in determining whether or not to settle the deadline suit and the terms of any settlement . statutes establishing programs administered by epa , and under which the agency may be sued , include 10 of the nation's most prominent environmental laws , such as the clean air act ; clean water act ; comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( better known as the superfund law ) ; emergency planning and community right - to - know act ; federal insecticide , fungicide , and rodenticide act and related provisions of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ; resource conservation and recovery act ; safe drinking water act ; and toxic substances control act . generally , the federal government has immunity from lawsuits , but federal laws authorize three types of suits related to epa's implementation of environmental laws . first , most of the major environmental statutes include “citizen suit” provisions authorizing citizens — including individuals , associations , businesses , and state and local governments — to sue epa when the agency fails to perform an action mandated by law . these suits include deadline suits .