the hsc did not comment on the draft report . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this completes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you might have . for further information on this testimony , please contact bernice steinhardt , director , strategic issues , at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or steinhardtb@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include susan ragland , allen lomax , catherine myrick , susan sato , and jordan wicker . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . officials are starting to build on these relationships . for example , some of the federal officials with leadership roles for an influenza pandemic met during the week of march 19 , 2007 , to continue to identify issues and begin developing solutions . one of the participants told us that although additional coordination meetings are needed , it may be challenging since there is no dedicated funding for the staff working on pandemic issues to participate in these and other related meetings . it is also unclear whether the newly established national and regional positions for a pandemic will further clarify leadership roles in light of existing and newly emerging plans and issues . for example , in 2006 , dhs made revisions to the nrp and released a supplement to the catastrophic incident annex — both designed to further clarify federal roles and responsibilities and relationships among federal , state , and local governments and responders . however , we reported in february 2007 that these revisions had not been tested and there was little information available on the extent to which these and other actions dhs was taking to improve readiness were operational . we also reported in may 2007 that fema has predesignated five teams of fcos and pfos in the gulf coast and eastern seaboard states at risk of hurricanes . however , there is still some question among state and local first responders about the need for both positions and how they will work together in disaster response . more recently , dhs reviewed the nrp and its supplemental documents . one of the issues this review intended to address was clarifying roles and responsibilities of key structures , positions , and levels of government , including the role of the pfo and that position's current lack of operational authority over the fco during an emergency . on september 10 , 2007 , dhs released a draft national response framework to replace the nrp , for public comment . comments on the framework are due october 11 , 2007 , and comments on the supplemental documents , such as revised emergency support function specifications , are due by november 9 , 2007 .