for the msa sample , this figure was 110 percent . for further information on this testimony , please contact william b. shear at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or shearw@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included steve westley ( assistant director ) , emily chalmers , chris krzeminski , and andy pauline . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . fha does not approve down - payment assistance programs administered by nonprofits . instead , lenders are responsible for assuring that down - payment assistance from a nonprofit meets fha requirements . additionally , our analysis of more recent loans — a sample of fha - insured loans settled in march 2005 — indicated that homes sold with nonprofit assistance were appraised and sold for about 2 percentage points more than comparable homes without nonprofit assistance . we found that fha - insured loans with down - payment assistance do not perform as well as loans without it . as part of our evaluation , we analyzed loan performance by source of down - payment assistance , controlling for the maximum age of the loan , as of june 30 , 2005 . we used two samples of fha - insured purchase loans from 2000 , 2001 , and 2002 — a national sample and a sample from three msas with high rates of down - payment assistance . we grouped the loans into the following three categories: loans with assistance from seller - funded nonprofit organizations , loans with assistance from nonseller - funded sources , and loans without assistance . as shown in figure 2 , in both samples and in each year , loans with down - payment assistance from seller - funded nonprofit organizations had the highest rates of delinquency and insurance claims , and loans without assistance the lowest . specifically , between 22 and 28 percent of loans with seller - funded assistance had experienced a 90-day delinquency , compared with 11 to 16 percent of loans with assistance from other sources and 8 to 12 percent of loans without assistance . the claim rates for loans with seller - funded assistance ranged from 6 to 18 percent , for loans with other sources of assistance from 5 to 10 percent , and for loans without assistance from 3 to 6 percent . in addition , we analyzed loan performance by source of down - payment assistance holding other variables constant . here we found that fha - insured loans with down - payment assistance had higher delinquency and claim rates than similar loans without such assistance ( see fig . the results from the national sample indicated that assistance from a seller - funded nonprofit raised the probability that the loan had gone to claim by 76 percent relative to similar loans with no assistance .