computational modeling . on the basis of its aging studies and other data , the enhanced surveillance program develops computational models to predict the impacts of aging on weapons components and materials . according to the enhanced surveillance program's federal program manager , computational predictive models primarily benefit weapons systems managers at the three nuclear security laboratories . the federal program manager noted that the models allow a projection of the future performance of the systems and anticipate failures with sufficient time to correct them . diagnostic tool development . the enhanced surveillance program develops diagnostic tools to support core surveillance and allow the evaluation of weapons without the need to dismantle and destroy them . this is important since new weapons are not being produced . one diagnostic tool developed by the program was the high - resolution computed tomography image analysis tool for a particular nuclear component , implemented in fiscal year 2009 . nnsa officials said this diagnostic tool has enhanced the ability to identify potential defects or anomalies without the need to dismantle or destroy the component . organizationally , the enhanced surveillance program is a part of nnsa's engineering program , which is part of nnsa's broader research , development , test , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) program . the engineering program creates and develops tools and capabilities to support efforts to ensure weapons are safe and reliable . nnsa's total rdt&e budget allocation for fiscal year 2016 is $1.8 billion ; the enhanced surveillance program budget allocation for fiscal year 2016 is approximately $39 million . according to agency documents , because of long - standing concerns over the stockpile surveillance program , nnsa launched its 2007 initiative to , among other things , better integrate stockpile surveillance program activities . the concerns date back to the mid - 1990s . for example , our july 1996 report on the surveillance program found the agency was behind in conducting surveillance tests and did not have written plans for addressing the backlog . a january 2001 internal nnsa review of the surveillance program made several recommendations to improve surveillance , including addressing the selection and testing approach for weapons and components , developing new tools to allow for nondestructive testing of the stockpile , improving aging and performance models , and achieving closer coordination and integration of core surveillance and the enhanced surveillance program . further , an april 2004 review of the enhanced surveillance program by doe's office of inspector general found that nnsa experienced delays in completing some enhanced surveillance program milestones and was at risk of not meeting future milestones . the report noted that such delays could result in nnsa's being unprepared to identify age - related defects in weapons and impact the agency's ability to annually assess the condition of the stockpile . finally , an october 2006 doe office of inspector general report found that nnsa had not eliminated its surveillance testing backlog . faced with this criticism , a growing backlog of core surveillance's traditional surveillance testing , budgetary pressures , and an aging stockpile , nnsa developed its 2007 initiative .