other classification . classification of most non - claims cases is done by experienced examiners who conduct further research on an organization . they decide which returns to filter out and which to send forward for possible examination , based on their professional judgment of the likelihood of noncompliance and the significance of the identified issues . returns are classified by one of two groups , eoca classification and exempt organizations examinations classification , depending on how the case originated and the details of the case . the two groups use different criteria and procedures , but have similar functions and results ; classification by either group may result in a correspondence examination , a field examination , or accepting a return as filed and filtering it out from further review . triage teams . for some eoca compliance projects , examination selection decisions are made using project - specific criteria applied by project - specific teams , called triage teams , instead of through the usual classification groups . for example , compliance projects that use questionnaires may have triage teams compare questionnaire responses with form 990 data to select organizations for examination . triage teams look at the compliance check or compliance review results and apply the project - specific criteria to determine which returns to filter out , and which to send forward for possible examination . case selection and delivery . after identification of organizations for possible examination , and after any intermediate research steps and classification , most returns that are selected for possible examination are sent to eo's case selection and delivery unit . ( returns that were classified by eoca generally skip this step and may be sent straight to examination by eoca examiners. ) at case selection and delivery , the returns become part of a pool of returns that may be sent for examination . claims that raise questions ( see above ) are sent for examination . high - priority and certain other referrals ( discussed below ) are also sent for examination , according to eo officials . aside from these referrals and claims , decisions are made based on available resources . different examinations must be conducted by different grades of examination staff , depending on the nature of the issues involved and the level of income on the return ; large and complex organizations are examined through eo's additionally , field examinations generally team examination program.involve in - person contact and so must be conducted in the geographic area of the exempt organization . examination offices tell the case selection and delivery unit the grades of examiners available . the unit then sends returns to the offices based on those grades and , in the case of field exams , on the locations of the offices . in fiscal year 2014 , 93 percent of returns sent to the case selection and delivery unit were ultimately sent to examination offices . dismissals . after selected returns arrive at examination offices , managers and examiners conduct risk assessments on the returns . they may choose not to conduct the examinations , if returns seem to pose limited noncompliance risk or for other reasons . in this report we use the term “dismissed” to refer to such returns .