section 2 . when assigned cic duties , an employee shall be given sufficient authority to fulfill the responsibilities of the assignment . general guidance and goals for the shift shall be conveyed in facility directives and / or during the shift / area position briefing . section 3 . cic premium pay shall be paid at the rate of ten ( 10 ) percent of the applicable hourly rate of basic pay times the number of hours and portions of hours during which the employee is assigned cic duties . ; ( 2 ) how adequate is the training faa provided controllers for their new duties and responsibilities ? ; ( 3 ) how adequate are faa's quality assurance procedures for measuring any safety - related effects of the cic expansion ? to conduct this work , we obtained and analyzed nationwide data from faa's air traffic services division on the implementation of the expanded cic program . we also visited 12 air traffic control facilities and 6 of faa's 9 regional offices to review their implementation of the cic selection process , training , and quality assurance measures . ; and ( 4 ) what is the status of faa's progress toward meeting its estimates of savings and productivity gains from the cic expansion ? we selected regional offices to ensure geographic diversity and , within those regions , we chose facilities that handle different levels of traffic ( in terms of volume and complexity ) and that represented a cross - section of the types of air traffic control facilities faa operates . we assembled an independent panel of four experts in air traffic control training to assess the adequacy of the cic training program in addition to reviewing all available student evaluations of the cic training . our detailed scope and methodology , including a list of the faa facilities we visited , are presented at the conclusion of this report . faa's mission is to promote the safe , orderly , and expeditious flow of air traffic in the united states . to accomplish this , faa provides uninterrupted air traffic control services throughout the year . a key component of these services is faa's air traffic controller workforce , which includes its air traffic controllers and their supervisors . controllers manage and direct air traffic throughout the country at three primary types of facilities to provide complete airport - to - airport air traffic management: airport towers — controllers at these facilities direct the flow of aircraft before landing , on the ground , and after takeoff within 5 nautical miles of the airport and up to 3,000 feet above the airport . tracons — controllers here provide radar separation to arriving and departing flights . they direct aircraft within the airspace that extends from the point where the tower control ends to about 50 nautical miles from the airport . some tracons are located outside of the airport . however , most are not only collocated with the airport tower , but the controllers there work at both the tower and the tracon .