these types of arrangements are explained below . outcomes of these partnership arrangements varied , as reported by tribal officials and other stakeholders we interviewed , but these stakeholders did not always agree on the outcomes . private providers can partner with a tribe to deploy broadband infrastructure on tribal lands . we found two instances in which a tribe partnered with private providers to improve broadband service . pine telephone company and choctaw nation . with the land the tribe has jurisdiction over covering over 10 counties across 12,000 square miles in oklahoma , the choctaw nation's lands encompasses about 15 percent of the state of oklahoma's total area — an area larger than the entire state of maryland . according to the oklahoma department of transportation , the choctaw nation is the largest employer in the southeastern oklahoma region and its businesses are key contributors to the state's economy . however , a tribal official told us that the tribal government has struggled to meet the tribe's broadband needs . according to the choctaw nation official , pine telephone company ( pine ) , a privately owned company , has a history of partnering with the choctaw nation . in 2010 , pine received a btop grant of $9.5 million to deploy broadband infrastructure to underserved areas of southeastern oklahoma , including choctaw nation lands . according to tribal officials and representatives from pine , the partnership enabled tribal government agencies and buildings — including public schools , public safety agencies , fire and police departments , and a health clinic — to get broadband service . the partnership also improved broadband service for the choctaw nation . additionally , pine had been proactive in partnering with the choctaw nation to secure federal grants and assist with land use and rights - of - way issues , according to a tribal official . pine representatives told us that partnering with the choctaw nation had been beneficial based on their common interest to increase broadband service to the area . inland cellular , first step , and nez perce . the nez perce tribe's reservation consists of 750,000 acres located in north central idaho . tribal officials told us that the terrain on the reservation makes broadband deployment challenging because it has very large hills and deep valleys ; additionally the reservation is sparsely populated . tribal officials told us that prior to 2010 , there was no broadband service available on the nez perce reservation . in 2010 , the tribe received a btop grant of $1.6 million for the nez perce broadband enhancement project ; the project was completed in 2013 . the tribe used that federal grant to deploy 216 miles of broadband ( wireless ) infrastructure across its reservation to provide broadband service in four northern idaho counties . as part of the project , the tribe partnered with two private providers , inland cellular and first step , to expand broadband service on the reservation . the tribe used btop funding for infrastructure buildout in areas in need of connectivity , while inland cellular and first step focused their efforts on infrastructure buildout in more populated areas .