further , . the 32 laboratories that analyzed samples collected from rocky flats were required to undergo annual technical audits to ensure the accuracy of their analytical results . who knows what will happen ? the uncertainty of the future contributes the largest concern i have about the cleanup.” in the summer of 2005 , doe arranged for a number of cleanup verification activities , including kaiser - hill's ground - based scans along the boundaries of previously remediated areas where contamination was once known to exist ; bechtel nevada's aerial scan of the site ; and the oak ridge institute of science and education's ( orise ) sampling and ground - based scanning of the 903 pad and lip area . we would like your views on the overall verification process , as well as your views on each of these three specific verification activities . how , if at all , did the overall verification process affect your confidence in the site's cleanup ? neither increased nor diminished my confidence don't know / no basis to judge 4 18 . please explain or provide examples that illustrate how the overall verification process affected your confidence in the site's cleanup . comments from 5 of the 13 respondents who believed that the overall verification process “greatly increased” or “somewhat increased” their confidence ( in response to question 17 ) included the following: “although i felt there was a low probability of contamination being in the buffer zone , given the level of suspicion and the recent publication of several false and misleading books and articles i felt it was important . this is a good time to state that although almost all the public fear involved radiologic contamination , it is not the most hazardous.” “additional testing always adds to the vote of confidence.” “the aerial scan was the most effective . the other parts of the verification were too confusing for the majority of the community to understand . when the hot spots were discovered in the 903 pad lip area , those of us more familiar with statistical sampling methodology could understand that it was not that grave of a situation , but those who read newspapers i am sure were not comforted.” “orise , although paid by doe , is an independent . as such , i trust their results.” “the targeted independent verification areas helped to assure my confidence level but did not greatly increase it . i do think the verification process was important to other board members and most of all to the general public .