space leadership . the dod's space acquisition portfolio has numerous stakeholders , including each of the military services ; intelligence community organizations ; research agencies ; multiple dod headquarters offices ; civil government agencies ; and the executive office of the president . over more than the last 15 years , we have noted — along with congressional committees , and various commissions and reviews — concern about the fragmented nature of dod's space system acquisition processes and acquisition oversight . in september 2015 , we began a review based on language in the senate report accompanying a bill for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 which is looking at: ( 1 ) how dod's management and oversight of space system acquisitions are structured ; ( 2 ) whether past recommendations for improving this structure have been implemented ; and ( 3 ) what challenges , if any , result from this current structure . our preliminary findings indicate that the structure of space system acquisitions and oversight continues to be complicated . it involves a large number of stakeholders , and there is no single individual , office , or entity in place that provides oversight for the overall space program acquisition structure . a number of commissions and study groups have recommended substantive changes to the way the government plans for , acquires , and manages space systems , including centralizing planning and decision - making authority for space systems and establishing oversight authority outside the air force . additionally , various dod officials and experts that we spoke with noted other problems with the process of acquiring and managing space systems , including long acquisition timelines and extensive review processes , decision - making authority being at too high a level , and little long - term planning or system architecture work . dod does point to a recent change in dod's organizational structure for space programs that attempts to mitigate these problems . responsive launch . in light of dod's dramatically increased demand and dependence on space capabilities and that operationally responsive low cost launch could assist in addressing such needs , dod was required to report to the congress on “responsive launch,” which generally means the ability to launch space assets to their intended orbits as the need arises , possibly to augment or reconstitute existing space capabilities . in october 2015 , we reported that dod did not yet have a consolidated plan for developing a responsive launch capability since there were no formal requirements for such a capability . dod and contractor officials we spoke with also highlighted several potential challenges dod faces as it pursues operationally responsive launch capabilities . for example , dod officials told us that existing national security space program architectures ( including payloads , ground systems , user equipment , and launch systems ) may need to be modified to improve responsiveness , which could present challenges . that is , modifying one program could have repercussions for another , including changes to infrastructure and command and control elements .