invention begins . once basic principles are observed , practical applications can be invented . the application is speculative and there is no proof or detailed analysis to support the assumption . examples are still limited to paper studies . active research and development is initiated . this includes analytical studies and laboratory studies to physically validate analytical predictions of separate elements of the technology . examples include components that are not yet integrated or representative . basic technological components are integrated to establish that the pieces will work together . this is relatively “low fidelity” compared to the eventual system . examples include integration of “ad hoc” hardware in a laboratory . fidelity of breadboard technology increases significantly . the basic technological components are integrated with reasonably realistic supporting elements so that the technology can be tested in a simulated environment . examples include “high fidelity” laboratory integration of components . representative model or prototype system , which is well beyond the breadboard tested for trl 5 , is tested in a relevant environment . represents a major step up in a technology's demonstrated readiness . examples include testing a prototype in a high fidelity laboratory environment or in simulated operational environment . prototype near or at planned operational system . represents a major step up from trl 6 , requiring the demonstration of an actual system prototype in an operational environment , such as in an aircraft , vehicle , or space . examples include testing the prototype in a test bed aircraft . technology has been proven to work in its final form and under expected conditions . in almost all cases , this trl represents the end of true system development . examples include developmental test and evaluation of the system in its intended weapon system to determine if it meets design specifications . actual application of the technology in its final form and under mission conditions , such as those encountered in operational test and evaluation . in almost all cases , this is the end of the last “bug fixing” aspects of true system development . examples include using the system under operational mission conditions . appendix ii: critical technologies and their descriptions description involves the ability to detect and isolate the cause of aircraft problems and then predict when maintenance activity will have to occur on systems with pending failures . life - cycle cost savings are dependent on prognostics and health management through improved sortie generation rate , reduced logistics and manpower requirements , and more efficient inventory control . includes integration of propulsion , vehicle management system , and other subsystems as they affect aircraft stability , control , and flying qualities ( especially short take - off and vertical landing ) . aircraft improvements are to reduce pilot workload and increase flight safety . includes areas of electrical power , electrical wiring , environmental control systems , fire protection , fuel systems , hydraulics , landing gear systems , mechanisms , and secondary power . important for reducing aircraft weight , decreasing maintenance cost , and improving reliability . involves designing an integrated support concept that includes an aircraft with supportable stealth characteristics and improved logistics and maintenance functions .