this problem delayed the on - site response . nrc's office of the inspector general also identified emergency preparedness issues , including the state's difficulties getting information about the emergency from consolidated edison and the fact that english is a second language for many who lived within 10 miles of the plant . the office of the inspector general concluded , and nrc agreed , that recurring uncorrected weaknesses at indian point 2 had played a role in the company's response during the february 2000 event . however , nrc concluded that consolidated edison had taken the necessary steps to protect public health and safety . consolidated edison subsequently evaluated its entire emergency preparedness program to determine the causes of the deficiencies and to develop corrective actions . consolidated edison concluded that senior management did not pay sufficient attention to the emergency preparedness program or problems at indian point 2 because these problems were not viewed as a high priority warranting close attention and improvement . as a result , emergency preparedness had relatively low visibility , minimal direction , and inadequate resources . the company also found that ( 1 ) the emergency response organization had been stagnant , understaffed , poorly equipped , and consistently ineffective ; ( 2 ) the emergency manager performed collateral and competing duties ; and ( 3 ) for a time , a contractor held the manager's position . furthermore , the professional development and continuing training of the emergency planning staff had been minimal . the company undertook initiatives to address the deficiencies noted . despite these initiatives , in april 2001 , nrc reported that it had found problems similar to those previously identified at indian point 2 . nrc again found weaknesses in communication and information dissemination . it also found that the utility's training program had not prevented the recurrence of these issues during on - site drills and that its actions to resolve other weaknesses had not been fully effective . nrc said that consolidated edison had identified the major issues in its business plan , which , if properly implemented , should improve emergency preparedness at the plant . the counties had also taken some other actions to improve their radiological emergency programs . for example , all four counties agreed to activate their emergency operation centers at the “alert” level ( the second lowest of four nrc classifications ) . before the february 2000 event , the counties differed on when they would activate their centers , with one county activating its center at the alert level and the other three counties at the site - area emergency level ( the next level above an alert ) . as a result , once the first county activated its center during the event , the media questioned why the other three counties had not done so . the counties also connected the “executive hot line,” which linked the state , four counties , and governor , to the emergency operations facility at indian point 2 to establish and maintain real - time communications during an emergency . in addition to these actions , county officials suggested to us in 2001 that other changes to improve communications among nrc , fema , and nonstate entities could be taken .