program eligibility has changed over time . for example , when the program was originally structured , only businesses with fewer than 25 employees were eligible ; however , according to state officials , the need for these grants and loans was too great , and they increased the employee limit to businesses with fewer than 100 employees . ( see table 2. ) once hud allocated cdbg disaster relief funds to the affected states , state - level development agencies were responsible for the administration and management of the funds . representatives of state and local organizations and organizations that assist small businesses also expressed uncertainty regarding the impact on the small business economy that will result from the oil spill . while industry employment grew to about 24,200 in 2007 , it still remained significantly below its prehurricane level . in harrison county , mississippi , in 2004 there were about 450 accommodation and food services establishments , which dropped to about 350 in 2006 after the hurricanes and , as of 2007 , remained at about 350 . as of 2007 , employment levels in harrison county also had not rebounded to prehurricane levels . in response to the oil spill , sba has offered economic injury assistance to small businesses in counties and parishes in alabama , florida , louisiana , and mississippi included in sba's disaster declarations ( see fig . those eligible for this assistance include small businesses engaged in shrimping , crabbing , and oyster fishing in the waters closed as a result of the spill ; small businesses dependent on the catching or sale of shrimp , crabs , and oysters ; suppliers of fishing gear and fuel ; docks , boatyards , processors , wholesalers , shippers , retailers , and other small businesses dependent on revenue from fishing ; recreational and sports fishing small businesses ; and coastal small businesses . in addition , small businesses in areas included in the declaration that are currently repaying an existing sba disaster loan can request a deferment . also , homeowners who have existing sba disaster home loans can request a deferment if their business or employment has been impacted by the oil spill . as table 10 shows , sba had approved 181 economic injury disaster loans totaling $15.2 million as of july 22 , 2010 . sba also has granted deferments to 707 businesses and homeowners with existing disaster loan balances totaling about $86.9 million . according to sba officials , the agency tailors loan deferments on the basis of the need of the borrower and can defer payments on loans up to 12 months . however , interest on the loan continues to accrue during the deferment period . finally , sba had opened about 30 business recovery centers throughout the affected areas to provide information , answer questions , and assist with the loan application process . a number of businesses in the areas impacted by the oil spill had existing sba disaster loans related to hurricanes katrina and rita .