nnsa . nnsa did not establish a performance baseline for 2 of the 41 nnsa nonmajor projects we reviewed . according to nnsa documents and project officials , after a may 2000 wildfire damaged lands and buildings at the los alamos national laboratory , nnsa formally authorized two emergency recovery efforts in july 2000 . because this authorization was granted outside of the critical decision process , nnsa did not establish formal performance targets for these projects . we also conducted electronic testing on the specific data fields of interest , including cost , schedule , and scope targets . we determined that the cost and schedule data were complete and sufficiently reliable for our purposes ; however , we found the scope data to be incomplete . through interviews with officials , we ascertained that the scope data were not missing because of a system or data entry problem ; instead , because em and nnsa had not consistently identified and documented scope targets for the 71 projects we reviewed , these data could not be entered into pars . therefore , we obtained data on project scope , cost , and schedule directly from em and nnsa officials . for the 71 nonmajor projects , we reviewed selected documents providing information about the projects' targets for scope , cost , and completion date . we relied on doe order 413.3 for requirements on ( 1 ) specifying the scope , cost , and schedule targets for a project's performance baseline and ( 2 ) documenting the performance baseline.requirements , we reviewed the relevant documentation ( including critical decision memoranda and project execution plans ) and compared the performance targets established for scope , cost , and schedule with the actual performance of completed projects and the expected performance of ongoing projects . for completed projects , we compared the performance targets for scope , cost , and schedule — as documented in critical decision 2 ( cd - 2 ) approval memorandum and project execution plans — with the completed scope , actual costs , and approval dates as documented in critical decision 4 ( cd - 4 ) approval memorandum . for ongoing projects , we compared the performance targets for scope , cost , and schedule with doe project performance reports ; we also had officials from em , nnsa , and doe's office of acquisition and project management review performance information as of august 29 , 2012 . in cases where key project documents — including the cd - 2 and cd - 4 approval memoranda and project execution plans — did not identify all three performance targets for scope , cost , and completion , we requested and reviewed alternative project documents . these included , among other things: independent project review reports ; briefing slides prepared for doe advisory boards ; contractor work packages ; doe documents listing the functional and operational requirements of projects ; memoranda used to request approval of changes to project baselines ; final acceptance reports documenting that contractors delivered project requirements ; and doe quarterly and monthly status reports on ongoing projects . when reviewing alternative project documents , we requested documents dated as close to cd - 2 and cd - 4 as possible .