gao - 07-406sp . washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2007 . what challenges if any does socom face in managing its acquisition programs ? socom has encountered difficulties over the past several years with two of its flagship acquisition programs — the advanced seal delivery system ( asds ) and the cv - 22 advanced vertical lift aircraft . the asds program is funded by socom and managed by the navy . the basic cv - 22 platform is funded by the air force and produced under a navy contract . socom funds sof - peculiar modifications to the cv - 22 . both the asds and cv - 22 programs have experienced significant cost , schedule , and performance problems because of requirements , technology , and design issues . since both programs began before 2001 , we did not include them in our analysis . however , we have reported separately on the programs , and those reports are listed at the end of this report . to assess socom's management of its acquisition programs , we collected and reviewed information on all programs undertaken by the command between 2001 and 2006 . we analyzed the information to determine what types of systems were being acquired and whether programs were meeting planned cost , schedule , and quantity objectives . to identify the challenges they face , we examined and analyzed pertinent documentation to include dod , military departments , and socom directives , instructions , policies , and operating procedures related to the defense acquisition system , and we interviewed key officials from socom's special operations acquisition and logistics and resources and requirements organizations . we relied on previous gao work as a framework for knowledge - based acquisition . we performed our review from july 2006 through may 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . socom is one of ten combatant commands directly responsible to the secretary of defense . the command was established by the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1987 , and codified in 10 usc section 167 . as a functional command , socom's primary responsibility is to prepare the special operations forces ( sof ) to carry out assigned missions . when appropriate , socom may be called upon to conduct special operations activities unilaterally or provide support to other u.s. military forces . in 2003 , the secretary of defense expanded socom's role to include leading the dod's gwot operations . in this central role , socom plans , directs , and executes special operations in the conduct of the gwot in order to disrupt and destroy terrorist networks that threaten the united states , its citizens , and its interests worldwide . socom also organizes , trains , and equips sof warriors provided to the geographic combatant commanders and to the american ambassadors and their country teams . in keeping with this expanded role , dod has begun to re - tool socom from primarily a supporting command into a command responsible for planning , synchronizing , and executing missions in the gwot . socom is headquartered at macdill air force base in tampa , florida , and has four component commands , and one sub - unified command located at different military bases .