iv. ) hhs noted that cms has expanded its efforts to ensure that gpra goals become an integral part of its overall management culture , including management of mip activities . in addition , hhs stated that with the introduction of ppaca , the department is developing performance metrics that are in addition to , and align with , gpra goals .  provider audit . includes both automated and manual prepayment and postpayment reviews of individual medicare claims to determine whether the services are provided by legitimate providers to eligible beneficiaries and are covered , medically reasonable , and necessary .  provider outreach and education .  part c and d oversight . consists of subactivities to address improper payments in medicare parts c and d. cms began this activity in fiscal year 2006 .  other medicare fee - for - service . consists of a variety of subactivities related to medicare fee - for - service not captured by the other activities , such as support for pilot programs and enhancements to cms data systems that cms officials told us will allow for better analysis . cms began these subactivities in fiscal year 2009 . cpi is the cms component responsible for oversight of all of cms's program integrity efforts , including mip , and is led by a deputy administrator . formed in april 2010 , cpi was created to enable cms to pursue a more strategic and coordinated program integrity approach and to also allow the agency to build on and strengthen existing program integrity efforts . cpi has targeted several program areas to help identify , evaluate , and focus resources and projects . these areas are prevention , detection , recovery , and transparency and accountability . mip is led by the director of the medicare program integrity group within cpi . however , the mip activity managers and their staff members are not all located within cpi . there are mip activity managers located in cpi , the center for medicare , and ofm . for example , while the benefit integrity activity is managed by cpi , the medical review activity is managed by cms's provider compliance group within ofm . see appendix i for an organizational chart that identifies the cms components responsible for the oversight of mip activities . cms uses a variety of contractors to perform mip activities , including a comprehensive error rate testing ( cert ) contractor , an msp contractor , medicare administrative contractors ( mac ) , medicare drug integrity contractors , the national supplier clearinghouse , program safeguard contractors , and zone program integrity contractors ( zpic ) . for example , the macs conduct provider audits , prepayment and postpayment review of medicare claims , and some provider outreach and education . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or kingk@gao.gov . the second new performance goal aims to strengthen cms's provider enrollment actions to prevent fraudulent providers and suppliers from enrolling in medicare and ensure that existing providers continue to meet enrollment requirements .