ii. ) in the 8 years from 1998 through 2005 , large fcdcs in a panel data set that we analyzed consisting of tax returns that were present in the soi corporate files in every year were more likely to report no tax liability over multiple years than large usccs in the same panel data set . as figure 2 shows , about 72 percent of fcdcs and 55 percent of usccs reported no tax liability for at least 1 year during the 8 years . about 57 percent of fcdcs and 42 percent of usccs reported no tax liability in multiple years — 2 or more years — and about 34 percent of fcdcs and 24 percent of usccs reported no tax liability for at least half the study period — 4 or more years . a correspondingly higher percentage of usccs reported a tax liability in all 8 years , 45 percent for usccs and 28 percent for fcdcs . large fcdcs and usccs reporting no tax liability in 2005 arrived at that result in similar ways on their tax returns , as shown in figure 3 . at a high level , corporate tax returns are organized to ( 1 ) calculate gross profit as gross receipts or sales minus the cost of goods sold ; ( 2 ) calculate total income as gross profit plus other types of income ; ( 3 ) report various deductible expenses ; ( 4 ) calculate taxable income as the difference between income and deductions ; and ( 5 ) calculate the tax liability for the taxable income . corporations can establish the basis for a zero tax liability at different stages in these calculations by reporting , for example , that they have no total income or no taxable income which results in their having no tax liability . figure 3 shows the percentage of corporations reporting no tax liability in 2005 by the line on their tax return where they first reported the zero dollar amounts that resulted in no tax liability . for example , the figure shows that 3 percent of large fcdcs and 1 percent of large usccs established no tax liability by reporting no gross profit on line 3 of their returns . this pattern of similar percentages for large corporations continues throughout the tax return . for example , a similar , small percentage of large fcdcs or usccs , around 4 to 5 percent , established their zero tax liability on line 11 by reporting zero total income . as figure 3 shows , the overwhelming majority , about 79 to 80 percent of both large fcdcs and usccs that reported zero tax liability in 2005 , established it on line 28 where they reported zero taxable income before net operating losses . this means that their reported current - year deductions more than offset the positive current - year total income reported on line 11 . the two most commonly used deductions , as a percentage of the value of all deductions claimed , were “other deductions” and the deduction for salaries and wages . see table 3 and figure 8 in appendix ii for detailed comparisons of tax return line items and deductions .