qualified nonmetropolitan counties . qualified nonmetropolitan counties are those that , based on decennial census data , are not located in a metropolitan statistical area and in which 1. the median household income is less than 80 percent of the nonmetropolitan state median household income ; 2. the unemployment rate is not less than 140 percent of the average unemployment rate for either the nation or the state ( whichever is lower ) ; or 3. a difficult development area is located . qualified indian reservations . a hubzone qualified indian reservation has the same meaning as the term “indian country” as defined in another federal statute , with some exceptions . these are all lands within the limits of any indian reservation , all dependent indian communities within u.s. borders , and all indian allotments . in addition , portions of the state of oklahoma qualify because they meet the internal revenue service's definition of “former indian reservations in oklahoma.” redesignated areas . these are census tracts or nonmetropolitan counties that no longer meet the economic criteria but remain eligible until after the release of the 2010 decennial census data . base closure areas . areas within the external boundaries of former military bases that were closed by the base realignment and closure act ( brac ) qualify for hubzone status for a 5-year period from the date of formal closure . in order for a firm to be certified to participate in the hubzone program , it must meet the following four criteria: the company must be small by sba size standards ; the company must be at least 51 percent owned and controlled by u.s. citizens ; the company's principal office — the location where the greatest number of employees perform their work — must be located in a hubzone ; and at least 35 percent of the company's full - time ( or full - time equivalent ) employees must reside in a hubzone . as of february 2008 , 12,986 certified firms participated in the hubzone program . more than 4,200 hubzone firms obtained approximately $8.1 billion in federal contracts in fiscal year 2007 . the annual federal contracting goal for hubzone small businesses is 3 percent of all prime contract awards — contracts that are awarded directly by an agency . our june 2008 report found that a series of statutory changes have resulted in an increase in the number and types of hubzone areas . these changes could diffuse ( or limit ) the economic benefits of the program . further , while sba relies on federal law to identify qualified hubzone areas , its hubzone map is inaccurate . in recent years , amendments to the hubzone act and other statutes have increased the number and types of hubzone areas . subsequent to the various statutory changes , the number of hubzone areas grew from 7,895 in calendar year 1999 to 14,364 in 2006 . sba's data show that , as of 2006 , there were 12,218 qualified census tracts ; 1,301 nonmetropolitan counties ; 651 indian country areas ; 82 brac areas ; and 112 difficult development areas .