why was the emergency response plan updated ? ( written responses not included ) 6c . do you think your plan needs to be updated ? ( written responses not included ) 11 . does your state have a governance body supporting emergency communications planning ? generally , how often does the governance body in your state meet to discuss planning efforts to ensure emergency communications during disasters ? are public safety representatives from the following categories represented in your governance body ? if “other challenge” is checked , what other challenges affect your state's ability to ensure operable and continuous emergency communications during disasters ? ( written responses not included ) 20 . what actions , if any , has your state taken to address the items you identified as challenges in question 19 ? ( written responses not included ) 21 . what actions , if any , can the federal government take to address the items you identified as challenges in question 19 ? ( written responses not included ) 22 . if you would like to expand upon any of your responses to the questions above , or have any other comments about your state's planning efforts to ensure operable and interoperable emergency communications , please enter them below . does your emergency communications plan address the following elements ? planning ( standard operating procedures , protocols ) technology ( data and voice elements , common applications , base sharing , custom applications , swapping radios , gateways ) usage ( how often interoperability communications are used in planned events , localized emergency incidents , regional incidents , and daily use ) 8 . does your emergency communications plan address the following types of events ? significant events ( i.e. , terrorist attacks , major disaster , and other emergencies that pose the greatest risk to the state ) routine events ( i.e. , localized emergency incidents , regional emergency incidents , special events , large public gatherings , state and national exercise ) if “other standardized elements” is checked , what other elements are contained in your operating protocols and procedures ? the ecpc has not documented its strategic goals and outcomes . we previously reported that establishing shared outcomes and goals that resonate with , and are agreed upon by all participants , is essential to achieving outcomes in interagency groups , but can also be challenging . participants each bring different views , organizational cultures , missions , and ways of operating . participants may even disagree on the nature of the problem or issue being addressed . furthermore , agency officials involved in several of the interagency groups we previously reviewed cautioned that if agencies do not have a vested interest in the outcomes , and if outcomes are not aligned with agency objectives , participant agencies would not invest their limited time and resources . what best describes the swic in your state ? however , by establishing outcomes and strategic goals based on the group's shared interests , a collaborative group can shape its vision and define its own purpose , and when articulated and understood by the group , this shared purpose provides a reason to participate . ( written responses not included ) 10c .