this report is our second review of the ipp program . in 1999 , we found significant problems with doe's management of the ipp program and , as a result , we made several recommendations that doe has implemented to improve the program . after the soviet union's collapse in 1991 , many scientists and engineers with weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) knowledge and expertise suffered significant cuts in pay or lost their government - supported work . to address concerns that these scientists would sell their expertise to terrorists or countries of concern , doe began its ipp program in 1994 . through october 1 , 2007 , there were 929 draft , active , inactive , and completed ipp projects involving personnel at about 200 nuclear , chemical , and biological institutes in russia and other countries . as of april 2007 , doe reported it had supplemented the salaries of over 16,770 scientists , engineers , and technicians and created 2,790 long - term , private sector jobs in russia and other countries through the ipp program . my testimony today will discuss ( 1 ) doe's reported accomplishments for the ipp program , ( 2 ) doe's exit strategy for the ipp program , and ( 3 ) the extent to which the ipp program has experienced annual carryover balances of unspent funds and the reasons for such carryovers . in conducting our review , we examined 207 of the 929 ipp projects . we selected this sample of projects on the basis of a variety of factors , such as geographic distribution , representation of all participating u.s. national laboratories , and project costs . we interviewed key doe and national laboratory officials and analyzed documentation , such as program guidance , project proposals , and financial information . doe's ipp program office is responsible for making final decisions on all projects . doe requires that at least 65 percent of each ipp project's funding be used as payments to individuals actually working on the project or to the participating institutes in payment for project - related supplies , equipment , and overhead . because the ipp program is not administered through a government - to - government agreement , doe distributes ipp funding through three tax - exempt entities to avoid paying foreign taxes . these organizations transfer funds directly to the personal bank accounts of ipp project participants . to receive payment , project participants must submit paperwork to these organizations indicating , among other things , whether they possess wmd experience . doe has not accurately portrayed the ipp program's progress in the number of wmd scientists receiving doe support and the number of long - term , private sector jobs created . many of the scientists in russia and other countries that doe has paid through its ipp program did not claim to have wmd experience . furthermore , doe's process for substantiating the weapons backgrounds of ipp project participants has several weaknesses .