fmcsa agreed with our recommendations . in june 2013 , to help better identify chameleon carriers , fmcsa developed and began testing a risk - based methodology that implemented a framework that closely follows the methodology we discussed in our report . fmcsa's preliminary analysis of this methodology indicates that it is generally successful in providing a risk - based screening of new applicants , which it plans to use as a front - end screening methodology for all carrier types seeking operating authority . by developing this risk - based methodology and analyzing the initial results , fmcsa has developed an approach that may help keep unsafe carriers off the road . to further help congress with its oversight of fmcsa and motor carrier safety , we also have on - going work on fmcsa's hours - of - service regulations , dod's transportation protective services program , and commercial driver's licenses . this work is in various stages , and we expect to issue the final reports later this year . in conclusion , the commercial motor carrier industry is large and dynamic , and fmcsa plays an important role in identifying and removing unsafe carriers from the roadways . with over 500,000 active motor carriers , it is essential to examine ways to better target fmcsa's resources to motor carriers presenting the greatest risk . to effectively do this , fmcsa must use a number of strategies to identify and intervene with high risk carriers . we continue to believe that a data - driven , risk - based approach for identifying high risk carriers holds promise . fmcsa's preliminary steps to implement a risk - based screening methodology have the potential to identify more high risk chameleon carriers . however , without efforts to revise its sms methodology , fmcsa will not be able to effectively target its intervention resources toward the highest risk carriers and will be challenged to meet its mission of reducing the overall crashes , injuries , and fatalities involving large trucks and buses . chairwoman fischer , ranking member booker , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared remarks . i would be pleased to answer any questions you or other members may have at this time . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in summary , our recent work on fmcsa oversight found that the establishment of the csa program and chameleon carrier vetting program are steps toward better oversight of motor carriers . through the csa program , fmcsa can provide the agency , state safety authorities , and the industry with valuable information regarding carriers' performance on the road and reach more carriers through interventions . however , while we continue to believe that a data - driven , risk - based approach holds promise , our work identified several major challenges that limit the precision of sms scores and confidence that these scores are effectively comparing safety performance across carriers . these serious challenges raise questions about whether csa is able to identify and target the carriers at highest risk for crashing in the future .