borders . gao - 13-414t . washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2013 . border security: opportunities exist to ensure more effective use of dhs's air and marine assets . gao - 12-518 . washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2012 . u.s. customs and border protection's border security fencing , infrastructure and technology fiscal year 2011 expenditure plan . gao - 12-106r . washington , d.c.: november 17 , 2011 . arizona border surveillance technology: more information on plans and costs is needed before proceeding . gao - 12-22 . washington , d.c.: november 4 , 2011 . cbp concurred with our recommendations and has implemented one of them . specifically , in june 2014 , cbp issued guidance informing border patrol agents that the asset assist data field within its database was now a mandatory data field . agents are required to enter any assisting surveillance technology or other equipment before proceeding . further , as of may 2015 , cbp had identified a set of potential key attributes for performance metrics for all technologies to be deployed under the plan . however , cbp officials stated that this set of performance metrics was under review as the agency continued to refine the key attributes for metrics to assess the contributions and impacts of surveillance technology on its border security mission . in our march 2016 update on the progress made by agencies to address our findings on duplication and cost savings across the federal government , we reported that cbp had modified its time frame for developing baselines for each performance measure and that additional time would be needed to implement and apply key attributes for metrics . according to cbp officials , cbp expected these performance measure baselines to be developed by the end of calendar year 2015 , at which time the agency planned to begin using the data to evaluate the individual and collective contributions of specific technology assets deployed under the plan . moreover , cbp planned to use the baseline data to establish a tool that explains the qualitative and quantitative impacts of technology and tactical infrastructure on situational awareness in specific areas of the border environment by the end of fiscal year 2016 . while cbp had expected to complete its development of baselines for each performance measure by the end of calendar year 2015 , as of march 2016 the actual completion is being adjusted pending test and evaluation results for recently deployed technologies on the southwest border . until cbp completes its efforts to fully develop and apply key attributes for performance metrics for all technologies to be deployed under the plan , it will not be well positioned to fully assess its progress in implementing the plan and determining when mission benefits have been fully realized . our ongoing work shows that as of may 2016 , cbp operates nine predator b from four amo national air security operations centers ( nasoc ) located in sierra vista , arizona ; grand forks , north dakota ; corpus christi , texas ; and jacksonville , florida . three predator b aircraft are assigned to the nasocs in arizona , north dakota , and texas while the nasoc in florida remotely operates predator b aircraft launched from the other nasocs .