hedge funds have been deeply affected in the financial turmoil . according to an industry survey , most hedge fund strategies produced double - digit losses in 2008 and hedge funds saw approximately $70 billion in redemptions between june and november 2008 . some observers blamed hedge funds for dramatic volatility in the stock and commodity markets last year and some funds of hedge funds were heavily invested in the alleged madoff fraud . nevertheless , an industry survey of institutional investors suggests that these investors are still committed to investing in hedge funds in the long term . financial regulators' views on hedge funds appear to be shifting as well , perhaps signaling recognition that hedge funds have become an integral part of the financial markets . for example , hedge funds are allowed to borrow from the federal reserve for the first time under the term asset - backed securities loan facility ( talf ) intended to support consumer credit . while the federal reserve chairman and treasury secretary have supported the position of enhanced market discipline over stricter regulation of hedge funds in 2007 , treasury has recently called for greater regulatory oversight of hedge funds . despite changes surrounding the hedge fund sector , the issues and concerns related to regulatory oversight of hedge funds and challenges posed by hedge fund investing that were raised in our 2008 reports remain relevant today . cftc has authorized the national futures association ( nfa ) , a self - regulatory organization for the u.s. futures industry , to conduct day - to - day monitoring of registered cpos and ctas . in fiscal year 2006 , nfa examinations of cpos included six of the largest u.s. hedge fund advisers . in addition , sec , cftc , and bank regulators can use their existing authorities — to establish capital standards and reporting requirements , conduct risk - based examinations , and take enforcement actions — to oversee activities , including those involving hedge funds , of broker - dealers , of futures commission merchants , and of banks , respectively . they also act as clients through their purchase of clearing and other services and as borrowers through their use of margin loans from prime brokers . much has happened in the financial markets since we issued our reports . this statement is based on our january 24 , 2008 and august 14 , 2008 reports . specifically , i will discuss: ( 1 ) the oversight of hedge fund - related activities provided by federal financial regulators under their existing authorities ; ( 2 ) the potential benefits , risks , and challenges pension plans face in investing in hedge funds ; ( 3 ) the measures investors , creditors , and counterparties have taken to impose market discipline on hedge funds ; and ( 4 ) the potential for systemic risk from hedge fund - related activities and actions regulators have taken to address this risk . to do this work , we reviewed and analyzed relevant regulatory examination documentation and enforcement cases from federal financial regulators . we also analyzed relevant laws and regulations , survey data , speeches , testimonies , studies , and industry protocols and guidelines about private pools of capital .