growth rates . states should submit to hhs 5 years of historical data for per person costs and beneficiary enrollment in their existing medicaid program . hhs's policy states that spending limits should be based on a benchmark growth rate , which is the lower of state - specific historical growth or the estimates of nationwide growth for the beneficiary groups included in the demonstration . the policy indicates that states , in providing hhs with state - specific historical growth rates , must also provide quantified explanations of any unusual changes in the trends . nationwide projections of cost growth are developed by cms actuaries to assist omb in preparing the president's budget . growth rates for determining budget neutrality can vary for different eligibility groups . for example , the nationwide estimates of per capita cost growth in medicaid for fiscal year 2012 were 6.0 percent for children , 3.4 percent for aged individuals , 2.6 percent for blind and disabled individuals , and 2.5 percent for adults . figure 1 illustrates steps used to set spending limits for proposed section 1115 demonstrations . some types of section 1115 demonstrations are not required to follow this process for determining spending limits . specifically , for demonstrations that redirect a state's federal dsh funding , hhs policy is to base the spending limit on the lower of the state's dsh allotment or actual dsh expenditures prior to the demonstration . in addition , there is another group of recent section 1115 demonstrations pursuant to which federal law has defined how to calculate budget neutrality . specifically , under the children's health insurance program reauthorization act of 2009 ( chipra ) , states with existing section 1115 demonstrations covering childless adults using state children's health insurance program ( chip ) funding were required to end these projects.apply and receive approval for new section 1115 demonstrations through which they could continue to cover childless adults using medicaid funds . chipra required that these new demonstrations be budget neutral , and required hhs to use a defined process of identifying the spending base and growth rates for demonstration spending limits . the 10 new comprehensive section 1115 demonstrations we examined focused on implementing ways of using federal funds to pay for services not typically covered under medicaid . all 10 demonstrations were approved to implement different coverage strategies or cost sharing for certain beneficiary populations . appendix ii provides a brief summary of the key features of 10 demonstrations . two states we reviewed — arizona and texas — obtained the authority under their section 1115 demonstrations to establish funding pools for purposes of making supplemental payments and to receive federal matching funds for these payments . as approved , arizona's section 1115 demonstration allows the state to make new types of supplemental payments to providers , and allowed the state to establish a funding pool from which these payments could be made . arizona has operated a comprehensive section 1115 demonstration for many years , under which the majority of the medicaid population is enrolled in managed care . under its previous demonstration , the state made dsh payments to hospitals , but did not make upl payments to its providers because the majority of services were provided under managed care contracts .