i for details ) . for example , irs met or exceeded its goals for the percentage of errors included in letters , notices , and refunds . for eight of its nine measures , irs met or exceeded its previous year's performance . irs did not meet one goal and paid more interest on delayed refunds than expected , because of problems with a computer system that processes some taxpayer identification numbers and the inexperience of new staff . irs did not meet its efficiency goal because it received fewer easy to process tetr returns than expected . the timely processing of returns supports tax compliance and possibly reduces the need for taxpayer services . over the last decade , irs has improved its performance processing tax returns and providing taxpayer assistance . we see value in two irs initiatives intended to further improve this performance . tab , besides being a data - driven strategy for further improving service , may provide irs with a better understanding of the effect of taxpayer service on compliance and thus of the return on irs's large investment in service . similarly , obtaining more information about paid preparers is valuable because doing so should give the congress and irs a better basis for making decisions about the future oversight of paid preparers . in addition to these initiatives , we have identified other potential means for improving service . one opportunity is to increase electronically filed returns , either through mandates or bar coding , and transcribing the remaining lines on residual paper returns . however , irs does not have the benefit / cost estimates that would be useful to make decisions about how to proceed . in particular , irs does not know the actions needed to require software vendors to include bar codes on printed individual income tax returns and the cost of those actions ; the benefits , in terms of processing costs and improved enforcement , of having all information available electronically ; and how much electronic filing would have to increase for the benefits of transcribing all remaining paper returns to exceed the costs . such information would allow irs to compare the costs of additional transcription to the benefits of processing costs savings , additional enforcement revenues and reduced taxpayer burden . additionally , despite increasing reliance on volunteer organizations to target underserved taxpayer groups , irs lacks information on the effectiveness of its efforts . finally , while irs has been implementing contact recording at walk - in sites to monitor the accuracy of tax law and account assistance , it has not determined the feasibility of extending contact recording to its low - income return preparation assistance program . in both cases , the missing information impedes irs's ability to make data - based decisions about how to improve assistance to underserved taxpayers .