activities . in 2005 usaid allocated $245 million of this amount for the coastal road , and in 2006 usaid increased its allocation to $254 million . usaid reported that the final estimated cost , as of july 2012 , was $256 million , or $2.8 million per mile . figure 3 shows usaid's initial and revised plans and completed results for the indonesia coastal road . from august 2005 to september 2010 , usaid awarded five contracts to reconstruct the coastal road in aceh province , indonesia — three contracts for construction , one contract for design and supervision , and one contract for project management . factors related to contractor performance as well as local conditions delayed usaid's progress in designing and constructing the road and led to increased costs . however , as of july 2012 , usaid had not arranged for final inspections to ensure the quality of around 50 miles — about 55 percent — of the completed road that are still under warranty . to help ensure the quality of the road's design and construction , usaid established organizational and operational controls by contracting with experienced personnel for key management positions and including a 1- year warranty in each construction contract . project manager . in april 2006 , usaid hired a u.s. - registered professional engineer as its project manager for the entire road construction project . the project manager had previous experience managing several usaid infrastructure projects overseas as well as managing regional operations with a u.s. state's department of transportation . the project manager served as the project's chief technical officer and usaid's principal interface with design / construction supervision and construction contractors and indonesian government officials . design and supervision . approximately 6 months before hiring its project manager , usaid contracted with parsons as the project's construction management contractor to complete the design of most of the road and manage the supervision of its construction . according to a parsons official , usaid's hiring of a single firm to complete the design and management of construction supervision facilitated communication between design engineers and construction supervision staff and promoted quality in construction . usaid required that key parsons design personnel have appropriate qualifications . for example , geotechnical , pavement , and structural designers were all required to be registered professional engineers with a minimum of 5 years experience on projects of a similar scope . in addition , usaid required that key parsons' staff in indonesia have certain qualifications , such as skills and experience in contract administration , inspection , and quality monitoring , to help ensure that the work complied with specifications and conformed to standard construction practices . one - year warranty . usaid included a 1-year warranty period in all of its contracts with construction firms . specifically , for a period of 1 year after each road section is completed , the contractor is required to correct any poor - quality or faulty work that usaid or parsons finds during inspections.the indonesian government until the contractor completes the corrective actions , and contractors are not released from their responsibilities until the indonesian government formally accepts the section of road .