pub . l no . 112-141 , § 32801 , 126 stat . map - 21 is the current authorization act for surface transportation programs and expired at the end of fiscal year 2014 . programs and budget authority authorized by map - 21 were extended to may 31 , 2015 . pub . 113-159 , § 1001 ( a ) ,128 stat . among other things , section 32801 of map - 21 required dot to conduct a comprehensive truck size and weight limits study addressing differences in safety risks , infrastructure impacts , and the effect on levels of enforcement between trucks operating at or within federal truck size and weight limits and trucks legally operating in excess of federal limits . emergencies as set out in on map - 21 . additionally , fhwa in cooperation with the trucking industry and the commercial vehicle safety alliance funded the development of pilot car escort and law enforcement escort best practices guides in 2004 . fhwa officials told us that they are planning to provide staff support to update the pilot car escort best practices guide including providing research on stakeholder - identified priority areas , such as vehicle operations.funds administered by fhwa can be used by states in constructing some infrastructure , such as weigh stations , to enforce weight standards . fhwa's policy is to provide a safe and efficient highway network that can accommodate large vehicles , but fhwa plays a limited role in permitting oversize and overweight vehicles for several reasons . while fhwa's regulations establish standards for vehicle size and weight , according to fhwa officials , fhwa lacks the statutory authority to establish any requirements for state permitting . according to these officials , permitting practices are largely a state matter , and thus they do not keep records of states' permitting requirements or provide technical assistance on permitting to states . officials from the 10 states we interviewed told us that the federal government provides them with little or no guidance on permitting . however , state transportation agencies — through their membership in aashto — have efforts under way to harmonize size and weight requirements and conditions under which they issue oversize and overweight vehicle permits . fhwa assists in an advisory role in this effort . fhwa officials told us that states are now working on changes to state administrative rules in order to harmonize requirements . states have varying laws and requirements that carriers must follow when operating vehicles on highways and bridges . specifically , we found that states vary on vehicle size and weight laws , on state practices to issue and enforce permits for oversize and overweight vehicles , and on other state permitting requirements , as described below . all 50 states and the district of columbia ( d.c. ) have state laws or regulations , based on applicable federal regulations , that set size and weight limits for vehicles operating in that state . maximum vehicle width and weight requirements are generally set at the federal standard ( 8 feet 6 inches wide and 80,000 pounds for gross vehicle weight ) . however , states have varying size requirements for vehicle length and height .