( see fig . during this 12-year period , mean per user spending on outpatient therapy grew threefold from about $400 to almost $1,200 . in 2011 , about 80 percent of the 4.9 million medicare beneficiaries who used ot and pt / slp did not exceed the annual cap of $1,870 . twenty percent of the medicare beneficiaries using outpatient therapy ( about 980,000 individuals ) exceeded the cap that year and spent , on average , $3,000 on outpatient therapy . therapy provided in nursing homes and private practice offices accounted for over 70 percent of outpatient therapy services in 2011 , with the remaining services being provided in hospital outpatient departments and outpatient rehabilitation centers , and by home health agencies . in addition , studies have found that utilization of outpatient therapy services is not evenly distributed across the country . for example , in 2010 , the hhs oig reported on 20 counties with spending per beneficiary 72 percent higher than the national average . medpac's analysis of outpatient therapy claims data from 2011 showed that average per - beneficiary spending varied widely by county , ranging from $406 to $3,582 . the therapy caps that were first imposed in 1999 to control spending growth raised concern that patients with extensive need of outpatient therapy services would be affected adversely , and the caps were only in effect in 1999 and for part of 2003 due to a series of temporary congressional moratoria . as implemented in 2006 , when the moratoria expired , congress required cms to implement a process to allow exceptions to the caps for certain medically necessary services . this exceptions process allowed for two types of exceptions . the first was an automatic exception for certain conditions or complexities , such as hip and knee replacements . the second — called a manual exceptions process by cms — was a preapproval process whereby a provider could submit a letter and supporting documentation requesting an exception — called a preapproval request — for up to 15 days of treatment above the annual cap , which would be manually reviewed by the mac . if the services qualified for either an automatic or a manual exception , cms guidance instructed the provider to include a “kx” modifier on each line of the resulting claim that contained a service above the cap . this modifier represented the provider's attestation that the services rendered were medically necessary , and it triggered an exception in the medicare claims processing system , which ensured payment for those outpatient therapy services above the cap . an automatic exceptions process for claims with a kx modifier was extended through 2012 for claims over the annual cap of $1,880 , with manual reviews required for claims above the threshold of $3,700 . the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 extended the medicare therapy caps exceptions process , including the requirement for the manual review of claims over $3,700 , through december 31 , 2013 . as a result , the running totals included errors from prior weeks and the final numbers do not total correctly .