sector agreements . sector agreements have been reached for civil aircraft , nuclear power plants , renewable energies and water projects , and ships . some of these agreements have different rules for minimum interest and premium rates and maximum repayments terms than those that apply to standard transactions through the arrangement . the aircraft sector understanding is especially significant because it regulates aircraft support terms for ecas of major aircraft - exporting countries , including the united states , brazil , canada , france , germany , and the united kingdom . a large share of some countries' eca support is in the aircraft sector . the arrangement also has a variety of reporting requirements in conjunction with its overall and sector agreements that provide transparency about eca activities to arrangement members . ecas must report all of their long - term officially supported export credit transactions to the oecd as they occur and , twice a year , report the amount of outstanding officially supported export credits . further , separate reporting requirements apply with respect to minimum premium rates as well as the aircraft sector agreement . oecd officials said they are hoping to streamline these reporting requirements and are in the process of approving a new data - reporting directive . however , certain export credit transactions of member ecas fall outside the arrangement and its reporting requirements , which lessens the transparency of eca activities . these include “market windows,” or support that an eca provides on market terms . canada's eca currently provides this type of support . the use of market windows has historically been an issue of concern for the united states , because of limited transparency and the potential for unfair advantage stemming from an eca's government connection . a second type of transaction outside the scope of the arrangement is non - export credit financing activities , such as untied lending and investment finance . a majority of g - 7 ecas offer untied lending , which takes the form of loans extended to other countries for strategic reasons . while these loans are not directly linked to the purchase of exports from the lending country , the terms can take whatever form the two countries agree upon . for instance , japan provided an untied loan to a commercial bank in malaysia in order to provide long - term financing to japanese companies located there , as well as local companies within their supply chain . congressional notification . congress requires ex - im to submit a detailed statement describing and explaining a transaction to congress prior to the board of directors' final approval if the transaction is ( 1 ) in an amount equal to or greater than $100,000,000 or ( 2 ) related to nuclear power or heavy water production facilities . according to hermes officials , germany also sends a notification to the german parliament's committee on budgets for transactions exceeding 1 billion euros . according to ex - im , 38 transactions valued at about $16 billion in 2010 were sent to congress before the board of directors' final approval of the transactions . ex - im's domestic content requirements are generally higher and less flexible than those of other ecas .