economic factors . officials from seven of the 10 selected states noted that economic factors such as low unemployment can affect traffic safety . for example , officials in one state said that fatalities decreased during the 2009 recession , but when the economy began to improve and more people were employed , fatalities increased . these officials noted that the number of people driving is also affected by gas prices because when prices increase , people drive less . changes to state laws . officials from eight of the 10 selected states said that changes in state laws can affect whether a state meets its targets . for example , officials from one state said fatalities increased beginning in 2012 when the state legislature passed a law allowing the operation of a motorcycle without a helmet , and continued to increase through 2017 when the state legislature increased the speed limit on some roads from 70 to 75 miles per hour . these officials also noted that they expect fatalities in their state to further increase as a result of the recent legalization of the recreational use of marijuana . however , the extent to which states achieve targets does not necessarily reflect whether the number of fatalities has increased or decreased over time . first , states that achieved fatality targets did not necessarily experience reduced traffic fatalities . for example , for the 2017 targets , state - reported nhtsa data shows that 10 of 52 states achieved their target for the pedestrian fatalities performance measure , but five of these 10 states also experienced an increase in pedestrian fatalities compared to their 2012 through 2016 historical average . these data also show that the remaining 42 states did not achieve their total fatality target . second , some states have experienced a decrease in traffic fatalities while not achieving their targets . for example , state - reported nhtsa data shows that 31 states did not achieve their targets for the speeding - related fatalities performance measure . however , these same data show that 11 of these 31 states decreased the total of number of these fatalities over their 2017 target period compared to their 2012 to 2016 average . further , states that established targets that represented an increase in fatalities from historical averages ( increasing targets ) were more likely to achieve them than states that established targets that represented a decrease or no change in fatalities compared to their historical averages ( decreasing targets ) , according to state - reported nhtsa data . specifically , in 2017 , for all of the required fatality performance measures , these data show that states that set increasing fatality targets relative to their historical 2012 to 2016 average achieved them at a higher rate than states that set targets that represented a decrease or no change to the number of fatalities ( see fig.1. ) for example , for the total fatality performance measure , eight states set increasing targets relative to their historical 2012 to 2016 average , while 44 states set decreasing or unchanged targets relative to their averages .