not yet available . information not contained in the ntsb incident reports . serious incursions involving at least one commercial 2008 ( through sept. 16 , 2008 ) john wayne - orange county , santa ana , ca long beach - daugherty field , ca general mitchell international , milwaukee , wi des 30 incrsions that faa had not yet classified as of ast 18 , 2008 . the above nmbers combine data sing faa's previos definition of incrsions from fiscal year 2001 throgh fiscal year 2007 and the icao definition of incrsions dring fiscal year 2008 . the nmber of serios incrsions is not affected by faa's adoption of the icao definition . william p. hobby , houston , tx led deployment dates are as of ag . 25 , 2008 , and represent when the facility first declares the system ready for conditional se . once the system is formally accepted by the facility , the system is commissioned . faa's draft accelerated schedle , shown in this table , targets completing asde - x deployment by the fall of 2010 , except at new york lagardia , memphis international , and las vegas mccarran international airports , where the agency is coordinating asde - x implementation with the completion of new air traffic control towers . chicago o'hare international fort lauderdale - hollywood international , fl george bush intercontinental , houston , tx rrently being tested at these locations . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . ( table 9 in app . i lists the airports with emas installations. ) thank you for the opportunity to testify today on runway safety . although air traffic has declined as economic factors , among others , have led airlines to reduce service , congestion on the movement areas — runways and taxiways — remains a matter of concern . since we last testified on runway safety before this subcommittee , in february 2008 , 11 more serious runway incursions — incidents in which collisions were narrowly or barely avoided — have occurred at u.s. airports , including 4 incursions involving commercial aircraft . on august 28 , 2008 , for example , a skywest commuter jet that was landing at the fresno yosemite international airport in california came within 15 feet of colliding with a general aviation aircraft that was still on the runway . proposed legislation to reauthorize faa would support additional efforts to improve runway safety by authorizing $114 million to develop runway incursion reduction programs and to deploy technology . in november 2007 , we reported that , according to experts we surveyed , encouraging the development of a runway incursion warning system in the cockpit would be among the most effective actions that faa could take to improve runway safety .