see our december 2010 report for more details . in addition , identity fraud remains a challenge because employers may not be able to determine if employees are presenting genuine identity and employment eligibility documents that are borrowed or stolen . e - verify also cannot detect cases in which an unscrupulous employer assists unauthorized employees . uscis has taken actions to address fraud , most notably with the fiscal year 2007 implementation of the photo matching tool for permanent residency cards and employment authorization documents and the september 2010 addition to the matching tool of passport photographs . uscis concurred with our recommendation and outlined actions to address it . for example , uscis commented that in november 2010 it began to distribute the u.s . citizenship welcome packet at all naturalization ceremonies to advise new citizens to update their records with ssa . uscis also commented that it has commissioned a study , to be completed in the third quarter of fiscal year 2011 , to determine how to enhance its name - matching algorithms . uscis's actions for reducing the likelihood of name - related erroneous tncs are useful steps , but they do not fully address the intent of the recommendation because they do not provide specific information to employees on how to prevent a name - related tnc . although the photo tool has some limitations , it can help reduce some fraud associated with the use of genuine documents in which the original photograph is substituted for another . to help combat identity fraud , uscis is also seeking to obtain driver's license data from states and planning to develop a program that would allow victims of identity theft to “lock” their social security numbers within e - verify until they need them to obtain employment authorization . combating identity fraud through the use of biometrics , such as through fingerprint or facial recognition , has been included in proposed legislation before congress as an element of comprehensive immigration reform , but implementing a biometric system has its own set of challenges , including those associated with cost and civil liberties . resolving these issues will be important if this technology is to be effectively implemented in combating identity fraud in the employment verification process . an effective employment authorization system requires a credible worksite enforcement program to ensure employer compliance with applicable immigration laws ; however uscis is challenged in ensuring employer compliance with e - verify requirements for several reasons . for example , uscis cannot monitor the extent to which employers follow program rules because uscis does not have a presence in employers' workplaces . uscis is further limited by its existing technology infrastructure , which provides limited ability to analyze patterns and trends in the data that could be indicative of employer misuse of e - verify . we reviewed documentation explaining how to resolve tncs and assist employees with name and citizenship changes . we reviewed uscis's privacy policy for e - verify and conducted interviews with privacy officials at uscis to determine what , if any , challenges exist in resolving tncs .