we agree . nonetheless , we were unable to include all of those objectives on the highlights page , which is a summary of our report . however , we have since added some of the objectives in other sections of our report . dod noted that the april 2008 memorandum results would be used to respond to the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 . this information was referenced in the background section of our report . dod explained that , given the multipronged application of results of the baseline review and intent to inform a variety of strategic human capital management initiatives , the department stands by its decision to rely on the component submissions as source material , reference material , or both , rather than summarizing and reporting the analysis for any single initiative . in light of the internal control standards , which we reference in our report , we continue to believe that the department should have documented and summarized its analysis . dod stated that the second to the last sentence on the highlights page should be revised to read that the new program “has developed and is continuing to refine” metrics and that the new program “did not have” clearly defined metrics to measure progress or success . however , during the course of our review , dod neither discussed metrics to measure the success of the program nor provided of such metrics . we therefore made no change to our report . dod stated that the reference to the “senior executive service” on the first page of the report should be changed to say “reduce by 150 the number of senior civilian executive positions.” we have revised our report accordingly . dod noted that “senior technical” should be “scientific / professional.” we clarified our use in a footnote in our report . dod's commented that “under secretary” should be “principal secretary.” we revised our report accordingly . dod's commented that pages 7 and 8 of our draft report described some but not all aspects of the allocation process and failed to mention the criteria provided to the components and upon which biennial allocation requests are justified . we disagree . dod's comments focused on the background of the report . the criteria are clearly specified in the report on pages 17 , 18 , and 19 . dod's commented that pages 7 and 8 of the draft report did not mention the analysis and evaluation aspect of the leveling process utilized by the civilian personnel management service is omitted and the ability of any component to submit an out - of - cycle request for allocations outside of the biennial process is not mentioned . we disagree . information on out - of - cycle request is clearly specified on page 25 and in appendix iv of our report . per comment 11 , we have changed “prioritized” to “leveling.” 11 . dod's comments stated that the department objects to the characterization of the leveling process as “reprioritizes” and dod evaluates all component biennial allocation submissions as a whole against the criteria developed for the biennial process .