all star metals , llc 2 . marad then reviews capacity at each facility in the competitive range . capacity , according to marad , refers to the facility's ability to take possession of and actively work on the ship ( s ) at its facility , which reflects current and future ship recycling work from all sources at the recycling facility . finally , marad considers past performance , which can include timeliness on past contracts , a change in management , or the amount of time since the facility last recycled a marad ship . marad , for its part , explained to us that past performance has rarely affected a contractor's ability to win a contract for one ship in an announcement , but has had a greater affect when marad considers the award of more than one ship to the contractor . in addition , in our review of contract documentation , we found several instances where marad considered past performance in combination with capacity . for example , a contractor may have had schedule delays on prior ships which were then exacerbated when the contractor was managing the recycling schedule for multiple ships . how marad considers the multiple factors when making a best value award varies depending on the specific circumstances of the procurement . as a result , the basis for each award may be unique , which may contribute to the contractor's confusion on how marad is making these decisions . to clarify past performance , in the fiscal year 2014 solicitation , marad has elaborated on what will be evaluated within the past performance criterion — stating that it includes the contractor's history of reasonable and cooperative behavior , record of integrity , and business relationships with the customer . although a positive step , lack of communication with contractors regarding effects of their past performance , if any , on their future offers remains a source of confusion . further , marad recently improved its contractor debriefing process by adding two more narrative sections to its pre - debriefing form , one on capacity and one on best value . under the simplified acquisition process , if a contractor requests information on an award that was based on factors other than price alone , marad is to provide a brief explanation of the basis for the contract award decision . although not required to do so , about two years ago , marad decided to offer more formal debriefings to convey this information . the debriefings are intended to help contractors understand how their offer compared to the winning offer and to help improve offers for the next time . once a facility contractor requests a debriefing , marad creates a pre - debriefing report that compares the contractor's offer — price and schedule — to the successful contractor's price and schedule . the pre - debriefing report is then sent to the requesting contractor with an invitation to participate in a debriefing meeting . marad told us that all contractors have been informed of the availability , upon request , of debriefing after a contract award .