( app . ii shows the percentage of homes , by state , cited for serious deficiencies in standard surveys across a 7-year period. ) in fiscal year 2006 , 6 states identified serious deficiencies in 30 percent or more of homes surveyed , 16 states found such deficiencies in 20 to 30 percent of homes , 22 found these deficiencies in 10 to 19 percent of homes , and 7 found these deficiencies in less than 10 percent of homes . for example , in fiscal year 2006 , the percentage of nursing homes cited for serious deficiencies ranged from a low of approximately 2 percent in one state to a high of almost 51 percent in another state . the inconsistency of state survey findings may reflect challenges in recruiting and retaining state surveyors and increasing state surveyor workloads . we reported in 2005 that , according to state survey agency officials , it is difficult to retain surveyors and fill vacancies because state survey agency salaries are rarely competitive with the private sector . moreover , the first year for a new surveyor is essentially a training period with low productivity . it can take as long as 3 years for a surveyor to gain sufficient knowledge , experience , and confidence to perform the job well . we also reported that limited experience levels of state surveyors resulting from high turnover rates was a contributing factor to ( 1 ) variability in citing actual harm or higher - level deficiencies and ( 2 ) understatement of such deficiencies . in addition , the implementation of cms's nursing home initiatives has increased state survey agencies' workload . states are now required to conduct on - site revisits to ensure serious deficiencies have been corrected , promptly investigate complaints alleging actual harm on - site , and initiate off - hour standard surveys in addition to quality - of - care surveys . as a result , surveyor presence in nursing homes has increased and surveyor work hours have effectively been expanded to weekends , evenings , and early mornings . in addition , data from federal comparative surveys indicate that quality - of - care problems remain for a significant proportion of nursing homes . in fiscal year 2006 , 28 percent of federal comparative surveys found more serious deficiencies than did state quality - of - care surveys . since 2002 , federal surveyors have found serious deficiencies in 21 percent or more of comparative surveys that were not cited in corresponding state quality - of - care surveys ( see fig . however , some serious deficiencies found by federal , but not state surveyors , may not have existed at the time the state survey occurred . in december 2005 , we reported on understatement of serious deficiencies in five states — california , florida , new york , ohio , and texas — from march 2002 through december 2004 . we selected these states for our analysis because the percentage of their state surveys that cited serious deficiencies decreased significantly from january 1999 through january 2005 . our analysis of more recent data from these states showed that understatement of serious deficiencies continues at varying levels .