we disagree with this approach . in prematurely declaring the action items to be completed , omb risks losing momentum on the progress it has made to date . table 2 provides both omb's and our assessments of the status of the key action items , with action items rated as “completed” if all of the required activities identified in the reform plan were completed , and “partially completed” if some , but not all , of the required activities were completed . until omb and the agencies complete the action items called for in the it reform plan , the benefits of the reform initiatives — including increased operational efficiencies and more effective management of large - scale it programs — may be delayed . with the last of the action items in the it reform plan due to be completed by june 2012 , it will be important for omb and the agencies to ensure that the action items due at earlier milestones are completed as soon as possible . the importance of performance measures for gauging the progress of programs and projects is well recognized . in the past , omb has directed agencies to define and select meaningful outcome - based performance measures that track the intended results of carrying out a program or activity . additionally , as we have previously reported , aligning performance measures with goals can help to measure progress toward those goals , emphasizing the quality of the services an agency provides or the resulting benefits to users . furthermore , industry experts describe performance measures as necessary for managing , planning , and monitoring the performance of a project against plans and stakeholders' needs . according to government and industry best practices , performance measures should be measurable , outcome - oriented , and actively tracked and managed . recognizing the importance of performance measurement , omb and gsa have established measures for 4 of the 10 action items we reviewed: data center consolidation , shifting to cloud computing , using contract vehicles to obtain infrastructure - as - a - service , and reforming investment review boards . moreover , omb reported on three of these measures in the analytical perspectives associated with the president's fiscal year 2013 budget . specifically , regarding data center consolidation , omb reported that agencies were on track to close 525 centers by the end of 2012 and expected to save $3 billion by 2015 . on the topic of cloud computing , omb reported that agencies had migrated 40 services to cloud computing environments in 2011 and expect to migrate an additional 39 services in 2012 . regarding investment review boards , omb reported that agency cios held 294 techstat reviews and had achieved more than $900 million in cost savings , life cycle cost avoidance , or reallocation of funding . however , omb has not established performance measures for 6 of the 10 action items we reviewed . for example , omb has not established measures related to the best practices collaboration platform , such as number of users , number of hits per query , and customer satisfaction .