we disagree . we were aware of fema's separated household's policy and did not count any payments as duplicates if they related to families that were displaced to different locations . in addition , for our statistical sample we performed a detailed case by case analysis on sample items that included using all available audit and investigative tools , background information , and nemis data to ensure conclusions reached were accurate . for example , we visited damaged addresses and spoke with ihp applicants , landlords , neighbors , and postal officials . fema also stated that it has been unable to validate our results because we had not provided evidence related to our estimate for their review . we have not provided details of our sample failures to fema because the cases of fraudulent and improper payments are in the process of being referred to the katrina fraud task force for investigation and potential prosecution , as has been the standard process for other fraud cases identified though data mining . based on agreements with the katrina fraud task force , which includes the department of homeland security inspector general , all fraud cases will continue to be referred directly to the katrina fraud task force to ensure investigations and prosecutions are not jeopardized . fema also raised concerns with the registrants we reported who had received duplicate lodging assistance . fema commented that such a determination can only be made after a knowledgeable case by case analysis determined the appropriateness of payments . our methodology used to identify data mined examples of the duplicate lodging payments consisted of comparing hotel receipt information and fema's own payment data to confirm that the subject received multiple rental assistance payments at the same time fema paid for their hotel room . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of the department of homeland security , and the director of federal emergency management agency . we will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact either william jenkins at ( 202 ) 512- 8757 or jenkinswo@gao.gov or greg kutz at ( 202 ) 512-7455 or kutzg@gao.gov if you or your staffs have any questions concerning this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix vi . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . to evaluate the federal emergency management agency's ( fema ) disaster assistance provided in response to hurricanes katrina and rita through the individuals and households program ( ihp ) , we assessed ( 1 ) how the types and amounts of assistance provided to victims of hurricanes katrina and rita compare to other recent hurricanes , ( 2 ) the challenges posed by the magnitude of the requests for assistance following hurricanes katrina and rita , and fema's response to these challenges , and ( 3 ) the vulnerability of the ihp to fraud and abuse and management issues in the wake of hurricanes katrina and rita and fema's reported actions to address any identified problems .