ehr councils . in fall 2018 , va's ehrm program established 18 ehr councils , based upon specific clinical and administrative areas , to make va - specific ehr system configuration decisions for these areas . each ehr council included subject - matter experts from va , such as health care providers in various clinical areas and other staff , as well as non - va participants from dod and cerner . according to va ehrm program officials , cerner's typical process for configuring its ehr system was modified to accommodate va's needs , which va officials stated were more complex than those of cerner's commercial clients . according to cerner officials , cerner does not typically establish councils as part of its ehr system configuration process . national workshops . va's ehrm program planned and held eight national workshops from november 2018 to october 2019 , during which members of all 18 ehr councils met to make standardized ehr system configuration decisions for the va health care system . va's ehrm program utilized dod's version of the cerner ehr system — mhs genesis — as its starting point for the ehr system configuration process . during the workshops , cerner assigned consultants to facilitate these workshops , who highlighted cerner's commercial best practices and prepared workflow designs , according to va ehrm program and cerner officials ; facilitated ehr system configuration decision discussions and noted input from ehr council members and other session participants such as dod representatives ; held sessions that involved members from different ehr councils for system configuration decisions that required coordination between councils . for example , the business operations council and the ambulatory council held joint sessions to address scheduling appointments for oncology patients ; was responsible for identifying and documenting recommendations for ehr system configuration decision differences between va sites , and each medical facility specialty / department ; and provided weekly progress updates to va that reflected overall progress of expected decisions to be completed compared to the actual approved ehr system configuration decisions during national workshops . over the course of the eight national workshops , ehr council members were responsible for making ehr system configuration decisions in given clinical and administrative areas and communicating them to cerner ; providing progress updates to va's ehrm program and va leadership ; and notifying appropriate governing bodies ( eg , vha program offices — such as the office of primary care ) of any local , state , federal , visn , and department policies that impact configuration decisions . more specifically , each council discussed va's work processes and documented relevant information that informed the configuration of the ehr system , including: ( 1 ) “workflows” — ”process maps” that capture the start - to - finish sequence and interactions of related steps , activities , or tasks for each work process that va medical facilities follow . for example , va has a medication administration workflow for describing the sequence of tasks needed for scanning a patient's wristband and administering medication . ( see fig . ( 2 ) “design decision matrices,” which are compilations of decisions and discussion topics that identify and resolve workflow questions to inform configuration decisions and support implementation of the ehr system .