addressing improper payments . the federal government serves as the steward of taxpayer dollars and should safeguard them against improper payments . the president's management agenda is consistent with our prior reporting that predictive analytic technologies can help agencies better identify and prevent improper payments . further , omb reported that it plans to develop more detailed categories of improper payments , which can help agencies tailor corrective action plans to better address the root causes of improper payments . in fiscal year 2013 , estimated governmentwide improper payments totaled approximately $106 billion ; however , this may not cover the full extent of improper payments throughout the federal government . in order to determine the full extent of improper payments governmentwide and to more effectively reduce and recover them , continued attention is needed to ( 1 ) adopt sound risk assessment and improper payment estimation methodologies and ( 2 ) develop effective corrective action plans and preventive and detective controls to address the root causes of improper payments . expanding strategic sourcing . one area that could yield significant cost savings is the expanded use of strategic sourcing , a process that moves away from numerous individual procurements to a broader aggregate approach . our work has found that federal agencies could better leverage their buying power and achieve additional savings by directing more procurement spending to existing strategic sourcing contracts and further expanding strategic sourcing practices to their highest spending procurement categories . for example , most agencies' efforts do not address their highest spending areas such as services . we estimated that savings of one percent from selected large agencies' procurement spending alone would equate to over $4 billion . omb regularly convenes meetings for agencies to provide progress updates on high - risk issues . gao and omb have agreed to hold a series of meetings on the issues on gao's high risk list . the purposes of these meetings are to discuss progress achieved and specifically focus on actions that are needed to fully address high - risk issues and ultimately remove them from the list . these meetings typically include omb's deputy director for management , agency leaders , as well as myself and have provided a useful forum for constructive and productive dialogues . strategic human capital management has been on our high risk list since 2001 . since then , as a result of actions taken by congress , the office of personnel management , and individual agencies , important progress has been made . still , additional efforts are needed in such areas as human capital planning , building results - oriented cultures , and talent management , such as ( 1 ) addressing government - wide and agency - specific skill gaps and enhancing workforce diversity , ( 2 ) strengthening performance management systems to improve the “line of sight” between individual performance and organizational outcomes , and ( 3 ) fully assessing the costs and benefits of ses training . improving the department of defense's ( dod ) weapons systems and services acquisition .