the agency agreed with our recommendation . from fiscal year 1999 through fiscal year 2006 , federal and state agencies participating in the restoration of the south florida ecosystem provided $7.1 billion for the effort . of this total , federal agencies provided $2.3 billion and florida provided $4.8 billion . two agencies — the corps and interior — provided over 80 percent of the federal contribution . as figure 1 shows , federal and state agencies allocated the largest portion of the $7.1 billion to non - cerp projects for fiscal years 1999 through 2006 . while federal agencies and florida provided about $2.3 billion during fiscal years 1999 through 2006 for cerp projects , this amount was about $1.2 billion less than they had estimated needing for these projects over this period . this was because the federal contribution was $1.4 billion less than expected . this shortfall occurred primarily because cerp projects did not receive the congressional authorization and appropriations that the agencies had expected . in contrast , florida provided a total of $2 billion over the period , exceeding its expected contribution to cerp by $250 million , and therefore making up some of the federal funding shortfall . additionally , between july 31 , 2000 , and june 30 , 2006 , the total estimated cost for the south florida ecosystem restoration grew from $15.4 billion to $19.7 billion , or by 28 percent . a significant part of this increase can be attributed to cerp projects ; for these projects costs increased from $8.8 billion to $10.1 billion . this increase represents nearly 31 percent of the increase in the total estimated cost for the restoration . agency officials reported that costs have increased for the restoration effort primarily because of inflation , increased land and construction costs , and changes in the scope of work . furthermore , the costs of restoring the south florida ecosystem are likely to continue to increase for the following reasons: estimated costs for some of the projects are not known or fully known because they are still in the design and planning stage . for example , the total costs for one project that we examined — the site 1 impoundment project — grew by almost $36 million ; from about $46 million to about $81 million after the design phase was completed . if other cerp projects , for which initial planning and design have not yet been completed , also experience similar increases in project costs , then the estimated total costs of not only cerp but the overall restoration effort will grow significantly . the full cost of acquiring land for the restoration effort is not known . land costs for 56 non - cerp land projects , expected to total 862,796 acres , have not yet been reported . according to state officials , florida land prices are escalating rapidly , owing primarily to development pressures . consequently , future project costs are likely to rise with higher land costs .