1 and app . ii for more information ) . according to ngos and resettlement agencies , the u.s. refugee resettlement program has been strained by a growing number of iraqi and afghan refugees and the economic downturn in the united states . in june 2009 , the international rescue committee reported that the high levels of trauma , injury , and illness among iraqi refugees contribute to the precarious nature of their resettlement . moreover , unemployment and homelessness threaten iraqi refugees and other populations recently resettled in the united states , according to ngos and resettlement agencies . in october 2009 , the georgetown law school reported that a michigan resettlement office received funding in 2008 for 300 refugees , but served more than 1,200 . caseworkers , dealing with an average of 120 cases at a time — up from 30 the year before — could not provide what they considered sufficient employment services . according to the international rescue committee report and resettlement agency officials we interviewed , some iraqi refugees face eviction because they cannot pay their rent . the present economic downturn has made jobs normally available to refugees , such as entry - level jobs with limited english proficiency , scarce and more competitive . an orr official stated that , before the current economic recession , refugees could regularly secure such jobs , but since the recession these positions are generally not available . most of the resettlement agencies stated that it is taking longer than usual — often as long as 6 months , and in some cases , 9 to 10 months — for incoming refugees to find employment . u.s. officials and resettlement agencies stated that without jobs , some refugees are unable to get by on the levels of assistance afforded them by the u.s. refugee resettlement program . iraqi refugees , in particular , have faced difficulties finding work despite their relatively high levels of education , according to prm , orr , and uscis officials , and representatives from the resettlement agencies . according to an orr official and resettlement agency officials , the u.s. resettlement program does not take into account refugees' prior work experience and education in job placements . rather , the focus of the program is on securing early employment for refugees . prm data indicate that many iraqi refugees who were resettled in the united states in fiscal years 2007 through 2009 reported having some secondary education . prm , orr , and the resettlement agencies reported that educated iraqis are struggling to find entry - level employment in the united states , much less employment in their professional field of work . for example , we interviewed three iraqi refugees about their experience searching for employment in the united states . two had worked for the u.s. government in iraq , and one was unable to find an entry - level position requiring no formal education . this individual estimated that he had applied for more than 30 low - skill jobs , such as for a busboy and cleaner , before his former u.s. supervisor in iraq helped him find a job .