this increase is the same for each covered employee . most gs employees also receive a locality payment that varies based on their location . while fepca specifies a process designed to reduce federal - nonfederal pay gaps in each locality , in practice locality increases have usually been far less than the recommended amount , which has been between 15 and 20 percent in recent years . the president's pay agent , the entity responsible for recommending federal locality pay adjustments to the president , has recommended that the underlying model and methodology for estimating pay gaps be reexamined to ensure that private sector and federal sector pay comparisons are as accurate as possible . to date , no such reexamination has taken place . however , other organizations have compared federal and non - federal pay . the findings of the six studies published between 2009 and 2012 that we reviewed came to different conclusions on which sector had the higher pay and the size of the pay disparities because they used different approaches , methods , and data . with that in mind , when looking within and across these or other studies , it is important to understand the studies' methodologies because they affect how the studies can be interpreted . the across - the - board and locality pay increases discussed above are given to all covered employees nearly every year and are not linked to performance . employees that are linked to performance ratings as determined by agencies' performance appraisal systems include within - grade increases , ratings - based cash awards , and quality step increases . within - grade increases are the least strongly linked to performance , ratings - based cash awards are more strongly linked to performance depending on the rating system the agency uses , and quality step increases are also more strongly linked to performance . pay increases and monetary awards available to gs based on our past work , we believe that implementing a more market - based and more performance - oriented pay system is both doable and desirable . however , experience has shown it certainly is not easy . for one thing , agencies must have effective performance management systems that link individual expectations to organizational results . moreover , representatives of public , private , and nonprofit organizations , in discussing the successes and challenges they have experienced in designing and implementing their own results - oriented pay systems , told us they had to shift from a culture where compensation is based on position and longevity to one that is performance oriented , affordable , and sustainable . in fiscal years 2011 , 2012 , and 2013 , there was neither an across - the - board or locality pay increase due to a government - wide pay freeze . useful lessons learned that will be important to consider to the extent the federal government moves toward a more results - oriented pay system . lessons learned include the following: 1 . focus on a set of values and objectives to guide the pay system . examine the value of employees' total compensation to remain competitive in the labor market .