this has been a long - standing concern . in our 2002 report on human capital flexibilities , we noted that for many years prior , federal managers had complained that competitive examining procedures were rigid and complex . agencies can use a number of additional hiring authorities beyond competitive examining . these authorities can add flexibility to the process and chcos have expressed a desire for more . however , we previously found that agencies relied on only a small number of available authorities . in fiscal year 2014 , of the 105 hiring authority codes used in total , agencies relied on 20 hiring authority codes to make around 90 percent of the new appointments . we recommended in 2016 that opm use information from its reviews of agencies' use of certain hiring authorities to determine whether opportunities exist to refine , consolidate , or expand agency - specific authorities , and implement changes where opm is authorized , including seeking presidential authorization or developing legislative proposals if necessary . opm agreed with our recommendation and has made progress in these areas , although more work is needed to follow through on planned actions to streamline authorities . for example , in december 2018 , opm said that it continues to research and examine streamlining opportunities , such as those identified in its july 2018 study on excepted service hiring authorities . however , opm did not provide a time frame for implementation . in addition , in its march 2019 congressional justification for the fiscal year 2020 budget request , opm included legislative proposals for new hiring authorities , such as authority for short - term appointments to allow agencies to appoint and compensate highly qualified experts to help agencies meet critical needs as well as a change to the criteria for granting direct hire authority . a variety of special pay authorities can help agencies compete in the labor market for top talent , but agencies only use them for a small number of employees . this can confuse applicants and delay hiring . in july 2018 , opm officials stated that agencies can develop more effective vacancy announcements when hiring managers partner with human resource ( hr ) staff . according to opm , hiring managers can work with hr staff to identify the critical competencies needed in the job , develop a recruiting strategy , and ensure the job announcement accurately and clearly describes the required competencies and experience . to promote collaboration between hiring managers and hr staff , opm is training agencies on the role of hiring managers in writing vacancy announcements , according to opm officials . strategically leverage available hiring and pay flexibilities . to help ensure agencies have the talent they need to meet their missions , we have found that federal agencies should have a hiring process that is simultaneously applicant friendly , sufficiently flexible to enable agencies to meet their needs , and consistent with statutory requirements , such as hiring on the basis of merit . key to achieving this is the hiring authority used to bring applicants onboard . in march 2019 , we reported that chcos cited the complex competitive examining process as a cause of the lengthy hiring time .