( see fig . selected agencies' treatment of identity information during the comment analysis phase also varies . specifically , program offices with the responsibility for analyzing comments place varied importance on identity information during the analysis phase . finally , all agencies draft a response to comments with their final rule , but the extent to which the agencies identify commenters or commenter types in their response also varies across the selected agencies . our analysis of regulations.gov and agency - specific comment websites shows that the varied comment posting practices of the 10 selected agencies are not always documented or clearly communicated to public users of the websites . we also interviewed relevant agency officials . additional information about our scope and methodology is available in our june 2019 report . since the issuance of that report , we have received and reviewed additional information from selected agencies related to the actions they have taken in response to the report's recommendations . we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . consistent with the discretion afforded by the apa , regulations.gov and agency - specific comment websites use required and optional fields on comment forms to collect some identity information from commenters . in addition to the text of the comment , agencies may choose to collect identity information by requiring commenters to fill in other fields , such as name , address , and email address before they are able to submit a comment . regardless of the fields required by the comment form , the selected agencies all accept anonymous comments in practice . federal agencies publish an average of 3,700 nprms each year . most agencies utilize regulations.gov to receive public comments on proposed rules , but some agencies have their own agency - specific websites . although the number of public comments submitted on nprms can vary widely , in recent years , some high - profile rulemakings have received extremely large numbers of comments . for example , during the public comment period for the federal communications commission's ( fcc ) 2017 restoring internet freedom nprm , fcc received more than 22 million comments through its public comment website . subsequently , media and others reported that some of the comments submitted to fcc were suspected to have been submitted using false identity information . specifically , in the comment forms on regulations.gov and agency - specific comment websites , a commenter can submit under a fictitious name , such as “anonymous anonymous,” enter a single letter in each required field , or provide a fabricated address . in each of these scenarios , as long as a character or characters are entered into the required fields , the comment will be accepted .