dod requires such a comparison before purchasing ammunition . records indicate that the army is buying ammunition when potentially usable ammunition is available in the stockpile , suggesting that checking the stockpile could be cost - effective by avoiding concurrent procurement and demilitarization and could put the army in a better position of buying what it actually needs . to improve the financial reporting , economy , and efficiency of demilitarizing excess ammunition , we recommend that the secretary of defense require the secretary of the army to 1. identify and include the total liability ( domestic and overseas ) associated with demilitarizing excess ammunition in the department's annual consolidated balance sheet ; 2. develop a plan in consultation with congress that includes procedures for assessing the appropriate mix of public / private sector capacity needed to demilitarize excess ammunition and the cost - effectiveness of using contractors versus government facilities to demilitarize excess ammunition , with specific actions identified for addressing the capacity issue ; and 3. comply with dod's policy to routinely compare planned purchases of ammunition for training with usable ammunition in the stockpile and require the single manager for conventional ammunition to prepare periodic reports to the office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics , documenting such comparisons and showing the quantities and types of ammunition reclaimed from the stockpile . the following are gao's comments on the department of defense's ( dod ) letter dated march 26 , 2001 . dod's comment and our evaluation are included in the body of the report . the examples of costs that could have been avoided that we cite in our report relate to contracts awarded for fiscal year 2000 . the examples illustrate the need for dod to develop a plan that includes procedures for assessing the appropriate mix of public / private sector capacity by considering the cost - effectiveness of using contractors versus government facilities to demilitarize excess ammunition . such a plan would help better ensure that cost - effective decisions are made . the scope and methodology of our work are described in appendix i . this is the third and final report in response to your request that we evaluate the department of defense's ammunition management practices . under the national military strategy , the military services are required to maintain enough ammunition for wartime needs and for peacetime needs , such as training . the defense planning guidance lays out general guidelines for the services to determine how much ammunition they need to conduct operations under the strategy . ammunition that exceeds these requirements is to be shared among the services or disposed of through sale to other nations , recycling , or demilitarization . in 1977 , the army , through its operations support command ( formerly industrial operations command ) , assumed single manager responsibility for managing , storing , and disposing of the services' ammunition . the command's defense ammunition center provides the command and the military services a variety of ammunition related services , including training , technical assistance , and logistics support . the army demilitarizes excess ammunition at its ammunition depots , plants , and centers .