two did so . the other two respondents did not reply to our clarification email , and we excluded their responses to the misunderstood questions . not all respondents provided answers to all questions in our questionnaire . we extracted the data from the word questionnaires and imported them into excel for qualitative analyses . please consider factors impacting both taxpayers and the dod . the box will expand as you type . c. what are the negative aspects associated with this alternative , if any ? please consider factors impacting both taxpayers and the dod . the box will expand as you type . d. what are the costs associated with this alternative , if any ? if you are aware of more than one , you will be able to tell us about others in questions 9-12 .  please skip to question 13 please skip to question 13 a . if yes , please briefly describe the first alternative approach . the box will expand as you type . elizabeth field , ( 202 ) 512-2775 or fielde1@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , richard k. geiger , assistant director ; arkelga braxton , assistant director ; rebekah boone ; amie lesser ; felicia lopez ; james p. klein ( analyst - in - charge ) ; shylene mata ; sheila miller ; richard powelson ; and michael silver made key contributions to this report . please consider costs impacting both taxpayers and the dod . e. what are the requirements associated with implementing this alternative ? consider factors such as: changes to existing systems , policies , or processes ; new systems , policies , or processes ; new budget estimations ; required training ; etc . were you aware of this alternative before completing this questionnaire ? please check one box . are you aware of any alternative approaches for separating amounts designated for oco from amounts designated for base activities other than the ones listed above ? please continue to “b” through “e” b . what are the positive aspects associated with this alternative , if any ? these could be requirements for dod or the congress . the box will expand as you type . please consider both approaches dod could implement on its own ( such as approaches to separating oco from base in the o&m account or changes that make that unnecessary ) and legislative approaches the congress could take . we are aware of the enterprise resource planning ( erp ) systems listed above . for this question , we are interested in the implementation of new potential alternatives other than the erp system . please check one box .  please continue to “a” through “e” to tell us about one alternative . the box will expand as you type . gao has identified the following as a possible alternative to the current approach for separating amounts designated for oco from amounts designated for base activities in the appropriations process: a . please check one box . please check one box . we inspected the excel files to ensure that data were not missing or were not imported incorrectly and made iterative corrections to the process to ensure accurate data were analyzed .