this was the case with pcv . at the time , no vaccines that protected against invasive pneumococcal disease were licensed for use in children under 2 years of age , so pcv was eligible to be designated as a fast track product and to receive priority review . as a result , the review and approval of pcv took about 8.5 months , compared with the median time of 18.5 months for vaccines . some of the vaccines in the pipeline are already licensed products in other countries , including canada and various countries in europe . to what extent have recent childhood vaccine shortages affected immunization policies and programs ? what factors have contributed to the recent shortages , and have they been resolved ? what strategies are federal agencies considering to help mitigate disruptions in the vaccine supply ? to assess the effect of vaccine shortages on immunization policies and programs , we surveyed 64 state , territorial , and local immunization programs supported by cdc , examined recent changes in recommended immunization schedules , and reviewed studies of past outbreaks . to identify the factors that contributed to shortages and determine if they are being resolved , we visited the four primary vaccine manufacturers , determined how federal regulatory procedures affect vaccine production , and reviewed various analyses of vaccine supply problems by hhs agencies and other entities . cdc currently recommends routine immunizations against 11 childhood diseases: diphtheria , tetanus , pertussis ( whooping cough ) , haemophilus influenzae type b ( most commonly meningitis ) , hepatitis b , measles , mumps , rubella ( german measles ) , invasive pneumococcal disease , polio , and varicella ( chicken pox ) . some vaccines protect against multiple diseases . to identify strategies being considered by federal authorities to help prevent or mitigate vaccine shortages , we reviewed studies and recommendations to strengthen the vaccine supply , attended advisory panel meetings examining vaccine shortages , and interviewed agency officials and other vaccine experts . we conducted our work from november 2001 through july 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . by combining antigens ( the component of a vaccine that triggers an immune response ) , a single injection of a combination vaccine can protect against multiple diseases . to build and maintain sufficient immunity , multiple doses of each of these vaccines are usually needed through infancy and early childhood . cdc's suggested vaccine timetable calls for children to receive up to 23 doses of these vaccines through the first 6 years of life . an additional tetanus - diphtheria booster is recommended during adolescence . when very large shares of the general population are immunized , vaccines are successful at preventing major outbreaks of disease . vaccines also offer some degree of protection to individuals not immunized , because a high immunization rate in a population gives a disease less opportunity to take hold and spread — a concept known as “herd immunity.” development of vaccines and establishment of large - scale immunization programs have virtually eliminated some diseases and drastically reduced the impact of others .