swanton border patrol sector . the number of individuals entering canada between official ports of entry in quebec , north of swanton sector's area of responsibility , known to border patrol was approximately 1,000 individuals during the 4-year period from 2012 through 2015 , according to sector officials . in 2016 , the number of individuals known to swanton sector increased to approximately 1,100 individuals , and then increased to approximately 16,800 individuals in 2017 . blaine border patrol sector . to what extent has cbp developed and implemented performance measures to assess the effectiveness of securing the northern border between ports of entry ? to address all three questions , we interviewed department of homeland security ( dhs ) and cbp officials from headquarters and field locations . specifically , we met with headquarters officials from dhs's office of strategy , policy , and plans ; office of program analysis and evaluation ; science and technology directorate ; u.s. coast guard ; and u.s. immigration and customs enforcement . from cbp , we met with headquarters officials from the air and marine operations ( amo ) , u.s. border patrol ( border patrol ) , office of information and technology , office of intelligence , office of facilities and asset management , and office of accountability / performance management and analysis division . we also met with officials from the government of canada to discuss their views on northern border security . for a list of government agencies and entities interviewed in field locations , see table 1 . in addition , we conducted site visits in michigan , new york , vermont , virginia , and washington , as well as the canadian provinces of british columbia , ontario , and quebec . we chose these locations based on deployment of cbp resources — surveillance technology such as remote video surveillance systems — and reported levels of illicit cross - border activity by border patrol , including arrests of individuals and seizures of narcotics . findings from our site visits cannot be generalized to all cbp locations along the northern border , but provide valuable insights into our research questions . to address the first question , we reviewed dhs and cbp policies , procedures , reports , and assessments describing threats along the northern border between ports of entry . specifically , we reviewed dhs's 2017 northern border threat analysis report and the june 2018 northern border strategy . we reviewed border patrol policies and procedures related to identifying and documenting threats and intelligence reports , referred to as intelligence estimates , completed in each northern border sector for fiscal years 2017 and 2018 . in addition , we reviewed border patrol's national intelligence estimates for fiscal years 2017 and 2018 . we also reviewed documents describing the results of border patrol's threats , targets , and operations assessments and intelligence preparation for the operation environment process completed for northern border sectors from 2014 through 2017 . to analyze the number apprehensions and drug seizures along the northern border , we obtained data from the enforcement integrated database for fiscal years 2013 through 2017 , a time period for which complete data were available at the time of our review .