both comments will be included in the docket . they may or may not submit a comment . to determine what internal guidance selected federal agencies have related to the identity of commenters in the federal rulemaking process , we first determined whether each of the selected agencies had any documented policies , procedures , or guidance associated with each phase of the comment process generally . for those agencies that did , we reviewed these documents to determine whether they explicitly included requirements associated with identity information . both types of filings can be submitted through an ecfs comment form , which requires commenters to enter information directly into an electronic form on the ecfs website . see appendix iii for examples of the comment forms used by ecfs . additionally , interested parties with the appropriate technical capabilities can submit either type of filing directly to ecfs via a direct application programming interface ( api ) or through a public api that is registered with the website data.gov . for ebsa and whd , guidance from dol recommends attaching the “organization name” to comments within a docket to improve transparency and help the agency and public users search for organizations within regulations.gov . the public - facing website of fdms is regulations.gov , which is an interactive website that allows the public to make comments on regulatory documents , review comments submitted by others , and access federal regulatory information . regulations.gov allows commenters to submit comments to rulemakings by entering information directly in an electronic form on the regulations.gov website . this form also allows commenters to attach files as part of their comment submission , and can be customized by each participating agency . appendix ii provides an example of one comment form from regulations.gov . additionally , all participating agencies allow comments to be submitted by mail or hand delivery . at their discretion , some participating agencies also allow comments to be submitted via email . see table 1 . fcc's electronic comment filing system ( ecfs ) : ecfs is a web - based application that allows anyone with access to the internet to submit comments to fcc rulemaking proceedings . ecfs allows commenters to submit comments to rulemakings through two main avenues: brief text comments submitted as express filings , and long - form comments submitted as standard filings . filing comments through an api allows interested parties the ability to file a large number of comments without having to submit multiple individual comment forms . the “agency posting guidelines” provided by epa inform public users that all versions of duplicate or near - duplicate comments as part of mass mail campaigns may not be posted ; rather a representative sample will be provided , with a tally of the total number of duplicate comments received . ( see fig . however , this information does not provide enough detail to help public users determine whether all of the individual comments and associated identity information are posted within this docket , because it indicates that samples are provided for duplicate comments , rather than all of the copies submitted .