strengthening the survey methodology . because surveyors often missed significant care problems due to weaknesses in the survey process , hcfa contracted in 1998 for the development of a revised survey methodology . the agency's contractor has proposed a two - phase survey process . in the first phase , surveyors would initially identify potential care problems using data generated off - site prior to the start of the survey and additional , standardized information collected on - site . during the second phase , surveyors would conduct an onsite investigation to confirm and document the care deficiencies initially identified . compared to the current survey process , the revised methodology under development is designed to more systematically target potential problems at a home and give surveyors new tools to more adequately document care outcomes and conduct onsite investigations . in april 2003 , a cms official told us that the agency lacked adequate funding to complete testing and implementation of the revised methodology under development for almost 5 years . through september 2003 , cms will have committed about $4.7 million to this effort . while cms did not address the lack of adequate funding in its comments on our draft report , a cms official subsequently told us that about $508,000 has now been slated for additional field testing . this amount , however , has not yet been approved . not funding the additional field testing could jeopardize the entire initiative , in which a substantial investment has already been made . developing clearer guidance for surveyors . recognizing inconsistencies in how the scope and severity of deficiencies are cited across states , in october 2000 , hcfa began developing more structured guidance for surveyors , including survey investigative protocols for assessing specific deficiencies . the intent of this initiative is to enable surveyors to better ( 1 ) identify specific deficiencies , ( 2 ) investigate whether a deficiency is the result of poor care , and ( 3 ) document the level of harm resulting from a home's identified deficient care practices . delays have occurred , and the first such guidance to be completed — pressure sores — has not yet been released . developing additional state guidance for investigating complaints . despite initiation of a complaint improvement project in 1999 , cms has not yet developed detailed guidance for states to help improve their complaint investigation systems . cms received its contractor's report in june 2002 , and indicated agreement with the report's conclusion that reforming the complaint system is urgently needed to achieve a more standardized , consistent , and effective process . cms told us that it plans to issue new guidance to the states in late fiscal year 2003 — about 4 years after the complaint improvement project initiative was launched . as we reported in september 2000 , continued federal and state attention is required to ensure necessary improvements in the quality of care provided to the nation's vulnerable nursing home residents . the proportion of homes reported to have harmed residents is still unacceptably high , despite the reported decline in the incidence of such problems . this decline is consistent with the concerted congressional , federal , and state attention focused on addressing quality of care problems .