( fig . 1 depicts key steps in the process , app . iv describes key efforts for the renovation in 2001 and 2002 , and app . defined the need for a renovation . about a decade ago , u.n. officials identified the need for a major renovation to provide member states a 21st century headquarters . to define the technical needs , they competitively procured the services of a multidisciplinary team of consultants , who assessed the existing conditions of each infrastructure component . the assessments were based on visual inspections and selective probes of the buildings' structure and their electrical , mechanical , plumbing , and other systems . the assessment reports formed the basis for the capital master plan conclusion that current building conditions render the headquarters unacceptable for continued long - term use . defined u.n. project expectations . the secretary - general defined the project expectation as follows: “the united nations facility should be safe , free of hazardous materials , environmentally sound , fully accessible to all persons and cost - efficient to operate.” the capital master plan presented a framework of options that could meet this expectation and preliminary cost estimates ranging from $875 million to $1.2 billion . the estimates were ( 1 ) developed using standard industry practices ; ( 2 ) based on the condition assessments ; and ( 3 ) included costs for labor and materials , project management , and contingencies — all adjusted for the new york city market and for inflation over the project duration . however , the estimates excluded some costs , such as ( 1 ) u.n. staff other than for project management ; ( 2 ) furniture , fixtures , and equipment ; or ( 3 ) additional security measures . based on standard estimating literature and our work looking at the planning efforts , it is our opinion that the preliminary cost estimate has a margin of error of 20 to 30 percent . the estimates will be refined after the scope of the renovation is decided and further design work is completed . recognized the value of a project management plan to guide decisionmaking . u.n. project officials acknowledged the value of a project management plan that could include ( 1 ) a statement of project goals and objectives ; ( 2 ) options for management of the project ; ( 3 ) project implementation schedules ; ( 4 ) details about how the renovation would affect day - to - day u.n. operations ; and ( 5 ) observations about how u.n. stakeholders , including member states , employees , the city of new york , and others , would be involved in the process . as part of conceptual planning , u.n. officials are developing a new project management plan that updates the capital master plan . recognized a need to augment management capability . u.n. project staff recognize that while the secretariat does have project management capability , it does not have the capability to manage a project as large and complex as the proposed renovation . while a decision regarding project management has not been reached , u.n. officials have identified options that could be implemented when funding is approved .