( see fig . in addition to website navigation , it is also difficult for beneficiaries to understand the information in mpf , according to stakeholders , research studies , and ship directors responding to our survey . add supplemental coverage ? beneficiaries in original medicare can also purchase medicare supplemental insurance — known as medigap plans — offered by private insurance companies . these plans help pay for medicare's required cost sharing and some out - of - pocket costs not covered under original medicare , such as emergency health care during international travel . figure 1 illustrates the decisions beneficiaries have to make when selecting their medicare coverage options . two research studies we reviewed indicate that cost is a key consideration for medicare beneficiaries when selecting medicare coverage . beneficiaries may want to know what their likely out - of - pocket costs will be monthly , annually , or both . beneficiaries may also want to know what their costs may be if they have a change in health status , such as by experiencing an illness . beneficiaries may be responsible for several specific types of health care costs , including the following: premiums — beneficiaries generally make monthly payments to purchase coverage . medicare part a generally does not require beneficiaries to pay a premium . part b premiums are established by statutory formula and are means - tested so that beneficiaries with higher incomes pay higher premiums . the premiums charged by ma plans and part d plans are established by each plan and can vary widely . beneficiaries in original medicare who opt to purchase medigap will also pay a monthly premium for coverage , with the amount of the premium varying across the 10 standardized plans and by the different companies offering these plans . cost sharing — beneficiaries are typically responsible for paying a portion of the costs for the services they receive as either a copayment or coinsurance . a copayment is a fixed dollar amount for each doctor visit , medical service , or medication . with coinsurance , a beneficiary pays a percentage of the allowed charge for each health care service or medication . deductibles — beneficiaries must pay out - of - pocket a specified annual amount of expenses before medicare will begin paying for approved services or medications . ma plans establish out - of - pocket maximums or set limits on the amount a beneficiary will have to spend a year . in contrast , original medicare has no limit on beneficiary out - of - pocket costs . in 2019 , two medigap plans provide maximum out - of - pocket limits , and beneficiaries with these plans do not have to pay costs above the limits . the same two research studies identified access to particular health care providers as another key consideration for beneficiaries when selecting medicare coverage . beneficiaries in original medicare may see any doctor or use any facility that accepts medicare payment , and referrals are not needed to see specialists . in contrast , ma beneficiaries must typically use the ma plan's network of health care providers , including doctors , hospitals , and outpatient facilities , and referrals are generally needed to see specialists .