completed . the authority has ( 1 ) performed site visits and benchmarking analysis of accounting and financial management information systems similar to that used in the district ; ( 2 ) hired a consultant with extensive business process reengineering and systems implementation experience to analyze the district's financial management information systems implementation effort ; and ( 3 ) created a system of accounting and reporting ( soar ) steering committee , headed by the chair of the authority , which includes the mayor , cfo , chief technology officer , inspector general , and a dc council member . action in process . according to the authority , it is ( 1 ) assessing the functionality of the soar performance budgeting module ; and ( 2 ) including performance budgeting as an agenda item for the soar steering committee . see items 3 through 8 below . recommendation addresses life - cycle support of the software ; and ( 7 ) develop a written policy for software acquisition planning . requirements development and management: ( 1 ) develop an organizational policy for establishing and managing software - related requirements ; ( 2 ) clearly assign responsibility for requirements development and management ; ( 3 ) document other resource requirements or resources expended for requirements development activities ; ( 4 ) develop the capability to trace between contractual requirements and the contractor's work products ; and ( 5 ) develop measurements to determine the status of the requirements development and management activities . status as reported by district officials alternatives and cost - benefit analysis of out - sourcing the data center and upgrading versus replacing the current system . action in process . the authority is: ( 1 ) emphasizing the importance of implementing and enforcing clear policies and lines of accountability through the soar steering committee ; ( 2 ) requiring that the district provide documentation and justification for resources requested or expended ; and ( 3 ) emphasizing the importance of explicitly linking contractor payments to specific deliverables through the use of work breakdown structures . action in process . the authority has emphasized developing quantitative measures of project performance . the authority has emphasized to the soar pmo the importance of developing clear project deliverables and matching these to costs through the development of work breakdown structures . project management: ( 1 ) develop a written policy for the execution of the software project ; ( 2 ) authorize the project manager to independently alter either the performance , cost , or schedule ; and ( 3 ) require that measurements be taken to determine the status of project management activities . contract tracking and oversight: ( 1 ) develop written policy for contract tracking and oversight activities for the financial management system project ; ( 2 ) support the project team with contracting specialists ; ( 3 ) require that the project team review the contractor's planning documents ( for example , the project management plan , software risk management plan , software engineering plan , configuration management plan ) ; ( 4 ) assign someone responsibility for maintaining the integrity of the contract ; and ( 5 ) take measurements to determine the status of contract tracking and oversight activities .