outside employment . the doi oig concluded that the foundation did not comply with the dual compensation act when approving outside employment activities for employees . as of november 2013 , the foundation was taking steps to improve its internal controls related to employees' outside employment . specifically , the foundation prepared a draft outside employment policy , which requires foundation employees to obtain management approval prior to engaging in any outside employment . as of november 2013 , the draft outside employment policy was in the process of being reviewed by the foundation's general counsel for compliance with applicable law and implementing office of personnel management ( opm ) regulations and guidance . according to foundation officials , the policy is expected to be finalized in early 2014 . termination of employees . the doi oig audit report cited a lack of internal controls as the basis for questionable actions that were taken by foundation management to encourage employees to either voluntarily , or involuntarily , leave their foundation employment . the foundation was taking steps to improve its internal controls relating to termination of staff members' employment . specifically , as of november 2013 , the foundation was updating its personnel policies to direct that all personnel actions taken must comply with applicable law and implementing opm regulations and guidance , and that any deviation from such regulations and guidance must be documented and justified in writing . according to foundation officials , the policy is expected to be finalized in early 2014 . because the foundation's planned actions to improve its internal controls related to employees' outside employment and termination of employment were not finalized , it was too soon for us to assess the design of these actions and whether they are consistent with internal control standards and applicable laws , regulations , and guidance . the draft outside employment policy and the personnel policies relating to termination of employees will not be finalized until the foundation's general counsel and executive director and the board have reviewed and approved the proposed changes . once approved , the extent to which the new personnel - related internal controls and their implementation will help the foundation to successfully improve its internal controls and comply with applicable laws and regulations will require the continued involvement and vigorous oversight of foundation management and the board . the bona fide needs rule is based on the time statute ( 31 u.s.c . see the ethics in government act of 1978 , which is codified , as amended , in 5 u.s.c . appendix §§ 401-408 . the director of the office of government ethics has issued implementing regulations , which are codified , as amended , in 5 c.f.r . parts 2634-41. was not in compliance with the far when awarding sole source contracts . most of the sole source contracts were justified using the alternative dispute resolution ( adr ) exception to full and open competition ; contracted did not meet the essential elements required for an adr exception under far 6.302-3 ( “acquire services of an expert or neutral person for any current or anticipated litigation or dispute” ) .