iv . according to state , the biggest shortages are for foreign service generalists in the mid - level ranks , particularly in the administrative , consular , and public diplomacy areas , as well as foreign service specialists who provide infrastructure support services . it is in these areas that positions tend to have fewer bidders — oftentimes two or fewer bidders who meet the grade and functional specialty requirements , the threshold at which state considers a position hard - to - fill . as shown in table 2 , we analyzed the average number of bids submitted for the 2002 assignments cycle and found an average of fewer than three bidders for administrative and consular positions in 20 and 25 percent hardship posts ; and an average of fewer than three bidders for public diplomacy positions in 15 and 25 percent hardship posts . finally , foreign service specialist positions in 25 percent hardship posts also had , on average , fewer than three bidders . based on these data , it appears that , on average , positions in other functional areas and in the lesser hardship posts ( eg , economic , political , and rotational positions in nondifferential posts ) have a greater supply of interested bidders . to fill positions that are difficult to staff , primarily in hardship posts , state's policies allow bidding and assignment rules to be relaxed when there are not enough bidders . in addition , various employment mechanisms are available to allow post management to fill staffing gaps with temporary or limited - term personnel when necessary . while these options help ease the staffing problems at hardship posts and offer short - term relief , they are less than ideal . senior post officials acknowledged that employing staff with less experience and expertise than the positions require impedes the efficiency of post operations but that the alternative — absorbing the impact of extended staffing gaps — is worse . bidding and assignment rules may be relaxed for ( 1 ) hard - to - fill positions — where there are two or fewer fully qualified bidders who are at grade and are in the designated specialty and ( 2 ) posts that are identified as among the most difficult to staff — where 50 percent of the positions advertised have two or fewer bidders . ninety - eight , or about 38 percent , of the posts overseas met the criteria to be designated most difficult to staff in the 2002 assignments cycle . to staff positions at these posts , state eases certain rules , which could compromise diplomatic readiness . for example , to attract employees to bid on these positions , the department may allow stretch assignments early in the assignments cycle , waive language requirements , or offer unusually short tours of duty ( 12 to 18 months ) . the vast majority of the most - difficult - to - staff posts are in the bureau of african affairs , with about 40 percent ( 39 ) of the posts , and the bureau of european and eurasian affairs , with 27 percent ( 26 posts , mostly in the newly independent states ) .