mobile devices . in 2013 , we also explained that no federal law comprehensively governs applications software for mobile devices . application developers , mobile carriers , advertisers , and others may collect an individual's information through services provided on a mobile device . however , ftc has taken enforcement action against companies for use of mobile applications that violate coppa and fcra . the agency also has taken action under the ftc act . we and others have reported that the capability of mobile devices to provide consumer's location engenders privacy risks , particularly if companies use or share location data without consumers' knowledge . ecpa might not apply if location data were not deemed content and would not govern entities that are not covered by ecpa . but ftc could pursue enforcement action if a company's collection or use of the information violated coppa . more recently , in january of this year , we issued a report on internet privacy that reinforces what we reported in 2013 . to varying extents , internet content providers and internet service providers collect , use , and share information from their customers to enable their services , support advertising , and for other purposes . consumers access such services through mobile phones and tablets , computers , and other internet - connected devices . however , there is no comprehensive federal privacy statute with specific standards . ftc has been addressing internet privacy through its unfair and deceptive practices authority , among other statutes , and other agencies have been addressing this issue using industry - specific statutes . we concluded that recent developments regarding internet privacy suggest that this is an appropriate time for congress to consider comprehensive internet privacy legislation . to address such privacy concerns , states and other countries have adopted privacy rules . for example , the european union's general data protection regulation , which came into force in may 2018 , is a set of privacy rules that give consumers control over the collection , use , and sharing of their personal information , and california passed its own privacy law in june 2018 that becomes effective in 2020 . in february of this year , we reported that ftc does not have civil penalty authority for initial violations of glba's privacy and safeguarding requirements , which , unlike fcra , includes a provision directing federal regulators and ftc to establish standards for financial institutions to protect against any anticipated threats or hazards to the security of customer records . to obtain monetary redress for these violations , ftc must identify affected consumers and any monetary harm they may have experienced . however , harm resulting from privacy and security violations ( such as a data breach ) can be difficult to measure and can occur years in the future , making it difficult to trace a particular harm to a specific breach . as a result , ftc lacks a practical enforcement tool for imposing civil money penalties that could help to deter companies from violating data security provisions of glba and its implementing regulations . we recommended that congress consider giving ftc civil penalty authority to enforce glba's safeguarding provisions .