office of operations . ensures the timely and effective delivery of high quality and cost effective mission support services , including it support , across the fda and its centers , and coordinates emergency preparedness and response activities for incidents involving fda - regulated products across fda and its stakeholders . fda relies extensively on the use and outcomes of it to achieve its strategic priorities , fulfill its mission , and support related administrative needs . among others , the agency has implemented systems and other technology dedicated to supporting activities , such as: reviewing and evaluating new product applications , such as for prescription drugs , medical devices , and food additives . these systems are intended to help fda determine whether a product is safe before it enters the market . one such system — the document archiving , reporting , and regulatory tracking system — is intended to manage the drug and therapeutics review process . monitoring the safety of products on the market by collecting and assessing adverse reactions to fda - regulated products , such as illnesses due to food or negative reactions to drugs . this activity is supported by systems such as the vaccine adverse event reporting system , which accepts reports of adverse events that may be associated with u.s. - licensed vaccines from health care providers , manufacturers , and the public . screening imported food to detect and prevent entry into the united states of adulterated , misbranded , or potentially spoiled food . for example , the predictive risk - based evaluation for dynamic import compliance targeting is a tool used as part of the system that provides entry reviewers with information to help target high - risk shipments for examination and expedite the clearance of lower - risk cargo . surveilling and promoting the safety of fda - regulated products . with the exception of laboratories , systems developed and managed by the mission accomplishments and regulatory compliance services ( marcs ) investment are used to support all field activities , including domestic and foreign inspections , imports , compliance , and enforcement activities . conducting post - market safety surveillance for drug and therapeutic biologic products that have been approved by fda . the fda adverse event reporting system is used to help identify new safety concerns that might be related to a marketed product , evaluate a manufacturer's compliance with reporting regulations , and respond to outside requests for information . in addition , fda relies on various systems that support its administrative processes , such as payroll administration and personnel systems . all of the agency's systems are supported by an it infrastructure that includes network components , critical servers , and multiple data centers . fda's budget for the development , operations , and maintenance of its it investments was approximately $419 million for fiscal year 2013 and approximately $566 million for fiscal year 2014 . it spending for fiscal year 2014 was categorized into three portfolios: $287.4 million for it investments that support mission delivery and $260 million for it infrastructure , security , office automation , and $18.72 million for investments in enterprise architecture capital planning and chief information officer functions .