we provided a draft of this report to dhs for comment . on march 2 , 2016 , dhs provided written comments , which are reprinted in appendix i and provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . one of the goals of the plan is to ensure interoperable communications capabilities . the plan identified a number of ncr's initiatives to achieve this goal including: ensuring communications interoperability across agencies , managing and coordinating radio upgrades across jurisdictions , maintaining a cache of extra radios , conducting training to improve the ability of all ncr partners to access and use communications systems effectively , and encourage participation in biannual communication exercises that test all regional communication platforms . in addition , the oncrc has worked with ncr agencies to continue developing the national capital region network ( ncrnet ) which is a secure , non - commercial , fiber optic network . as part of the interoperable communications infrastructure , the ncrnet is designed to address the ncr's need for a web - based capability for secure data communications and should allow for more efficient , flexible , and secure data exchange particularly among state and local jurisdictions within the ncr . according to the oncrc's 2014 report to congress , most of the local jurisdictions in the region are connected via the ncrnet , but other ncr agencies are not . in comments on a draft of this report , oncrc officials said that , as of december 2015 , all of the jurisdictions in ncr are connected to ncrnet and efforts are underway to include federal agencies in the ncrnet . according to the director of oncrc , although ncr agencies and entities are not required to implement the ncr's strategic plan , they are committed to implementing it because they helped develop the plan and are stewards of public trust and resources . in its 2014 and 2015 reports to congress , the oncrc states that , as a result of the ncr's strategic plan , state and local agencies have a framework for sustaining current emergency communications capabilities , such as interoperability , and building new ones . the reports also noted that achieving the plan's goals will improve the region's preparedness to address critical risk in the ncr . as noted previously , one of the oncrc's responsibilities is to serve as a liaison with entities in the ncr to facilitate access to federal grants . the oncrc officials told us that the oncrc ( as a member of the senior policy group ) has collaborated with the ncr's emergency preparedness council to facilitate state and local agencies access to the dhs's uasi grant program . the uasi grant program is the primary source of federal homeland security funding for the ncr . in fiscal year 2014 , dhs allocated $53 million through the uasi grant program to the ncr to enhance the region's homeland security and preparedness capabilities . almost $7 million of the $53 million was to fund projects aimed at the ncr strategic plan's goal to ensure interoperable communications capabilities , such as purchasing radios and other equipment as well as developing a strategic plan for radio encryption .