friendship commission . we reported that incomplete reporting by agencies was due in part to omb not implementing a process to identify agencies that did not report required award information and stated that without such a process , it risked continued data gaps that limited the usefulness of the site . in a sample of 100 awards from usaspending.gov that we reviewed , each had at least one data error in a required field , consisting of either a blank data field , an inconsistency between the usaspending.gov data and agency records , or a lack of sufficient agency information to determine consistency . in 73 of the sampled awards , 6 or more of the 17 required data fields exhibited an error . agency officials attributed the lack of sufficient information , in part , to procedures and systems that did not include documenting all of the data required by ffata . for those awards where we had enough information to judge sufficiency , the data field with the most inconsistencies was the award title , which often lacked necessary specificity . this weakness was attributed , in part , to the lack of specific guidance from omb and to the lack of tools to identify incomplete reports . we reported that until omb addressed these issues , the ability of the public to find requested information and of omb to correct errors would be limited . to address these findings , we made several recommendations to the director of omb . for example , we recommended that omb revise its guidance to agencies to clarify that award titles should describe the purpose of each award and how agencies should validate and document their submitted data . we also recommended that omb develop and implement a plan to collect and report subaward data , as well as a procedure to regularly ensure that agencies report required award information . omb generally agreed with our findings and recommendations . since we last evaluated ffata compliance , omb has taken steps to improve usaspending.gov and the quality of its data through increased agency - level accountability and government - wide improvements . first , in omb's 2009 open government directive , agencies were directed to designate a high - level senior official to be accountable for the quality of , and internal controls over , federal spending information disseminated on public websites . a list of the agency - designated officials appears on usaspending.gov . subsequently , in an april 2010 memorandum to senior accountable officials , omb required agencies to establish a data quality framework for federal spending information , including a governance structure , risk assessments , control activities , and monitoring program . agencies were directed to submit plans for addressing these requirements to omb . to address government - wide weaknesses , omb issued guidance to agencies on improving the quality of data in the federal procurement data system , a contract database that is one of the main sources of usaspending.gov data .