incorrect information . call center staff did not always give us accurate information . for example , although some of our fictitious applicants were told that inspectors would call to schedule inspection even though the applicant did not know the extent of damage to his property , one of our inv for an inspection unless he provided a more precise account of his property damages . for another application , we had to fax supp documentation in multiple times because we were initially given an incorrect fax number . estigators was told he would not be scheduled delayed notification for hotel assistance . for two of our registrations that were approved for temporary housing , fema did no notify us in a timely manner , which prevented us from obtaining a hot room . s , in an effort to understand the experiences of actual disaster victim we contacted registrants chosen from a database provided by fema about half of the individuals we spoke with told us that they did not experience any problems with fema's application process ; the other half confirmed that they encountered delays in getting through to . fema operators , problems scheduling inspections , and difficulties obtaining hotel rooms once they had been approved . fema permits registration for assistance over the internet , but power outages may have forced many victims to seek assistance over the telephone . table 1 highlights 10 of our conversations with disaster victims . fema cited several factors that contributed to poor customer service in the aftermath of hurricanes ike and gustav: a higher - than - expected call volume , unmet staffing needs , contractor failure , and problems with its automatic call system . fema told us that although it intends to use a different contractor for the 2009 hurricane season , the agency will make no other changes to its call center operational plan . higher - than - expected call volume: fema told us that they received what they described as an overwhelming number of calls , especially from individuals that may not have otherwise asked for assistance , because the media and high - level government officials strongly encouraged the public to contact fema . for example , fema estimated that it would receive approximately 530,291 calls requesting assistance for hurricanes gustav and ike , but it actually received a total of 1,195,213 calls — 125 percent more than expected . fema officials also stated that many individuals who called fema had unrealistic expectations as a result of the widespread coverage of hurricane katrina . in particular , many applicants called because they expected to receive an immediate $2,000 expedited assistance payment . projected call center needs unmet: data provided by fema show that fema fell short of its anticipated peak staffing needs . according to fema , call centers are typically staffed with a baseline number of personnel before a disaster takes place . to determine staffing , fema primarily relies on historical models , and the type and the size of a disaster . if fema determines that additional staff are needed after a disaster occurs , it relies on an interagency agreement with the internal revenue service ( irs ) and on contractors .