we plan to report our results next year . we also expect to evaluate the extent to which there are governmentwide requirements for measuring and reporting grant performance and the extent to which federal agencies measure grant performance to report progress toward their goals , as well as offer assistance to grantees on collecting data and reporting grant performance . as with our streamlining work , the specifics of this grant performance reporting work are currently under development , and we anticipate a 2013 report . in our past work we have reported that effective performance accountability provisions are of fundamental importance in assuring the proper and effective use of federal funds to achieve program goals . under the recovery act , grants have played an important role in distributing federal funds in light of the most serious economic crisis since the great depression . as of june 2012 , treasury had paid out more than $250 billion in recovery act funds to state and local governments , much of it through grants . given the significant investment made in the recovery act , and the considerable challenges facing our nation moving forward , this subcommittee recognized the importance of collecting , analyzing , and sharing grant lessons and insights gained as a result of this process . building on our previous reviews , we will examine lessons from the implementation of the recovery act — including specific examples of practices and approaches that worked as well as challenges encountered by federal , state , and local agencies . among the potential issues to consider are the efforts to facilitate coordination and collaboration among federal , state , local , and nongovernmental partners and actions taken to enhance the organizational and administrative capacity of federal partners . once again , we anticipate reporting to the subcommittee next year . finally , in numerous reviews over the years , we have identified weaknesses in federal agencies' processes for managing and overseeing grant programs . among the issues we are planning to address in future work is how federal agencies can improve internal control over grants monitoring . we will also examine what improvements , if any , are needed in federal agencies' internal controls to help ensure the primary grantees are providing adequate oversight of subgrantees . the improvements made in the timeliness of grant closeouts since our 2008 report demonstrate that congressional oversight can lead agencies to focus attention on a specific grant challenge , and result in real progress . however , our recent update of our earlier analysis of undisbursed balances also shows that more still needs to be done to close out grants ; agencies would use their resources most effectively by focusing initially on older accounts with larger undisbursed balances . as our review of past grant work suggests , there are numerous other issues where congressional attention could also likely pay dividends . we will continue to monitor omb's action on our recommendations . the challenge presented by undisbursed balances in expired grant accounts is just one of a number of grants management challenges we have identified in our past work . grants continue to be an important tool used by the federal government to achieve national objectives .