acquisition management . dhs's acquisition function includes managing and overseeing nearly $16 billion in acquisitions to support its broad and complex missions , such as information systems , new technologies , aircraft , ships , and professional services . dhs has recognized the need to improve acquisition outcomes and taken some positive steps to organize and assess the acquisition function , but continues to lack clear accountability for the outcomes of acquisition dollars spent . a common theme in our work on acquisition management is dhs's struggle to provide adequate support for its mission components and resources for departmentwide oversight . dhs has not yet accomplished its goal of integrating the acquisition function across the department . for example , the structure of dhs's acquisition function creates ambiguity about who is accountable for acquisition decisions because it depends on a system of dual accountability and cooperation and collaboration between the chief procurement officer ( cpo ) and the component heads . in june 2007 , dhs officials stated that they were in the process of modifying the lines of business management directive , which exempts the coast guard and the secret service from complying , to ensure that no contracting organization is exempt . this directive has not yet been revised . in september 2007 , we reported on continued acquisition oversight issues at dhs , identifying that the department has not fully ensured proper oversight of its contractors providing services closely supporting inherently government functions . the cpo has established a departmentwide program to improve oversight ; however , dhs has been challenged to provide the appropriate level of oversight and management attention to its service contracting and major investments , and we continue to be concerned that the cpo may not have sufficient authority to effectively oversee the department's acquisitions . dhs still has not developed clear and transparent policies and processes for all acquisitions . concerns have been raised about how the investment review process has been used to oversee its largest acquisitions , and the investment review process in still under revision . we have ongoing work reviewing oversight of dhs's major investments which follows - up on our prior recommendations . regarding the acquisition workforce , our work and the work of the dhs ig has found acquisition workforce challenges across the department ; we have ongoing work in this area as well . financial management . dhs's financial management efforts include consolidating or integrating component agencies' financial management systems . dhs has made progress in addressing financial management and internal control weaknesses and has designated a chief financial officer , but the department continues to face challenges in these areas . however , since its establishment , dhs has been unable to obtain an unqualified or “clean” audit opinion on its financial statements . for fiscal year 2007 , the independent auditor issued a disclaimer on dhs's financial statements and identified eight significant deficiencies in dhs's internal control over financial reporting , seven of which were so serious that they qualified as material weaknesses . dhs has taken steps to prepare corrective action plans for its internal control weaknesses by , for example , developing and issuing a departmentwide strategic plan for the corrective action plan process and holding workshops on corrective action plans .