the table is followed by a narrative explanation of that measure . for the measures whose targets were exceeded or not met , the description usually explains whether commerce has adjusted its performance targets for future years based on actual performance . key contributors to this report were debra johnson , stephen lord , tina morgan , colleen phillips , william ritt , debra rucker , nancy simmons , and pierre toureille . the major management challenges confronting commerce , which include the governmentwide high - risk areas of strategic human capital management and information security , are shown in table 1 . the first column lists the challenges that commerce's office of inspector general and / or we identified . the second column discusses the progress commerce made in resolving its challenges as discussed in commerce's fy 2000 annual program performance report and fy 2002 performance plan . the third column discusses the extent to which commerce's combined document includes performance goals and measures to address the challenges . commerce's combined document discussed its progress in resolving all of the identified challenges . for its 15 challenges , commerce's performance plan contained goals or measures that were directly related to 11 of the challenges and goals or measures that were indirectly related to 3 of the challenges . the remaining challenge was not applicable because it dealt with improving commerce's gpra efforts . for example , under department management , commerce's performance goal to acquire and manage the fiscal and related resources necessary to support program goals contains a measure to protect information and staff at field sites from risk or disaster . for fiscal years 2001 and 2002 , the measure will be to ensure the protection of critical , classified , and sensitive commerce computer systems and information from compromise or exploitation by adversaries , and will include inspecting , accrediting , and certifying computer systems . another performance goal under department management is to acquire and manage the technology resources to support program goals . this goal includes a measure to increase the maturity of its information technology security program , which is a new measure for which the first target is established for fiscal year 2001 . information security and related issues such as critical infrastructure protection are also identified in the report as management challenges by the following component agencies: eda , bxa , noaa , the bureau of the census , the minority business development agency , and the national institute of standards and technology . the report provides little specific information on the progress of resolving these challenges at these component agencies , and the related performance goals or measures identified were shown as new for fiscal year 2000 . the fiscal year 2002 plan does not highlight the priority for establishing safeguards against unconventional national security threats that was included in the fiscal year 2001 plan . however , according to the plan , some of commerce's component agencies have performance goals and / or measures for critical infrastructure protection . these are as follows: the national institute of standards and technology has a goal to protect the national information infrastructure .