performance shortfalls . cultural issues have also been linked to long - standing security problems at department of energy weapons laboratories , and to intractable waste , fraud , abuse , and mismanagement problems in the social security administration's high - risk supplemental security income program . overcoming such problems requires overcoming the barriers that result from an entrenched organizational culture . innovation and flexibility in human capital management , as well as continual efforts to capture data not only on employee performance , but also on the effectiveness of agencies' efforts at human capital management . in summary , mr. chairman , designing , implementing , and maintaining effective human capital strategies for all federal workers , but particularly for the it workforce , will be critical to achieving the goals of maximizing the performance and ensuring the accountability of the federal government . in a performance management environment where federal agencies are held accountable for delivering improvements in program performance , the “people dimension” is of paramount importance . offer competitive benefits . promote work / life balance programs . encourage management ownership . support technical currency and continuous learning . build in reliability , clarity , and transparency . description this compensation approach would establish broad pay ranges , tie base pay to market rates , and link increases in pay to competencies and results to attract and retain it talent . the new compensation system would ensure that managers have the flexibility to pay individual workers for their respective skills and competencies as well as their contributions to the organization . the new compensation system for it professionals needs to be linked to faster , enhanced recruitment and hiring processes . a new federal it compensation system would provide a better balance among internal equity ( that is , equity among government jobs ) , external equity ( between jobs in the government and in other sectors ) , and contribution equity ( among individual employees ) . the new system would offer a more competitive benefits package for senior technical employees as well as executives . federal managers and human resources specialists must actively market work / life benefits and programs so that potential it workers are aware of them . managers must ( 1 ) actively participate in the design and implementation of agency - specific features of the new system , ( 2 ) be rewarded for effectively implementing and managing the system , and ( 3 ) be held accountable for not carrying out their management responsibilities . agency management should design and support developmental activities such as formalized training , on - the - job training , computer - assisted learning , self - instructional guides , coaching , and other approaches . agency budgets and management decisions must support full implementation of the new system . the new system must be reliable , meaning that it consistently conforms with policies so that the same set of circumstances always leads to a fair decision and result . although we have not analyzed all aspects of these recommendations , many of them are consistent with suggestions we have made in prior testimonies , as well as with the practices that we have instituted in our own internal human capital management .