( see fig . the 126 contracts with high disenrollment rates — those with rates above the median rate of 10.6 percent — accounted for 38 percent of the ma population in our study . ( see table 1 for a comparison of the characteristics of contracts with and without health - biased disenrollment. ) our analysis of data from cms's ma five - star rating system showed that the contracts with health - biased disenrollment generally had lower overall quality ratings than contracts without health - biased disenrollment . ( see fig . among the 126 contracts with higher disenrollment rates , nearly two - thirds of the health - biased contracts had three or fewer stars compared to about one - fourth of the contracts without health - biased disenrollment . furthermore , only 11 percent of contracts with health - biased disenrollment had four or more stars compared to 32 percent of the contracts without health - biased disenrollment . in addition , the contracts with health - biased disenrollment scored lower than the contracts without health - biased disenrollment across each of the nine performance domains in the ma five - star rating system . we found a smaller share of the 35 contracts with health - biased disenrollment had better than median quality scores when compared to the 91 contracts without health - biased disenrollment . for example , only 36 percent of the contracts with health - biased disenrollment had better than median scores on managing chronic ( long - term ) conditions , which include measures on blood pressure and diabetes care . in contrast , 52 percent of the contracts without health - biased disenrollment performed above the median on this performance domain . ( see table 2. ) our review of cms's disenrollment reasons survey reports showed that beneficiaries who disenrolled from the 35 contracts with health - biased disenrollment tended to report that they did so for reasons related to provider coverage . in contrast , beneficiaries who disenrolled from the 91 contracts without health - biased disenrollment tended to report that they left their contracts for reasons related to the cost of care . on average , 37 percent of these contracts had a majority of their beneficiaries in snps compared with 21 percent , on average , for the contracts without health - biased disenrollment . less time in ma program . the contracts with health - biased disenrollment had , on average , fewer years in the ma program compared to the contracts without health - biased disenrollment — an average of 8 years compared to 12 years , respectively . ( see fig . specifically , we found the following: beneficiaries who left the 35 contracts with health - biased disenrollment commonly reported disenrolling because their preferred doctor or hospital was not covered by their ma contract . this reason was cited by 41 percent of surveyed disenrollees , on average , across the contracts with health - biased disenrollment . in contrast , the same reason was cited by 25 percent of surveyed disenrollees , on average , across the contracts without health - biased disenrollment .