iv ) . we also received oral comments from external reviewers representing two asc industry organizations , aaasc and fasa . these services are paid for separately by medicare . however , there are some differences between asc and opps payments for procedures . under the opps , hospital outpatient departments generally may not bill separately for implantable devices related to the procedure , but they may bill separately for additional services that are directly related to the procedure , such as certain drugs and diagnostic services , including x - rays . hospital outpatient departments also may bill separately for additional services that are not directly related to the procedure and do not occur during the procedure , such as laboratory services to evaluate a tissue sample . because they provide a broader array of services , and because cms has encouraged hospitals to report all services provided during a procedure on their medicare claims for rate - setting purposes , hospital claims may provide more detail about the services delivered during a procedure than asc claims do . cms set the initial 1982 asc payment rates based on cost and charge data from 40 ascs . at that time , there were about 125 ascs in operation . procedures were placed into four payment groups , and all procedures in a group were paid the same rate . when the asc payment system was first established , federal law required cms to review the payment rates periodically . in 1986 , cms conducted an asc survey to gather cost and charge data . in 1990 , using these data , cms revised the payment rates and increased the number of payment groups to eight . a ninth payment group was established in 1991 . these groups are still in use , although some procedures have been added to or deleted from the asc - approved list . although payments have not been revised using asc cost data since 1990 , the payment rates have been periodically updated for inflation . in 1994 , congress required that cms conduct a survey of asc costs no later than january 1 , 1995 , and thereafter every 5 years , to revise asc payment rates . cms conducted a survey in 1994 to collect asc cost data . in 1998 , cms proposed revising asc payment rates based on the 1994 survey data and assigned procedures performed at ascs into payment groups that were comparable to the payment groups it was developing for the same procedures under the opps . we compared electronic cms data with the original document sources for a large sample of records , performed electronic testing for errors in accuracy and completeness , and reviewed data for reasonableness . based on these efforts , we determined that data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to calculate per - procedure costs with the data from the surveyed asc facilities , we first deducted costs that medicare considers unallowable , such as advertising and entertainment costs . we allocated indirect costs equally across all procedures performed by the facility . for each procedure performed by a responding asc facility , we summed its allocated direct and indirect costs to determine a total cost for the procedure .