our work focused on insurance coverage for homeowners . unsatisfactory files contain either a critical error ( eg , a violation of policy or an incorrect payment ) or three non - critical errors ( eg , violations of procedures that did not delay actions or claims ) . write - your - own companies with error rates of 20 percent or higher of the total number of files reviewed for the specific underwriting or claims operation review would always receive an unsatisfactory designation . in such cases , fema requires that the company develop an action plan to correct the problems identified and is to schedule a follow - up review in 6 months to determine whether progress has been made . the operational reviews and follow - up visits to insurance companies that we analyzed during 2005 followed fema's internal control procedures for identifying and resolving specific problems that may occur in individual insurance companies' processes for selling and renewing nfip policies and adjusting claims . according to information provided by fema , the number of operational reviews completed between 2000 and august 2005 were done at a pace that allows for a review of each participating insurance company at least once every 3 years , as fema procedures require . in addition , the processes fema had in place for operational reviews and quality assurance reinspections of claims adjustments met our internal control standard for monitoring federal programs . in addition to operational reviews done by fema staff , fema's program contractor conducts quality assurance reinspections of claims for specific flood events . the program contractor employs nine general adjusters who conduct quality assurance reinspections of a sample of open claims for each flood event . procedures for the general adjusters to follow are outlined in fema's write your own financial control plan . according to the general adjusters we interviewed , in addition to preparing written reports of each reinspection , general adjusters discuss the results of the reinspections they perform with officials of write - your - own companies that process the claims . if a general adjuster determines that the insurance company allowed an expense that should not have been covered , the company is to reimburse the nfip . conversely , if a general adjuster finds that the private - sector adjuster missed a covered expenses in the original adjustment , the general adjuster is to take steps to provide additional payment to the policyholder . an instructor at an adjuster refresher training session , while observing that adjusters had performed very well overall during the 2004 hurricane season , cited several errors that he had identified in reinspections of claims , including improper room dimension measurements and improper allocation of costs caused by wind damage ( covered by homeowners' policies ) versus costs caused by flood damage . in addition , the instructor identified as a problem poor communication with homeowners on the processes followed to inspect the homeowner's property and settle the claim . overall error rates for write - your - own companies are monitored . procedures require additional monitoring , training , or other action if error rates exceed 3 percent .