depository institutions . reports the transportation ( physically , or mailing and shipping or receipt ) of currency into or out of the united states and certain other monetary instruments on any one occasion in excess of $10,000 . individuals , corporations , partnerships , trusts or estates , and associations . exceptions include ( 1 ) businesses serving as agents of another msb ; ( 2 ) businesses whose only msb activity is the issuance , sale , or redemption of stored value ; ( 3 ) the u.s . postal service or agencies of the united states , a state , or a political subdivision of any state ; and ( 4 ) msb branch offices . included within the bsa reporting and record - keeping requirements are msbs . a business is generally considered to be an msb if ( 1 ) it offers one or more of the following services: money orders , traveler's checks , check cashing , currency dealing or exchange , and stored value and ( 2 ) the business either conducts more than $1,000 in these activities with the same person in one day or provides money transfer services in any amount . each business ( not including branches ) that fits within the definition of an msb is required to register with fincen , except for the u.s . postal service and other agents of the federal , state , or local governments , and those businesses that are considered msbs only because they ( 1 ) act as agents for other msbs or ( 2 ) act as issuers , sellers , or redeemers of stored value . certain msbs are required to file suspicious activity reports for transactions involving at least $2,000 in which the msb believes or has reason to believe that the transaction ( 1 ) involves funds derived from illegal activity or is intended to hide such activity ; ( 2 ) is otherwise designed to evade the reporting requirements under bsa ; ( 3 ) has no business or apparent lawful purpose or is not the type of transaction in which the customer would normally be expected to engage ; or ( 4 ) involves the use of an msb to facilitate criminal activity . all msbs are required to develop and implement risk - based bsa compliance programs . msbs are also required to file currency transaction reports for cash transactions of over $10,000 , and must maintain information pertaining to the sale of and verify the identity of those purchasing certain monetary instruments ( eg , money orders and traveler's checks ) valued from $3,000 to $10,000 . msbs must also maintain information on funds transfers of $3,000 or more . one way to improve the irs's knowledge of the nbfi population subject to bsa requirements would be to access specific identifying information reported on income tax returns . however , the irs office of fraud / bsa is unable to use taxpayer information to identify businesses that may be subject to bsa requirements . section 6103 of the internal revenue code , which prohibits irs from disclosing returns or return information unless a statutory exception applies , does not currently specifically allow disclosure for title 31 examinations .