services account . accumulates costs for initial acquisition , maintenance , repair , and replacement of furnishings , furniture , movable household equipment , and authorized miscellaneous items . also includes control , handling , record keeping , moving of government - owned furnishings into and out of dwelling units and charges for connecting and disconnecting equipment , as well as handling costs incident to storage . miscellaneous account . excludes furnishings for foreign locations . although the military family housing inventory has been decreasing , service officials told us their maintenance accounts have not decreased proportionally — mostly in order to address unfunded maintenance backlogs . reductions through energy conservation initiatives . key program assumptions — osd and services provide input for anticipated pace of housing privatization: projects are being privatized at different pace by service . inventory of family housing units decreasing at different amounts by service . when assumptions used to build the budget request are not fully realized , reprogrammings are needed to adjust to reality during the budget year . appropriations , the budget materials provided to congress often rely on pricing and program assumptions made up to a year and a half before services execute their budgets . acceleration of services' housing privatization plans is having a significant influence on estimating budget needs , ( eg , osd moved up its goal of eliminating inadequate military family housing from fiscal year 2010 to 2007 ) . budget adjustments due to privatization schedule slippages could take 2 to 3 years to be remedied . services often use maintenance accounts to move funds with the least disruption because maintenance can be deferred . any of these considerations can complicate the budget execution process if they are not estimated accurately . housing management covers mostly salary costs for activities such as housing referrals , waiting lists , waivers for rental and utility deposits , tenant and landlord complaints , and basic housing allowance surveys . army and navy are currently conducting studies to better determine impact of housing privatization on their management costs ( eg , whether some of these activities could be contracted out or conducted by the housing privatization developer ) . osd housing officials said more experience with housing privatization is needed to properly assess its impact on housing management activities . dod's financial management regulations state that services are to seek congressional approval prior to reprogramming funds for specified accounts ( eg , housing privatization support costs ) and items reduced by congress in appropriation and notify congress when reprogrammings cumulatively reach or exceed 10 percent of the adjusted appropriated amount . reprogramming data generally reflect the sum of hundreds of small actions . dod's financial management regulations do not allow the services to transfer funds between appropriations without osd's involvement ( i.e. , foreign currency ) : no evidence that unauthorized transfers were made . had changed by more than 10 percent from fiscal years 2001 to 2003: 19 showed fund increases of 10 percent or more , of which the services were required to notify congress . 14 showed fund decreases of 10 percent or more , of which the services were not required to notify congress .