, phmsa officials themselves . postal service . classifications also include “compatibility groups” that denote which explosives can be transported together . for example , the regulations do not allow blasting detonators , which are used to trigger an explosive device , to be transported in the same truck as primary explosive substances . unlike some other classes of hazmat that can be self - classified ( meaning the shipper classifies the material ) , in order to be classified , explosives must be first examined by one of six phmsa - approved third party test labs . the explosives manufacturer , which ultimately submits an application to phmsa for classification , first selects and hires one of the test labs and makes a sample of the explosive available to the test lab for examination . the test lab uses international standards to test the material and to recommend a classification . phmsa then reviews the manufacturer's application , including the test lab's report and recommended classification , and approves a classification for the explosive ( see fig . in 2010 and 2014 , the dot oig reported weaknesses in phmsa's management and oversight of the approvals process . for example , in 2010 , the dot oig raised questions about the effectiveness of phmsa's oversight and found that phmsa had not inspected any of the test labs in 10 years and that test labs did not always submit annual reports as required . in 2014 , the dot oig reported that phmsa had addressed these issues . however , the 2014 report found phmsa evaluation forms missing for many explosives classification reviews , a situation that dot oig noted was an internal control weakness . as a result , the dot oig recommended phmsa require the use of evaluation forms to document its review of explosive classification applications . according to a dot oig official , phmsa effectively addressed this recommendation in 2015 . phmsa's oversight of the classification of new explosives includes two key parts — ( 1 ) approving and monitoring the test labs and ( 2 ) reviewing and approving the manufacturers' applications for classification of a new explosive and the labs' test classification recommendations . phmsa has several activities to approve and oversee test labs , but its efforts to ensure consistency are limited by phmsa's lack of a systematic approach to developing and issuing guidance for these labs . in response to the dot oig's findings of oversight weaknesses from 2010 , phmsa strengthened its activities to approve and monitor test labs . specifically , to ensure that test lab examiners meet the requirements specified in regulation , phmsa established an approval process that includes interviewing examiners and reviewing test lab and examiner qualifications and recertifying test labs every 5 years through an on - site inspection . phmsa officials stated that in addition to ensuring compliance with regulations , an important goal of phmsa's oversight of test labs is to promote consistency across test labs . phmsa officials stated that efforts to promote consistency are particularly important given turnover — half of test labs were approved in 2012 or later .