coastal habitat . states allocated czmp funds for coastal habitat protection and restoration activities including the acquisition or placement of easements on coastal lands ; restoration of coastal habitats ; data collection and mapping of coastal habitats ; development of plans for habitat acquisition , restoration , and other habitat management needs ; implementation of permitting and enforcement programs that protect coastal habitat through planning and regulation of development ; or support of land management programs such as those for coastal preserves and parks . states also allocated czmp funds for public outreach and education activities that focused on coastal habitat protection and restoration . according to noaa's analysis , approximately 24 percent of czmp funds awarded during fiscal years 2008 through 2013 were allocated to coastal habitat protection and restoration activities . according to noaa's czmp performance measurement system data from 2008 through 2013 , states reported that they used czmp funds to protect nearly 23,300 acres of coastal habitat through acquisition or easement , restore nearly 37,400 acres of coastal habitat , and through regulatory programs protect more than 123,000 net acres of coastal habitat . coastal hazards . states allocated czmp funds for activities that help coastal communities minimize risks from coastal hazards , such as storms , tsunamis , and sea - level rise , and improve hazard awareness and understanding . such activities include assessment and planning efforts , such as developing mitigation plans , risk and vulnerability assessments , and data collection and mapping to identify and manage development in areas vulnerable to coastal hazards ; implementation of hazard mitigation projects ; implementation and enforcement of hazard policies , regulations , and requirements ; and education and training on coastal hazard topics . according to noaa's analysis of cooperative agreements with states for czmp funding , about 13 percent of czmp funds awarded in fiscal years 2008 through 2013 were allocated for coastal hazards projects . the coastal hazards focus area was the one focus area where the share of czmp funds allocated steadily increased over the 6-year period , from roughly 7 percent in fiscal year 2008 to about 16 percent in fiscal year 2013 . most state program officials we spoke with identified their work to help communities reduce future damage from hazardous events and impacts from sea - level rise related to climate change as among their more significant projects . noaa also identified coastal hazards work as a priority area , and in 2011 , through the agency's funding guidance , began encouraging states to use czmp funding for projects that improve the resiliency of coastal communities to adapt to the impacts of coastal hazards and climate change . in addition , many of the projects that were awarded funding under the competitive projects of special merit program in fiscal years 2012 and 2013 were identified by states as addressing , at least in part , coastal hazards , according to noaa officials . for example , south carolina's project to study tidal inlet dynamics and erosion and maine's adaptation planning project for its coastal parks both addressed coastal hazard issues .