gao - 11-728 . washington , d.c.: july 25 , 2011 . the mcc project improved the condition of the road . before rehabilitation , the samtskhe - javakheti road was passable but rough , with a driving time of about 8¼ hours . the project decreased the road's roughness , and after rehabilitation , the same trip could be made in about 2¾ hours . mcc reported roughness measurements before rehabilitation that indicated a vehicle would have to drive under about 30 miles per hour for passengers to ride comfortably . road roughness measurements made after project completion indicated that passengers could ride comfortably even at speeds of 75 miles per hour . we traveled a portion of the road that was bypassed by the rehabilitation project and found it to be filled with potholes and patches . we found the new road was much smoother ( see fig . the scope of the project also included rehabilitating or rebuilding 27 bridges ( see fig . in march 2012 , mcc's independent engineer reported that all bridges were performing well and had only a few defects such as erosion of embankment slopes , and incomplete guardrail hardware . we observed only minor defects such as a small chip in a bridge beam but no apparent quality problems . while the pavement in some lots appeared to be in good condition , the pavement in other lots was not . we observed that the pavement in road lots 1 and 7 was smooth with minimal defects . however , we found pavement deterioration in parts of 5 of the 11 road lots . the amount of deterioration and completed repair work varied in those lots , which constituted about 60 percent of the total kilometers of the final project . in lots 4 and 6ii , surface deterioration had been treated with a surface sealer to keep the surface from deteriorating further ( see fig . while seal coating may keep water from entering the cracks and make the road look better in the short term , it does not add pavement strength . as a result , deterioration will continue under the anticipated increased traffic loads for the project if the underlying cause of the cracking is not repaired . lots 2 and 3 had undergone patching , but in one case the patch failed and the deterioration had continued beyond the patch , as shown in figure 9 . in other places , we found continued cracking in need of repair , as shown in figure 10 . this type of cracking — known as alligator cracking — is caused by fatigue failure of the asphalt surface , which is related to weakened layers of asphalt beneath the pavement , insufficient pavement thickness , excessive loading , or some combination of these factors . in lot 3a , much of the pavement was failing and under repair . the contractor was in the process of milling the top layer of pavement in some areas and full - depth patching of the pavement in other areas ( see fig . at project completion , the quality of construction generally met established quality standards .