building relationships . building relationships — both within and across countries — between partners' law enforcement agencies and rule of law institutions can help sustain police training , according to officials from multiple agencies . for example , in 2013 , dod's defense institute of international legal studies conducted border security training in el salvador that included military , police , and civilian officials . the training focused on improving el salvador's interagency cooperation and enhancing respect for human rights . to build and sustain relationships across countries , doj's federal bureau of investigation holds an annual training conference that brings together vetted police units from various partner nations , according to officials . developing civil society . officials from both state and usaid told us that police reform efforts are more sustainable if there are parallel civil society organizations that can advocate for accountability from police and other law enforcement institutions . usaid works with civil society and community organizations to track police abuses , including human rights violations . officials said that external monitoring can promote the transparency , accountability , and effectiveness of the police . for example , usaid's justice , human rights , and security strengthening project in honduras seeks to build the capacity of civil society organizations to advocate for vulnerable groups and victims of human rights abuses . civilian police forces that protect human rights are essential to functioning democracies , and u.s. agencies recognize that it is important to include respect for human rights in training provided to partner nation security forces , including police . the need to bolster respect for human rights among security forces is specifically emphasized in assistance strategies for el salvador , guatemala , and honduras — three countries with notable histories of human rights violations by security forces , according to state and usaid . however , unlike dod , which has written policies requiring the inclusion of human rights content in its training , state and usaid have few such formal mechanisms to ensure human rights content is appropriately included . creating internal control mechanisms , such as objectives or directives to training implementing partners , would help ensure that state - and usaid - funded police training is consistent with u.s. government and agency priorities in including content related to respect for human rights as appropriate . such control mechanisms would also enable the agencies to better account for implementing partners' related activities . in addition , state lacks a standardized process to readily compile reliable data on the total number of police trained through inl - funded programs in the northern triangle countries . without such data , state cannot reliably report on progress toward the u.s. strategy for central america and thus cannot accurately assess the efficacy of such training . addressing these two gaps — establishing internal control mechanisms related to human rights training content and improving police training data — would better position state to assess the outcomes of such training , the results of which could inform future funding and sustainment decisions .