of the loan . as amp lending grew , federal banking regulators and consumer advocates as amp lending grew , federal banking regulators and consumer advocates expressed concerns about loans that allow deferred repayment of expressed concerns about loans that allow deferred repayment of principal or negative amortization ; borrowers' ability to make future , principal or negative amortization ; borrowers' ability to make future , higher payments ; and lenders' underwriting practices ( criteria for issuing higher payments ; and lenders' underwriting practices ( criteria for issuing loans ) . as a result of these and other factors , we studied the potential risks of amps for borrowers and lenders . this report discusses ( 1 ) recent trends in the amp market , ( 2 ) the impact of amps on borrowers and on the safety and soundness of financial institutions , ( 3 ) the extent to which mortgage disclosures discuss the risks of amps , ( 4 ) the federal regulatory response to the risks of amps for lenders and borrowers , and ( 5 ) selected state regulatory responses to the risks of amps for lenders and borrowers . to identify recent trends in the amp market , we gathered information from federal banking regulators and the residential mortgage lending industry on amp product features , customer base , and originators as well as the reasons for the recent growth of these products . to determine the potential risks of amps for borrowers and lenders , we analyzed the changes in future monthly payments that can occur with amps during periods of rising interest rates . we also interviewed officials from the federal banking regulators ( federal regulatory officials ) and representatives from the residential mortgage lending industry and reviewed studies on the risks of these mortgages compared with conventional fixed - rate mortgages . in addition , we obtained information on the securitization of amps from federal banking regulators , government - sponsored enterprises , and secondary mortgage market participants . to determine the extent to which mortgage disclosures explain the risks of amps , we reviewed federal laws and regulations governing the required content of mortgage disclosures , reviewed studies on borrowers' understanding of adjustable - rate products , and interviewed federal regulatory officials and industry participants . we also selected a sample of eight states to obtain state regulators' views on these disclosures — alaska , california , florida , nevada , new jersey , new york , north carolina , and ohio . we reviewed these states' laws and regulations governing the required content of mortgage disclosures and interviewed state officials . we selected these states on the basis of a number of criteria , including volume of amp lending and geographic location . we also conducted a readability and design analysis of a selection of written disclosures that amp lenders provide to borrowers . to obtain information on federal regulatory responses to the risks of amps for lenders and borrowers , we reviewed the draft interagency guidance on amp lending issued by federal banking regulators and interviewed regulatory officials . we also reviewed comments written by industry participants in response to the draft guidance .