i am pleased to answer any questions you may have . if so , the rvsr assigns a percentage rating . a veteran may subsequently reopen a claim to request an increase in disability compensation from va if , for example , a service - connected disability worsens or a new disability arises . if the veteran disagrees with va's decision regarding a claim , he or she can submit a written notice of disagreement to the regional office handling the claim . vba has a number of initiatives underway to improve the timeliness of claims and appeals processing . such efforts include leveraging vba staff and contractors to manage workload , modifying and streamlining procedures , improving records acquisition , and redesigning the claims and appeals processes . according to vba officials , these efforts will help va process all veterans' claims within va's stated target goal of 125 days by 2015 . however , the extent to which va is positioned to meet its ambitious processing timeliness goal remains uncertain . vba provided us with several planning documents , but , at the time of our review , could not provide us with a plan that met established criteria for sound planning , such as articulating performance measures for each initiative , including their intended impact on the claims backlog . vba area directors said some regional offices have established relationships with local ssa offices and have better results , but obtaining necessary ssa information has been an ongoing issue nationally . for example , officials at one regional office said a response from ssa regarding a medical records request can sometimes take more than a year to receive . vba's work processes , stemming mainly from its reliance on a paper - based claims system , can lead to misplaced or lost documents , and contribute to lengthy processing times . vba officials at three of the five regional offices we met with noted that errors and delays in handling , reviewing , and routing incoming mail to the correct claim folder can delay the processing of a claim or cause rework . for example , vba officials at one regional office said that claims may be stalled in the evidence gathering phase if mail that contains outstanding evidence is misplaced or lost . in addition , claims staff may rate a claim without knowledge of the additional evidence submitted and then , once the mail is routed to the claim folder , have to rerate the claim in light of the new evidence received . furthermore , while va may continue to process the claim and provide partial benefits to the veteran , a claim is not considered “complete” until a decision is made on all submitted conditions . moreover , a veteran has up to 1 year , from the notification of va's decision , to submit additional evidence in support of the claim before the decision is considered final . similarly , for an appeal , veterans may submit additional evidence at any time during the process .