circuit . regarding the provisions applicable to certain new units at power plants , epa granted a petition for reconsideration ; the court proceedings are on hold , and the provisions will not take effect before epa completes that process , expected in march 2013 . similar to the regulations limiting mercury emissions from municipal waste combustors and medical waste incinerators , mats are technology - based standards , as directed by caa , and thus are not designed or established with the specific purpose of addressing the effect of mercury emissions on waterbodies . epa projects that mats will reduce future mercury emissions from power plants to about 9 tons by 2016 , a 70 percent reduction from 2008 . according to an epa official , the reduced emissions of mercury have lessened the amount of mercury deposition into water because most mercury in water comes from atmospheric deposition , but estimates of the amount of mercury that has been prevented from depositing in water are difficult to determine . even with these reductions in mercury , atmospheric deposition continues to affect water quality and harm aquatic ecosystems . epa faces challenges in using air regulations to further address the effects of atmospheric deposition from no , so , and mercury . according to the agency , its recent efforts to establish secondary naaqs to address acid rain and nutrient over - enrichment were not successful because of insufficient scientific data . air regulations have limited and , are expected by epa to further limit , domestic mercury emissions , but mercury emissions originating outside of the united states are also contaminating u.s. waters . are sufficient to cause acidification of aquatic ecosystems through acid rain and contribute to nutrient over - enrichment in estuaries , among other effects , and that existing secondary naaqs for no and so ultimately , however , the agency did not establish any additional secondary naaqs to protect against these effects for ecosystems , citing challenges in available sufficient scientific data to set standards . emissions from power plants . to address the effects of acid rain , epa developed an innovative approach to establish a secondary naaqs but faced challenges including insufficient scientific data to determine the degree of protectiveness that would likely be provided by such standards . specifically , the caa requires that naaqs be both national in scope and provide the requisite degree of protection — that is , that the standards are neither more nor less stringent than necessary . because many areas in the united states are naturally resistant to the effects of acid rain due to underlying geological conditions , epa's approach was to establish a secondary naaqs that would apply nationwide but would account for differences in the sensitivity to acid rain of ecosystems across the country . as part of this approach , epa identified 84 regions , referred to as ecoregions , based on ecological factors relevant to acid rain in aquatic ecosystems . the 84 ecoregions cover the contiguous united states .