iii ) . labor's comments also highlighted some actions that it has already taken or plans to take . labor reported that it has recently implemented a new version of its electronic application system that has expanded its capacity to manage all elements of the application process . however , labor did not directly address our recommendation that the system be expanded to capture the entirety of the awards process , including final approval and issuance of the award letters by the secretary . in addition , labor agreed that information from users is needed to guide future refinements to the system but noted that a survey of all users might require a formal paperwork clearance process and , therefore , would provide less timely information than its present system involving user tests with selected grantees . while we agree that information from user tests is useful , we believe feedback from all grantees would better inform future enhancements . regarding our recommendation that it distribute more complete guidance and monitoring tools , labor explained that it is currently field - testing a monitoring guide for national emergency grant projects , and plans to release this guide by september 2006 . we believe such a guide could be an important step toward establishing consistent monitoring practices . also , labor concurred with our recommendation that it explore cost - effective ways to disseminate information to states and local areas to help them learn about promising practices for managing national emergency grant projects . in particular , labor noted that it has relied upon venues such as national conferences and forums to facilitate the sharing of information among grantees . labor did not provide technical comments on the draft . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of labor and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's home page at http: / / www.gao.gov . please contact me on 202-512-7215 or at nilsens@gao.gov if you or members of your staff have any questions about this report . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . our objectives were to ( 1 ) determine whether labor has shortened grant award times since our 2004 report and has been able to meet its own goal of 30 working days for awarding grants , ( 2 ) examine the uniformity of the program data that labor is currently collecting , and ( 3 ) assess labor's monitoring and oversight of national emergency grant projects . to examine how long it takes labor to award national emergency grants and determine whether labor is meeting its 30-working - day timeliness goal , we obtained a listing from labor of all grants awarded during program year 2004 and the first 2 quarters of program year 2005 . we selected this time period because labor implemented its new electronic application system and streamlined application data requirements at the beginning of program year 2004 .