real u.s. gdp . for our baseline simulations , we used cbo projections of real gdp for the period from 2019 through 2029 and the oasdi trustees' intermediate projections of real u.s. gdp growth for the years thereafter . for our sensitivity analysis , we used the oasdi trustees' high - cost and low - cost projections . health care excess cost growth . for our baseline simulations , we used cms's baseline projection of national health expenditures excess cost growth and we estimated medicaid excess cost growth based on cms's baseline projections . for our sensitivity analysis , we used cms's alternative projection of national health expenditures excess cost growth and we estimated medicaid excess cost growth based on cms's alternative projections . as another alternative , we simulated the model assuming both zero excess cost growth for national health expenditures and medicaid . our simulations used cbo's projection of federal spending on medicaid , chip , and exchange subsidies as a fraction of gdp to simulate certain variables related to state and local government spending on medicaid and other health spending . this projection incorporates excess cost growth for the period from 2019 through 2029 but assumes zero excess cost growth starting in 2030 , so we could only vary medicaid excess cost growth in the alternative simulations for 2030 and later . real rate of return on state and local government pension assets . for our baseline simulations , we assumed a 5 percent real rate of return on state and local government pension assets . for our sensitivity analysis , we used 2.5 percent and 7.5 percent . table 2 shows the growth rates or rates of return associated with the baseline and alternative projections of each variable for the simulation period . we simulated the model changing either real u.s. gdp growth , health care excess cost growth , or the real rate of return on pension assets , leaving the other variables fixed at their baseline values . thus , our sensitivity analysis is in the spirit of a partial equilibrium comparative statics analysis that sheds light on how each of the individual variables may affect the state and local government sector's fiscal outlook . however , these variables are likely to be correlated , so future changes in one would likely be associated with changes in others . our approach has a number of limitations and the results should be interpreted with caution . first , the state and local fiscal model is not designed for certain types of analyses . the simulations are not intended to provide precise predictions . even though we know that these governments regularly make changes in tax laws and expenditures , the model essentially holds current policies in place and analyzes the fiscal future for the sector as if those policies were maintained because it would be highly speculative to make any assumptions about future policy adjustments .