recovery for most of the commercial isotopes it sells . first , officials told us they believe many customers are sensitive to prices and already consider prices for isotopes to be too high . isotope program officials said that some potential customers are already unwilling or unable to pay current prices for many isotopes and that some existing customers have suggested that any price increases would make isotopes unaffordable and force them to seek other isotope sources . second , isotope program officials stated that the program's role is not to maximize revenue from isotope sales but to make isotopes widely available . isotope program officials told us that , consistent with the program's mission and the atomic energy act , the isotope program strives to supply isotopes at reasonable prices to encourage their use . for most of the isotopes it produces and sells , however , program officials told us that in instances where the isotope program is the only domestic supplier , the program has not formally determined the value of isotopes to commercial customers or prices of alternatives . program officials told us that they gain a sense of customers' value for isotopes through various interactions with these customers , although they did not provide a formal analysis as described in the pricing policy . according to documents provided by the isotope program , the program has also collected limited market information for a small number of isotopes , but these studies are outdated or do not consider pricing . for example , a market study provided by the isotope program that was conducted in 2002 projects the future demand and potential revenues for 25 different radioisotopes used in medicine over the next 5 to 10 years , but that study is now outdated . additionally , according to one program official , the market study to be conducted for the isotope program's isotopes beginning in 2012 is to provide information on which isotopes are in greatest demand so officials will know which stable isotopes to produce , although the study will not address isotope prices . without formally assessing the value of isotopes to commercial customers or the prices of alternatives for isotopes where the isotope program is the only domestic supplier , the isotope program does not know if its full cost recovery prices for isotopes are in fact discouraging others from producing isotopes , discouraging commercial entities and researchers from developing alternatives , and / or encouraging overconsumption . if assessments of customers' value for isotopes and the prices of potential alternatives show that prices can be increased above full cost recovery for some commercial isotopes , the additional revenue could be used to further the isotope program's mission and address unmet needs . for example , revenues could be used to fund research for the development of new or more efficient production capabilities for additional isotopes . also , the nuclear science advisory committee recommended in its report on opportunities and priorities for ensuring a robust national isotope program that the isotope program invest in a facility dedicated to producing radioisotopes .