felons . while hava requires coordinating the voter list with state information on persons convicted of a felony , election officials we interviewed in several of the states expressed concerns similar to those reported in our previous work that the criminal information they receive is incomplete , not timely , or difficult to decipher . this issue , similar to concerns related to the availability , timeliness , and quality of other types of voter registration information , poses an inherent risk to the accuracy of lists because it could limit the ability of officials to identify and remove names of felons ineligible to register to vote from the computerized voter lists . u.s. citizenship . in addition to having concerns regarding felony status , election officials from two states also expressed concerns regarding the willingness of registrants to self - attest that they were u.s. citizens and therefore eligible to vote under state eligibility requirements , concerns that are consistent with those documented in our previous work . the hava - required unique identifying numbers , such as driver's license numbers or social security numbers , are not useful for this purpose because neither is generally accepted as evidence of u.s. citizenship . this lack of information poses an inherent risk to the accuracy of lists , as illustrated by an example from minnesota . officials told us that they discovered 30 noncitizens on the minnesota voter list during the november 2004 general election despite having the hava - required computerized statewide voter list in place . minnesota's mva has since added visa expiration dates to the driver's licenses of noncitizens to indicate their citizenship status . south dakota officials reported their mva provides similar information on driver's licenses . to address this concern , arizona officials told us that their state no longer accepts the registration applicants' self - attestation of citizenship ; all voter registration applicants are now required to provide proof of citizenship . as we reported in our june 2005 report , federal jury administrators could identify possible noncitizens on the basis of information that potential jurors provide when identifying themselves as noncitizens on their jury service questionnaire . we recommended that the administrative office of the u.s. courts determine the feasibility and steps necessary for u.s. district court jury administrators to provide notice to state election officials of potential jurors who identify themselves as noncitizens . officials from hawaii reported that their state periodically checks the voter list with this type of information and other citizenship indexes . receiving voter registration applications . officials from georgia , south carolina , and south dakota said that their state received voter registration applications from registration drives that contained inaccuracies such as fictitious names , a problem that we had identified in past reports . south carolina officials also said that only a small number of such applications are generally received . officials from a majority of the nine states we reviewed reported that they received a small number of complaints from voters who said that they had registered through a registration drive but that their names did not appear on the voter list on election day .